                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        HOW DO THE BETTER EDUCATED DO IT?
                      SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND THE ABILITY
                       TO COPE WITH UNDERLYING IMPAIRMENT

                                        David M. Cutler
                                       Mary Beth Landrum
                                        Kate A. Stewart

                                       Working Paper 12040
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12040


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2006




David M. Cutler is the Otto Eckstein Professor of Applied Economics and Dean for the Social
Sciences at Harvard University and a research associate of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Mary Beth Landrum is Associate Professor of Biostatistics in the Department of Health
Care Policy and Kate A. Stewart is a PhD candidate in Health Policy at Harvard University. We are
grateful to Michael Hurd and members of the National Bureau of Economic Research Aging Group
for comments on an earlier version. This work was funded by the National Institute of Aging
(R01AG019805). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by David M. Cutler, Mary Beth Landrum and Kate A. Stewart. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do the Better Educated Do It? Socioeconomic Status and the Ability to Cope with
Underlying Impairment
David M. Cutler, Mary Beth Landrum and Kate A. Stewart
NBER Working Paper No. 12040
February 2006
JEL No. I1, J1

                                           ABSTRACT

There is a pronounced gradient in disability across socioeconomic groups, with better educated and

higher income groups reporting substantially less disability. In this paper, we consider why that is

the case, focusing on impairments in basic physical and cognitive aspects of living for the elderly.

Our empirical work has two parts. First, we consider how much of this gradient in disability is a

result of underlying differences in functioning versus the ability to cope with impairments. We show

differences in functioning are the major part of the difference in disability, but both are important.

Second, we consider how the better educated elderly cope with disability. Better educated people use

substantially more assistive technology than the less educated and are more likely to use paid help.

But use of these services is not the primary reason that the better educated are better able to cope.

We conclude with thoughts about other potential factors that may explain differential coping.


David M. Cutler                                       Kate A. Stewart
Department of Economics                               Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard University                                    Harvard Medical School
1875 Cambridge Street                                 180 Longwood Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Boston, MA 02115
and NBER                                              kstewart@hsph.harvard.edu
dcutler@harvard.edu

Mary Beth Landrum
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
landrum@hcp.med.harvard.edu
       The pronounced gradient in health among people in different socioeconomic

groups is well known. People who are richer or better educated live longer and have

higher quality of life than people in lower SES groups. The reason for this difference is

not well understood, however. Health results from decisions made throughout the

lifecourse (McGinness and Foege, 1993), perhaps even before birth (Barker, 1994). To

date, most attempts to explain the gradient have come up shorthanded (Adler et al.,

1993), even those exploring health differences among youths (Case, Lubotsky, and

Paxson, 2002). In this paper, we focus on one particular dimension of the socioeconomic

gradient in health. We examine how elderly people in different socioeconomic groups

cope with disability in performing basic personal care activities, including dressing,

bathing, and getting around inside, and activities required to live independently, such as

preparing meals, grocery shopping and managing money.

       Gradients in disability by socioeconomic status have been found in a large

number of studies (see for example Fried and Guralnik, 1997, Stuck et al 1999, and

Guralnik, Fried and Salive, 1996 and the references therein) and recent studies have

documented growing disparities in disability by socioeconomic status (Crimmins and

Saito, 2001; Schoeni et al, 2005). Two recent studies have attempted to understand the

causal pathways between socioeconomic status and disability by examining transitions

between health states using longitudinal data. Zimmer and House (2003) decompose the

association between education, income and prevalent disability into two pieces: onset of

new disability and progression among those disabled. They find that both income and

education is associated with onset but only income predicts subsequent progression




                                             1
suggesting that income can serve both to prevent ill health and allow individuals to better

manage illness. Similarly, Melzer et al (2001) examined incidence, recovery and

mortality rates by educational attainment and found that education was strongly

associated with incidence of disability but not related to recovery or risk of death among

the disabled. In these studies, recovery or progression of disability could results from a

number of factors including better management of the diseases underlying the limitations

and better ability to cope with limitations. In this paper, we examine a single piece of

this puzzle and consider whether differences in coping strategies allow the better off to

resolve their disability more effectively than the less well off.

       The motivation for our analysis is provided in Figure 1. Panel A of the figure

shows the age and sex-adjusted income and education gradients in impairment in any of a

number of measures of self-care tasks such as bathing, dressing, and related activities (the

data set and specific measures of disability are described later). We show impairment

even accounting for the use of personal and technological aids. There is a very

pronounced education relation in this measure of disability. Among those with less than

any high school education, about 8 percent of the elderly are disabled. In the highest

education group, those who are college grads, the rate is half as high. There is a

moderate income gradient in disability as well, although the difference is primarily

between the very poor – those earning below $10,000 – and everyone else.

       Panel B of the figure shows the income and education gradients in impairment in

various measures of independent functioning such as the ability to shop or do light

housework. The story is very similar. Over 20 percent of the elderly with less than any

high school are disabled, compared to below 15 percent among those with some college




                                              2
or more. There is also an income gradient in impairment along these dimensions. With

one exception (people earning $40,000-$49,000 per year), disability declines

monotonically with higher income.

          Our analysis considers two primary issues. First, we ask how much of this

gradient in health is a result of underlying differences in functioning versus the ability to

cope with impairments. We show that while the bulk of the difference is a result of

underlying functioning – the better off have much less difficulty with these measures

even in the absence of help – coping is important as well. The better educated are less

likely to have functional disabilities in the first place, and cope with them better when

they occur.

          Second, we consider how the better educated elderly cope, and in particular

whether the use of personal help and technological aids are important for successful

coping. Better educated people use substantially more assistive technology than the less

educated and are more likely to use paid help. Surprisingly, they are substantially less

likely to use help from relatives, so that overall use of personal care is actually lower

among the better educated than among the less educated, even given their functional

status.

          Knowing about use of aids or paid help does not explain the education gradient in

coping, however. Controlling for type of coping strategies does not affect in a material

way the pronounced education gradient in coping with disability. We speculate that

perhaps the intensity of use varies across education groups, that there is an interaction

between the technology that is available and the environment in which the person lives,

or that the more educated are more likely to cope through behavioral and/or




                                              3
environmental modifications (coping strategies not examined in this paper). Because our

data go only so far, we leave open the analysis of these specific hypotheses.

       Our paper is structured as follows. The first section discusses the disability

measures we considered and the data used. The second section presents analyses of the

link between socioeconomic status and disability. The third section examines alternative

explanations for the education gradient in coping, and the last section presents our

conclusions.



I.     Measures of Disability

       Disability is a complex concept related to a person’s health, their environment and

their role expectations. As such there is no perfect measure of disability. While most

research in the non-elderly defines disability in terms of ability to work, we follow the

lead of most researchers in measuring disability in the elderly as the presence of

impairments in activities of daily living (ADLs), self-care tasks such as dressing and

bathing, and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), tasks required to live

independently such as preparing meals, doing housework and managing money. Our data

source, Phase I of the National Health Interview Disability Supplement of 1994 and 1995

– abbreviated NHIS-D – includes information on 6 ADL measures: bathing, dressing,

eating, transferring to and from bed, toileting, and getting around inside the home.

Questions are also asked about 6 IADL measures: grocery shopping, managing money,

preparing meals, heavy housework, light housework and using the telephone.

       For any particular measure of disability, there are three relevant concepts. The

first is termed intrinsic disability, the share of people who report difficulty on an item in




                                              4
the absence of any help from other people or equipment. We measure intrinsic disability

for ADL tasks using a set of three questions from the NHIS-D. First respondents are

asked about receiving help from another person1 and about the use special equipment to

perform the task. Respondents who do not report personal or equipment help to do the

activity are asked if they have any difficulty performing the task. We consider

respondents to have intrinsic ADL disability if they either receive help from another

person, use equipment to perform a task, or deny either of these forms of help but report

difficulty performing the task. The NHIS-D did not ask about the use of special

equipment for IADL tasks. Thus we define respondents as having intrinsic IADL

disability if they report receiving help with the task or report difficulty in the absence of

help.

         We define residual disability as the share of people who report difficulty on an

item even with help from others or special equipment. In the NHIS-D, respondents who

report using special equipment or receiving help to perform a task were also asked how

much difficulty they have performing the task even with this help.2 We consider a

respondent to have residual disability if they report at least some difficulty even with

help/use of equipment or if they report that they do not receive help/use equipment but do

have difficulty with the task.

         The difference between intrinsic and residual difficulty is termed coping.

Specifically, we define coping as the share of the population with intrinsic disability who



1
  Specific questions are: “Because of physical, mental, or emotional problem do you get help from another
person …” and “Because of a physical, mental or emotional problem do you need to be reminded to do or
need to have someone close by to do them” for ADL tasks and “Because of a physical, mental or emotional
problems do you get help or supervision from another person,” for IADL tasks.
2
  The response options for this question are no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty or completely
unable.


                                                      5
do not have residual disability (i.e., the fraction of people for whom disability is

completely resolved through the use of special equipment or help from another person).

        There are many data sets that ask about either intrinsic disability (for example the

National Long Term Care Survey (NLTCS), the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey

(MCBS) and all years of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)). However, there

are only a few data sets that ask about residual disability3 and to our knowledge only

three data sets that asks about both intrinsic and residual disability – the NHIS-D, the

1993 AHEAD and First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I)

Epidemiologic Followup Study (NHEFS).4                We chose not to use the NHEFS because

the data were collected in the 1980s and included only approximately 10,000 individuals.

While the HRS/AHEAD data contains more detailed information on socioeconomic

measures than the NHIS, we chose to use the NHIS-D in our analysis for several reasons.

First the sample size is substantially larger for the 1994-1995 NHIS-D (almost 25,000

respondents age 65 and older compared to approximately 8,000 respondents to the 1993

AHEAD). Second, the AHEAD data only contains information on residual disability in

3
  For example, Verbrugge and Sevak (2002) also used residual disability measures in the NHIS-D to study
the efficacy of various types of assistance; Verbrugge et al (1997) used measures of residual disability in
the NHANES I; and Taylor and Hoenig (2004) and Agree (1999) studied residual disability using the Asset
and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old (AHEAD). Several investigators have also examined coping
with disability using other outcomes. For example, Agree and Freedman (2003) examined pain, fatigue
and time intensity associated with tasks even when using help using the NHIS-D Phase 2 surveys and
Penning and Strain (1994) examined subjective feelings of well-being among using of assistance with daily
tasks.
4
  The 1993 AHEAD asks a similar set of questions about intrinsic and residual disability in ADLs as the
NHIS-D. Specifically respondents were first asked, “Does anyone ever help you …,” then for two of the
ADLs (getting around inside and getting in and out of bed), respondents were asked, “Do you ever use
equipment or devices when ….” Respondents who report the use of either personal assistance or special
equipment were then asked, “Even when someone helps you/using the equipment, do you have any
difficulty …” Finally, respondents who deny personal or equipment help were asked, “Without any help or
special equipment, do you have any difficulty …” In contrast, the NHEFS first asked about difficulty with
12 everyday tasks without assistance, “Please tell me if you have no difficulty, some difficulty, much
difficulty, or are unable to do …. at all when you are by yourself and without the use of aids.” Those
reporting much difficulty or being unable to do the task were then asked about assistance from another
person or help from special equipment and those using assistance were asked about degree of difficulty
when they used the assistance.


                                                    6
ADL measures, while the NHIS-D asked respondents about difficulty with help for ADL

and IADL tasks. Finally, the AHEAD only asked respondents about the use of special

equipment to aid in the performance of two of the ADL tasks.

        The NHIS-D was conducted in 1994 and 1995 as a supplement to the regular

National Health Interview Survey. The survey was administered in person at the same

time as the NHIS Core and collected information on all members of the household age 5

and over. Several limitations of the NHIS-D should be noted. First, the NHIS is

restricted to people living in the community. Disability rates are thus lower than those

found in surveys that include institutionalized individuals (such as the NLTCS or the

MCBS). Our analysis will not take into account SES differences in the likelihood of

nursing home use. As residence in a nursing home suggests inability to cope with

declining health and disability, our analysis may underestimate SES differentials in the

ability to cope with disability.

        Second, the NHIS-D contains imperfect measures of household income.

Household income was measured in the 1994 and 1995 NHIS through two survey

questions. First respondents were asked if their family income was lower or higher than

$20,000. Then respondents were asked to categorize their income into 27 income groups.

The detailed categories were not reported by approximately 20% of respondents in our

sample.5 For these respondents, the NCHS imputed family income using sequential hot

deck imputation within matrix cells.6         Because of these measurement issues, and


5
  The weaknesses in this approach to assessing household income become apparent by contrasting it to the
approach taken in the HRS. For example, while 45% of responding households to the 1993 AHEAD
refused to report their exact household income, 75% of these respondents completed an unfolding cascade
while an additional 11% completed some of the unfolding cascade so that household income was
completely missing for only 6% of the households.
6
  The imputation was aided by detailed income and wealth data collected in the Family Resource
Supplement. Specifically, respondents age 65 and over were cross-classified according to total monthly


                                                    7
because household income may not adequately reflect resources and assets in an elderly

retired sample, we focus our primary attention on the relationship between coping and

education, noting that our estimates of the relationship between household income,

disability and coping are inherently limited by the available data.

        The NHIS-D also collects data on difficulty with several measures of physical

functioning: lifting something as heavy as 10 pounds, walking up 10 steps without

resting, walking a quarter of a mile, standing for about 20 minutes, bending down from a

standing position to pick up an object from the floor, reaching up over the head or

reaching out as if to shake someone’s hand, using fingers to grasp or handle something,

and holding a pen or pencil, and the use of specific assistive technologies (not in

conjunction with ADL or IADL tasks) including canes, crutches, walkers, orthopedic

shoes, manual and electric wheelchairs, scooters, and braces. Sociodemographic

variables include information on respondents’ age, race, gender, marital status,

educational attainment and household income, taken from the core survey. All analyses

accounted for the complex survey design and for pooling data from both survey years

using approximations based on Taylor-series linearizations.7



II.     Descriptive Statistics



family income reported in the Family Resources Supplement and median household income in their
sampling segment. Within these cells respondents were then sorted according to marital status, educational
attainment, gender and race-ethnicity for respondents who indicated their household income was less than
$20,000 and according to educational attainment, hours worked per week, marital status and number of
adult workers in the family for those who reported their income to be over $20,000. Hot-deck imputation
was then implemented within these sorted cells. For more details see, “Methods used to impute annual
family income in the National Health Interview Survey, 1990-96.”
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/elec_prods/subject/impute.htm. Last accessed May Dec 22, 2005.
7
  For details see, “Variance estimation for person data using Sudaan and the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS): Public use person data files, 1994-1995: Combining ’94 and ’95 data only.”
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhis/94_95var.pdf. Last accessed Dec 22, 2005


                                                    8
       We start our empirical analysis with basic data on disability. Although the NHIS-

D is administered to people of nearly all ages, we focus on the elderly population (ages

65 and older), since ADL and IADL disability rates are much higher in the elderly than in

the non-elderly. This also allows us to compare our results with most of the existing

literature, which has focused predominantly on the elderly population. In two years of

administration, the NHIS-D collected data on 24,791 people aged 65 and older.

       Table 1 presents basic descriptive data on the population. Fifty-eight percent of

the population is female and 89 percent is white. Fifty-seven percent of the population is

married, and a third is widowed. The education distribution is skewed towards less

completed schooling. Twenty-two percent of the sample did not start high school.

Another fifteen percent started high school but did not finish. Modal income is between

$10,000 and $20,000.

       Table 2 shows data on disability and coping rates. Nearly 10 percent of the

population reports some intrinsic ADL disability. This rate is comparable to other

surveys that have asked about intrinsic disability among community dwelling elderly.

For example, rates of ADL disability, defined as the getting help or using special

equipment with one or more ADL, among community-dwelling elderly age 70 were

approximately 15 percent in the 1995 HRS and the 1994 NLTCS and slightly over 20

percent in the 1994 MCBS (Freedman et al 2004). Over six percent of the respondents

report residual disability (difficulty completing the task even with help or special

equipment) on at least one ADL, meaning that approximately one-third of the elderly

population effectively copes with an underlying health problem so that all of their ADL




                                              9
limitations are resolved through the use of help or equipment.8 Looking within

categories, the most common ADL impairment is difficulty bathing (7.7 percent) and the

least common is difficulty eating (1.4 percent). The other measures are relatively similar,

at about 4 percent each. Coping rates vary less across the tasks, ranging from 25% for

transferring to 39% for bathing.

        A much larger share of the population – nearly one-quarter – reports an intrinsic

IADL disability. The ability to cope with IADL disability is smaller; only one-quarter of

people report that help completely alleviates their difficulty in performing important tasks

required for independent living. By a wide margin, the most common IADL disability is

doing heavy housework (22 percent). Activities associated with lighter housework or

shopping are second in importance (7 to 10 percent). Coping rates are again not

particularly different across the various categories, ranging from 26% for light housework

to 37% for managing money.

        Figure 1 presented the relation between socioeconomic status and residual

disability. Figure 2 presents the complementary figure for intrinsic disability. As with

residual disability, intrinsic disability is substantially different by income and education.

The highest education group has an intrinsic disability rate for ADLs that is

approximately one-half as large as the lowest education group. The variation across

income groups is slightly smaller, but still large. There is large variation in IADL

disability both by income and education.



8
  Verbrugge and Sevak (2002) found similar levels of coping across ADL and IADL tasks among NHIS-D
respondents age 55 and older. These rates can also be compared to those reported by Agree (1999) in an
analysis of the 1993 AHEAD. She found that 68% of respondents with ADL disability reported residual
difficulty performing tasks. Verbrugge et al (1997) analyzing data from the NHANES I Epidemiologic
Followup Study found that assistance (either personal or equipment) resolved difficulty in about 25% of
those with functional limitations and/or disability.


                                                  10
       The key issue for coping is the difference between intrinsic and residual

disability. Figure 3 shows how coping varies by income and education. There is little

variation in ability to cope with ADL impairments by income (Figure 3a). Only the

highest income group has higher rates of coping than the average, and the second highest

group has the lowest rates of coping. Coping ability generally increases with education,

with the exception of the best educated group. Thirty-nine percent of those with some

college cope with intrinsic ADL disability, compared to only 27 percent of the less well

educated. The story is similar for coping with IADL impairments (Figure 3b). There is

little variation in coping with IADL impairments across income groups, and a

pronounced education gradient in coping.

       Figures 4 and 5 show income and education gradients in coping, according to

task. Education gradients in ADL coping are most pronounced for coping with

difficulties eating and dressing. This is interesting given that these are areas where use of

equipment is very minor, but use of personal help is much greater (shown in Table 7

below). Education gradients in coping with IADL disabilities are largest for light and

heavy housework – again areas where personal help, especially paid help, can be very

important. In contrast, there are few differences across income and education groups in

coping with difficulties managing money, grocery shopping, and using the telephone.

       While Figures 1 through 3 are age and sex adjusted, we also want to control for

other demographic differences across groups. Table 3 reports basic regression results for

intrinsic disability and Table 4 shows results for residual disability. The first regression

in each table is for any disability – either ADL or IADL impairment; the second and third

regressions are for any ADL and IADL disability separately. In addition to five year age




                                             11
and sex groups and their interaction and the income and education dummy variables, we

include controls for marital status (married, widowed, or separated/divorced/single)

interacted with gender, and race (white or non-white).

         Older and non-white respondents are more likely to report disability and women

are more likely to report IADL disability. There is little indication that age effects varied

by gender of the respondents. Single people, whether widowed or

divorced/separated/never married, have higher rates of disability than do married people.

Surprising, this effect is similar for men and women. Including these demographic

variables has little impact on the education and income results. For example, the

difference in residual ADL disability between the best educated and the least educated in

Figure 1 is 4.1 percentage points; the difference in table 4 is 3.8 percentage points. In the

case of residual IADL disability, the unadjusted difference is 7.7 percentage points, and

the adjusted difference is 5.6 percentage points. Our findings are thus not an artifact of

demographic differences in the various groups.

         Table 5 shows how coping differs by income and education, controlling for

demographic factors and the severity of the underlying disability as measured by the

number of reported limitations. Ability to cope is strongly negatively related to the

number of limitations. In contrast to intrinsic or residual disability, there are few

differences across demographic groups in coping with disability9. Similar to the age and

sex adjusted results presented in Figure 3, we find differential effects in coping by

education but not by income. Coping with ADL disability is 4 to 10 percentage points

9
 This is similar to results presented in Verbrugge and Sevak (2002) who find that need characteristics, such
as severity of disability and poor health status, explain as much as 30% of the variance in resolving
difficulty with ADL and IADL tasks while predisposing and enabling characteristics, such as age, race,
marital status and socioeconomic status, are much smaller factors in explaining ability to cope with
disability.


                                                    12
higher among all respondents with at least some high school compared to those who

never started high school, with the highest rates of coping (38 percent) among those with

some college education. Coping with IADL disability is about 5 percentage points

higher among college graduates compared to those with a high school degree or less.

       Because there may be differences in the relationship between coping with

disability and socioeconomic status according to gender, we examined differences in

coping separately by women and men. Figure 6 displays differences in coping by

education and income in men and women (full regression results reported in Tables A

and B in the appendix). In contrast to combined results in men and women, there are

income differentials in coping among men, particularly at the highest levels of income.

Coping rates are 11 percentage points higher among men with family incomes $50,000

and over compared to those with incomes under $10,000. Differences in coping by level

of education are only evident among women, although the small number of males in our

sample limits our power to detect these associations. Coping rates are 4 to 8 percentage

points higher in women with at least a high school diploma compared to women with less

than high school education.

       We have also examined the impact of estimating models for disability including

income and education separately. Tables B through G in the appendix show the impact

of income and education when the other variable is excluded from the model, for each of

intrinsic disability (Tables B and C), residual disability (Tables D and E), and coping

(Tables F and G). Comparing the Appendix tables to the equivalent regressions in Tables

3 through 4 shows that for IADL disability, gradients in income and education are largely

independent of each other. This may seem surprising but is relatively common in health




                                            13
studies, where income and education often pick up very different effects (Deaton and

Paxson, 2001). In the case of ADL disability, income by itself has an effect on disability

that is almost entirely explained by education when both are included in the model.

Income has very little effect on effective coping with disability even in the absence of

education in the model. Our results suggest that among the elderly, education is a more

fundamental marker of socioeconomic status than is income (or at least income measured

with error)10. We present results with income and education included in the same

equations throughout the rest of the paper.



III.     How Do the Better Educated Cope?

         The central question raised by our results is how the better educated manage to

cope with intrinsic disability. The first hypothesis we consider is that our results simply

reflect difference in unmeasured health by educational attainment. While we examined

residual disability in the sub-set of respondents with intrinsic disability and controlled for

the number of reported limitations, it may be that more educated respondents have less

severe intrinsic disability that is more easily resolved.

         We test this hypothesis by including an additional set of controls in our models

representing difficulty performing a set of 7 physical tasks: lifting something as heavy as

10 pounds (15 percent of the elderly report difficulty with this task), walking up 10 steps

without resting (19 percent), walking a quarter of a mile (25 percent), standing for about

20 minutes (18 percent), bending down from a standing position to pick up an object

10
   This is in contrast to results presented by Agree (1999). Analyzing data from the 1993 AHEAD, she
finds that residual disability among respondents with limitations in getting around inside the home has a
non-linear relationship with net worth, so that residual disability declines with net worth up to a certain
point and then increases with increasing net worth. Education has a small and marginally significant
relationship with residual disability.


                                                     14
from the floor (17 percent), reaching up over the head or reaching out as if to shake

someone’s hand (8 percent), using fingers to grasp or handle something (6 percent). The

results from these models are presented in Table 6.

        Comparing estimated effects in Tables 5 and 6 we find some evidence for this

hypothesis, although it is not the whole explanation. For example, about a quarter of the

difference between those with a college education in coping with IADL disability is

explained by better underlying physical functioning, and the effect is no longer

statistically significant. Better health explains less of the education differences in coping

with ADL disability, but it is still some of it. Because we find that differences in physical

functioning explain some of the observed gradient, we include controls for functional

status in all future regressions.

        Our second hypothesis concerns differences in the use of various coping

strategies. The NHIS-D provides information on two broad coping strategies. The first

strategy is getting help from other individuals. The survey asks respondents who report

help from another person in completing an ADL or IADL task whether they received help

from relatives or non-relatives11 and whether or not these helpers where paid.12 We

classify personal help into three groups: 1) help from a spouse, child or parent, 2) other

unpaid help, or 3) paid help.13 The second strategy is to use assistive technologies.

Respondents were asked about the use of “special equipment” to aid in ADL tasks.




11
   The survey also distinguishes between household members and non-household members.
12
   Respondents are not asked about paid help if they report receiving help from a spouse, child or parent
only.
13
   We initially considered unpaid help from relatives and non-relatives separately. However, since only a
small number of respondents report unpaid help from a non-relative (4% and 6% of those with ADL and
IADL disability respectively), we combined the two categories.


                                                    15
        Table 7 shows the use of various coping strategies used by those who report

intrinsic disability in different domains. A vast majority of people (approximately 90

percent) with disability use at least one of the coping strategies. Overall, 64 percent of

people with any ADL impairment use personal help – 22 percent receiving help from a

spouse, child or parent, 21 percent using other unpaid help, and 25 percent using paid

help – and 56 percent use assistive technology.

        Coping strategies are very different across domains. Very few elderly use

assistive technology to help with eating and dressing. For example, 81 percent of people

with trouble eating use help from other people, and less than 10 percent use assistive

technology. In contrast, approximately half of those with intrinsic disability in toileting

or getting around inside use personal help, while over 60 percent use assistive

technology.

        Only questions about personal help are asked for people who report IADL

disability. Across domains, reported use of help is high, ranging from 83 percent for

using the telephone to 93 percent for managing money.

        Coping strategies also differ by SES group.14 Tables 8 and 9 show regression

results for the use of different coping strategies by income and education, and Figures 7

and 8 display adjusted percentages of people using each type of help. The use of any

personal help for ADL disability increases with income. Use of personal help is 16

14
  The prior literature on the effect of income and education on use and types of assistance is mixed (see
Agree et al 2004 and references there in). Most of this literature suggests that the predominate factor in
determining use of assistance and types of assistance among those who use some assistance is need (ie
severity and number of limitations and other measures of underlying health). For example, Verbrugge and
Sevak (2002) found that need characteristics, such as degree of difficulty and number of limitations,
explained 27% of the variation in use of assistance among those with ADL disability while predisposing
and enabling characteristics, such as age, race, marital status, education and income explained only 6% of
variation in use of assistance. Similarly, Mathieson et al (2002) found that need characteristics explained
15% of variation in use of equipment among those with ADL and IADL limitations while enabling
characteristics explained only 2% of variance.


                                                    16
percentage points higher (76% versus 60%) in the group with income above $50,000 than

the group with income below $10,000 (data not shown). Despite their higher incomes,

the rich use paid help much less than the poor for both ADL and IADL disabilities. But

they offset the reduced use of paid help with substantially more help from close relatives.

This is consistent with the ‘strategic bequest’ model of Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers

(1985); the possibility of an inheritance may spur children of better off parents to provide

more direct assistance (of course, other hypotheses are possible as well). Use of assistive

technologies for help with ADL disability is relatively independent of income.

         The pattern is the reverse for education. The better educated use more paid help

than the less educated, but receive less help from close relatives. All told, the better

educated use less personal care than the less educated (particularly for ADL tasks). For

ADL tasks, the better educated offset their lower use of personal care with substantially

higher rates of use of assistive technologies. On net, use of any form of help is high

among all respondents and roughly equal by education and income.

         The important question is how differential use of these technologies is related to

the ability to cope with impairment. We examine this issue by including measures of

personal and assistive technology use in the equations for ability to cope with disability.

Since respondents who use neither personal help nor equipment but report difficulty by

definition have residual disability, we focus on the subset of respondents who use some

kind of help (either personal or equipment). This omits only about 10 percent of the

sample.15




15
   There is unlikely to be any bias from this, as the analysis reported in the last columns of Tables 8 and 9
already demonstrated that education had little effect of whether or not respondents used any help.


                                                     17
        The results of this analysis are shown in Table 10 for ADL impairment and Table

11 for IADL impairment. We report estimated effects without controlling for use of

equipment and personal help in the first two columns in each table. These results differ

from those reported in Table 6 because of the restriction to the sample of respondents

who use either personal help or equipment. For these models we use mutually exclusive

categories for the type of help received. For ADL disability these categories are

equipment only (29%), help from a spouse, child or parent only (14%), other unpaid help

only (6%), paid help only (8%), multiple types of personal help (9%), and use of

equipment and personal help (30%). For IADL disability the categories are help from a

spouse, child or parent only (29%), other unpaid help only (18%), paid help only (24%),

and multiple types of personal help (30%). In each case, the omitted category in the

regression models in other unpaid help only. Relative to this category, people who use

multiple types of personal help are better able to cope with both ADL and IADL

disability. Help from a close relative is also less effective than other unpaid help for

coping with IADL disability, perhaps reflecting the fact that family members who have

less formal knowledge and training with disabled people are less effective at helping to

resolve disability.

        Surprisingly, including measures of use of personal and assistive technologies

does not affect the income or education coefficients in any material way. Comparing the

two columns in Table 10 shows that the coefficients on the higher education groups are

somewhat larger in the models with all of the help variables included as in the models

without the help variables. For example, the gap in coping with ADLs between those

with some college and those with less than a high school degree is 8.4 percent without the




                                             18
measures of help, and 9.0 percent with measures of help. Controlling for the types of

help received for IADL disability (reported in Table 11) explains more of the relationship

between education and coping. However, these effects were small and not statistically

significant even in the absence of controls for types of help received.

       The NHIS-D did not ask about the use of equipment to aid IADL tasks but did ask

all respondents (regardless of whether or not they reported disability) about use of

specific mobility aids including a cane or crutch, a walker, a manual wheelchair, an

electric wheelchair or scooter, or a brace. In the fifth and sixth columns of Table 11, we

present a model that also controls for the use of these specific mobility aids. While use of

an electric wheelchair or scooter was a more effective coping strategy than other mobility

aids (or the use of no mobility aids), use of specific technologies does not have any

additional explanatory power once we control for differences in the types of personal

help received.

       Because both the use of coping strategies and their effectiveness may vary by

gender, we also examined coping controlling for the use of help separately in men and

women. Table 12 shows rates of use of various coping strategies by gender. Over 50%

of men and women use equipment for ADL tasks. Men are more likely to get personal

help with ADL tasks (69% vs. 62%), particularly help from a spouse, child or parent

(31% vs. 18%). However, women are more likely to obtain paid help than men (28% vs.

21%), and there are few differences in use of other unpaid help for ADL tasks. For IADL

tasks, differences across gender in help from family members and paid help are smaller.

For example, 27% of men obtain help from a spouse, child or parent for IADLs compared




                                             19
to 25% for women. However, women are more likely to use other unpaid help for IADL

tasks compared to men (29% vs. 24%).

        We present analysis of coping ability by gender in Tables H-K in the appendix.

There is little evidence that the effectiveness of coping strategies varies by gender. In

addition, patterns observed in combined sample generally hold in each gender. For

example, in both men and women, adjusting for types of help increases differences by

education in coping with ADL limitations.

          Because both coping strategies and the size of the education gradient in coping

vary according to specific activity, we also examined whether or not coping strategies

explained task-specific education gradients. We examined four particular ADL and

IADL restrictions: difficulty getting around inside and dressing (both ADL impairments);

and difficulty shopping and doing light housework (IADL impairments). Two of these

impairments seem particularly amenable to help from assistive technology, particularly

mobility aids – getting around inside and shopping. The other two are activities where

there are strong education gradients in coping ability, shown in Figures 4 and 5.

        Table 13 shows the impact of coping strategies on coping with these two ADL

difficulties and Table 14 shows comparable results for the IADL difficulties. In each

case, the first two columns report results without the coping measures, and the next two

columns displays results controlling for the coping measures.16 Once again, use of

coping strategies does not explain the better coping of higher education groups with



16
  Questions about the type of help received were not asked in regard to specific tasks, so we cannot
differentiate between respondents who use multiple types of help for each of their limitations from a
respondent who uses paid help for some tasks and gets help from a spouse for other. Thus for ADL
disability we collapse our categories for type of help into equipment and personal help, equipment only and
personal help only. In addition, since respondents with IADL disability were not asked about equipment
help, we control for specific mobility aids in models examining specific IADL tasks.


                                                    20
specific ADL or IADL tasks. Surprisingly, type of coping strategy or use of specific

mobility aids had little effect on ability to cope with specific task, and thus had little

effect of the impact of education and income.



IV.     Conclusion

        Analyses of socioeconomic gradients in health are notoriously difficult, and ours

turns out to be complex as well. We show that the better educated are better able to cope

with underlying disability than the less educated. These differences are large: the ability

to cope with disease varies by as much as 8 percentage points across education groups.

We also show that the type of help different education groups receive is different. The

better educated are more likely to use assistive technologies than the less educated, and

are more likely to receive paid help than help from close relatives. Despite our best

attempts, however, we are unable to show that it is the use of these different forms of aids

that explains differences in the ability to cope.

        With the data that we have, we cannot examine this puzzle more completely. But

there are several hypotheses that might be tested using other data. One hypothesis is that

the more educated use care more intensively. For example, among users of paid help, the

less educated might use two hours of paid care per week, while the better educated might

use four hours. The additional two hours could substantially reduce impairment, but we

cannot determine that with our data. Several other researchers have observed socio-

demographic differences in the intensity of personal care. For example, Weiss et al

(1995) analyzed data from the 1993 AHEAD and found that Hispanics received more

hours of informal care per week than African Americans and non-Hispanic whites.




                                              21
Kemper (1992), in a small study of highly disabled individuals, found that income was

positively associated with both the likelihood of receiving paid help and the number of

hours of help among users of paid help. Those who completed high school were also

more likely to use paid help, but not more hours of help conditioning on using any paid

help.

        A related hypothesis is that the quality of the care received might be higher for the

more educated compared to the less educated. The personal help received could be better

trained and the equipment might be newer or less subject to failure.

        A third hypothesis is that the more educated may be more willing or able to use

behavior and environmental modifications to cope with their disability. For example, the

more educated might be more likely to cope with difficulty in preparing meals by buying

prepared foods, or they might be more able to make home modifications that allow them

to function with their disability. Few surveys collect data on the use of behavior

modifications and environmental adaptations. Norburn et al, (1995), analyzed data from

the 1991 National Survey of Self-Care and Aging and estimated that 75% of the

community elderly coped with their loss of functioning by changing their behavior, while

one-third made adaptations in their environment. Surprisingly, they found that these

coping strategies were not associated with income or education. Similarly, Mathieson et

al (2002), analyzing the National Survey of Self-Care and Aging, found that household

income and education were not related to the likelihood of making home modifications,

although subjective measures of resources, such as reporting having enough income to

buy little extras did increase the likelihood of making home modifications.




                                             22
       A final hypothesis is that the environments that the more educated live in are

more conducive to use of technology or personal aids. If the better educated live in

homes or shop in stores where there is more space, ramps, and elevators, use of a

wheelchair may be able to fully resolve the underlying impairment. That might be less

true in a crowded house or a store with narrow aisles and steps. Data on the specific

physical features of the home or environment are limited. However, Gitlin et al (2001)

reported an average of 13 environmental problems in a small study of approximately 300

elderly. Similarly, analyzing data from the 1995 American Housing Survey, Sandra

Newman (2003) found that 23% of elderly individuals had unmet need for housing

modifications and the number of reported unmet needs was negatively associated with

household income.

       In summary, we find that while the majority of socioeconomic differences in

disability can be attributed to differences in underlying functioning – the better off have

much less difficulty with these measures even in the absence of help – coping is

important as well. In addition, while we find differences in the way people receive help

with functional limitations across educational and income groups, these differences do

not explain the education gradient in coping. More work is needed to disentangle the

complex interrelationships between underlying functional limitations, coping strategies

and the environment in which people live in order to further understand how the better

educated are better able to cope with underlying disability.




                                             23
                                       References

Agree, Emily M. 1999. The influence of personal care and assistive devices on the
measurement of disability. Social Sciences and Medicine 48:427-443.

Agree, Emily M. and Vicki A. Freedman. 2003. A comparison of assistive technology
and personal care in alleviating disability and unmet need. The Gerontologist 43(3):335-
344.

Agree, Emily M., Vicki A. Freedman, and Manisha Sengupta. 2004. Factors influencing
the use of mobility technology in community-based long-term care. Journal of Aging
and Health 16(2):267-307.

 Adler, Nancy E, Thomas Boyce, Margaret Chesney, Susan Folkman, and Leonard Syme.
1993. Socioeconomic inequalities in health: No easy solution. Journal of the American
Medical Association 269 (24): 3140-3145.

Barker, David J.P. 1994. Mothers, babies, and disease in later life. London: BMJ
Publishing Group.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence Summers. 1985. The strategic
bequest motive. Journal of Political Economy 93:1045-1076

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. Economic status and health
in childhood: The origins of the gradient. American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334.

Crimmins, Eileen M. and Yasuhiko Saito. 2001. Trends in health life expectancy in the
United States, 1970-1990: gender, racial and educational differences. Social Science and
Medicine 52: 1629-1641.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. 2001. Mortality, education, income and
inequality among American cohorts. In D. Wise (ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Freedman, Vicki A., Eileen Crimmins, Robert F. Schoeni, Brenda C. Spillman, Hakan
Aykan, Ellen Kramarow, Kenneth Land, James Lubitz, Kenneth Manton, Linda G.
Martin, Diane Shinberg, and Timothy Waidmann. 2004. Resolving inconsistencies in
trends in old-age disability: report from a technical working group. Demography
41(3):417-441.

Fried, Linda P. and Jack M. Guralnik. 1997. Disability and older adults: Evidence
regarding significance, etiology and risk. Journal of the American Geriatric Society
45:92-100.




                                           24
Gitlin, Laura N., William Mann, Machiko Tomit, and Sue M. Marcus. 2001. Factors
associated with home environmental problems among community-living older persons.
Disability and Rehabilitation 23(17):777-787.

Guralnik, Jack M., Linda P. Fried and Marcel E. Salive. 1996. Disability as a public
health outcome in the aging population. Annual Reviews of Public Health 17:22-46.

Kemper, Peter. 1992. The use of formal and informal home care by the disabled eldery.
Health Services Research 27(4):421-451.

Mathieson, Kathleen M., Jennie Jacobs Kronenfeld and Verna M. Keith. 2002.
Maintaining functional independence in elderly adults: the roles of health status and
financial resources in predicting home modifications and use of mobility equipment. The
Gerontologist 42(1):24-31.

McGinness, J. Michael, and William H. Foege. 1993. Actual cause of death in the United
States. Journal of the American Medical Association 270:2207-12.

Melzer, David, Grant Izmirlian, Suzanne G. Leveille and Jack M. Guralnik. Educational
differences in the prevalence of mobility disability in old age: the dynamics of incidence,
mortality and recovery. Journal of Geronotology: Social Sciences 56B(5):S294-S301.

Newman, Sandra. 2003. The living conditions of elderly Americans. The Gerontologist
43 (1):99-109.

Norburn, Jean E. Kincade, Shulamit L. Bernard, Thomas R. Konrad, Alison Woomert,
Gordon H. DeFriese, William D. Kalsbeek, Gary G. Koch and Marcia G. Ory. 1995.
Self-care and assistance from others in coping with functional status limitations among a
national sample of older adults. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 50B(2):S101-
S109.

Penning, Margaret J. and Laurel A. Strain. 1994. Gender differences in disability,
assistance, and subjective well-being in later life. Journal of Gerontology: Social
Sciences 49(4):S202-S208.

Schoeni, Robert F., Linda G. Martin, Patricia M. Andreski, and Vicki A. Freedman.
2005. Persistent and growing socioeconomic disparities in disability among the elderly:
1982-2002. American Journal of Public Health 95 (11): 2065-2070.

Stuck, Andreas E., Jutta M. Walthert, Thorsten Nikolaus, Christophe J. Bula, Chritoph
Hohmann and John C. Beck. 1999. Risk factors for functional status decline in
community-living elderly people: A systematic literature review. Social Science and
Medicine. 48: 445-469.




                                            25
Taylor, Donald H. and Helen Hoenig. 2004. The effect of equipment usage and residual
task difficulty on use of personal assistance, days in bed, and nursing home placement.
Journal of the American Geriatric Society 52:72-79.

Verbrugge, Lois M., Catherine Rennert and Jennifer H. Madans. The great efficacy of
personal and equipment assistance in reducing disability. American Journal of Public
Health 87(3):384-392.

Verbrugge, Lois M. and Purvi Sevak. 2002. Use, type and efficacy of assistance for
disability. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences. 57B (6):S366-S379.

Weiss, Carlos O., Hector M. Gonzalez, Mohammed U. Kabeto and Kenneth M. Langa.
2005. Differences in amount of informal care received by non-Hispanic whites and
Latinos in a nationally representative sample of older Americans. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society 53:146-151.

Zimmer, Zachary and James S. House. 2003. Education, income, and functional
limitation transitions among American adults: contrasting onset and progression.
International Journal of Epidemiology. 32:1089-1097.




                                           26
Figure 1. Share of elderly reporting disability in ADLs or IADLS even with use of
help
  Panel A
                                              Any ADLs

      10%
       8%
       6%
       4%
       2%
       0%




                                                                                 S
                                                                                S




                                                                                 d



                                                                                 +
                                               k+




                                                                     ge ge
            9

                   9

                          9

                                 9

                                          9




                                                                               H

                                                                              ra
          99




                                                                               H
                  99

                         99

                                99

                                         99




                                                                            ad
                                                                           ll e
                                              50




                                                                So S g
                                                                           e
                                                                           n
        9,

                   ,

                          ,

                                 ,

                                        ,




                                                                         gr
                19

                       29

                              39

                                     49




                                                                        co
                                                                        m
                                                              a
       0-




                                                           th



                                                                       H
                                                                     So
            –

                   –

                           –

                                     –




                                                                      e
                                                          ss




                                                                   m
            K

                  K

                         K

                                K




                                                                  le
                                                      Le
        10

                 20

                        30

                               40




                                                                ol
                                                               C
                        Family Income                     Education



  Panel B                                     Any IADLs

      25%
      20%
      15%
      10%
       5%
       0%
                                                                      S
                                                                S



                                                                                           ad




                                                                                            +
                                              k+




                                                                                 ge ge
            9

                   9

                          9

                                 9

                                         9




                                                                     H
          99




                                                               H
                 99

                         99

                               99

                                         99




                                                                                       ad
                                                                                      ll e
                                                                          gr
                                              50




                                                                    e
                                                               n
        9,

                   ,

                          ,

                                 ,

                                        ,




                                                                                    gr
                19

                       29

                              39

                                     49




                                                                                   co
                                                                     m
                                                              a



                                                                          S
       0-




                                                           th



                                                                         H
                                                                  So
            –

                   –

                          –

                                 –




                                                                              e
                                                          ss




                                                                            m
            K

                  K

                         K

                                K




                                                                              le
                                                     Le




                                                                         So
        10

                20

                        30

                              40




                                                                                 ol
                                                                                C




                       Family Income                        Education



Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age and sex mix of the population.
Figure 2. Share of elderly reporting disability in ADLs or IADLS in the absence of
receiving help
  Panel A
                                 Any ADLs

      12%
      10%
       8%
       6%
       4%
       2%
       0%
                     9




                                                                 ad




                                                                  +
                    9

                   99

                    9

                   99




                                                                  e
                                                        So H S

                                                                HS
                   k+
                  99

                  99



                  99




                                                     lle lleg

                                                               ad
                  9



                 ,9




                                                               gr
                50
       10 - 9,

               9,

               9,

               9,




                                                              e
                                                            an




                                                             gr
              49




                                                   Co co
                                                   So S
                                                            m
              1

              2

              3
             0




                                                          th



                                                          H



                                                        ge
            –

            –

            –

            –




                                                         e
                                               ss




                                                      m
          K

          K

          K

          K
       20

       30

       40




                                            Le
                Family Income                      Education




  Panel B                        Any IADLs

      30%
      25%
      20%
      15%
      10%
       5%
       0%
                   99




                                                               ad
                    9

                   99

                   99

                   99




                                                                +
                                                              ge
                                                                S

                                                              HS
                                      k+
                  99




                                                             ad
                                                             H
                ,9

                ,9

                ,9




                                                           gr
       10 - 9,9




                                                          ll e
                                   50
               9,




                                                         gr
                                                         e
                                                        an
              29

              39

              49




                                                        o
                                                      HS
                                                       m
              1




                                                       c
             0




                                                     ge
                                                     th

                                                   So
            –

            –

            –

            –




                                                    e
                                                 lle
                                              ss




                                                 m
          K

          K

          K

          K
       20

       30

       40




                                              So

                                              Co
                                           Le




                 Family Income                      Education



Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age and sex mix of the population.
 Figure 3. Ability to cope for “any ADLs” and “any IADLs” by family income and
education, adjusted for age and sex
  Panel A                        Any ADLs

  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
               99




                                                            ad




                                                             +
              99

              99

              99

              99




                                                           ge
                                                             S

                                                           HS
                                    k+




                                                          ad
                                                          H
   10 - 9,9

            ,9

            ,9

            ,9

            ,9




                                                         gr

                                                        lle
                                 50




                                                       gr
                                                       e
                                                      an
          19

          29

          39

          49




                                                     co
                                                    HS
                                                     m
         0




                                                   ge
                                                   th

                                                 So
        –

        –

        –

        –




                                                  e

                                               lle
                                            ss




                                               m
      K

      K

      K

      K
   20

   30

   40




                                            So

                                            Co
                                         Le

                 Family income                            Education



  Panel B                        Any IADLs

      40%

      30%

      20%

      10%

        0%
                      9




                                                                ad
                     9

                     9

                     9

                    99




                                                                 +
                                                                 e
                                                      So H S

                                                               HS
                    k+
                   99

                   99

                   99

                   99




                                                              ad
                                                    lle leg
                  ,9




                                                              gr
                 50
        10 - 9,

                9,

                9,

                9,




                                                           gr
                                                            e
                                                          an
               49




                                                           ol
                                                 So S
                                                          m
               1

               2

               3




                                                         c
              0




                                                       ge
                                                        th



                                                        H
             –

             –

             –

             –




                                                       e
                                               ss




                                                    m
           K

           K

           K

           K
        20

        30

        40




                                                 Co
                                            Le




                 Family Income                      Education



Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age and sex mix of the population.
                      0                                                         0                                                     0                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          60%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          70%




                                       0%
                                      10%
                                      20%
                                      30%
                                      40%
                                      50%
                                      60%
                                      70%
                                                                                                 0%
                                                                                                10%
                                                                                                20%
                                                                                                30%
                                                                                                40%
                                                                                                50%
                                                                                                60%
                                                                                                70%
                                                                                                                                                       0%
                                                                                                                                                      10%
                                                                                                                                                      20%
                                                                                                                                                      30%
                                                                                                                                                      40%
                                                                                                                                                      50%
                                                                                                                                                      60%
                                                                                                                                                      70%
                10 - 9,9                                                  10 - 9,9                                              10 - 9,9                                             10 - 9,9
                   K        99                                               K        99                                           K        99                                          K        99
                     –                                                         –                                                     –                                                    –
                       19                                                        19                                                    19                                                   19
                20       ,9                                               20       ,9                                           20       ,9                                          20       ,9
                   K       99                                                K       99                                            K       99                                           K       99
                     –                                                         –                                                     –                                                    –
                       29                                                        29                                                    29                                                   29
                30       ,9                                               30       ,9                                           30       ,9                                          30       ,9
                   K       99                                                K       99                                            K       99                                           K       99
                     –                                                         –                                                     –                                                    –
                       39                                                        39                                                    39                                                   39
                40       ,9                                               40       ,9                                           40       ,9                                          40       ,9
                   K       99                                                K       99                                            K       99                                           K       99
                     –                                                         –                                                     –                                                    –
                       49                                                        49                                                    49                                                   49
                         ,9                                                        ,9                                                    ,9                                                   ,9




                                                                                                                Family income
                                                                                                                                                                     Family income




Family income
                                                          Family income
                           99                                                        99                                                    99                                                   99
                           50                                                     50                                                       50                                                   50
                              k+                                                     k+                                                       k+                                                   k+
                Le                                                        Le                                                    Le                                                   Le




                                                                                                                                                            Eating
                                                                                                                                   ss                                                   ss




                                                                                                      Bathing
                   ss                                                        ss
                       th                                                        th                                                    th                                                   th




                                            Transfering
                          an                                                        an                                                    an                                                   an
                              H                                                         H                                                     H                                                    H
                     So          S                                             So          S                                         So          S                                        So          S
                         m                                                         m                                                     m                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Getting Around Inside




                           e                                                         e                                                     e                                                    e
                              HS                                                        HS                                                    HS                                                   HS
                        H                                                         H                                                     H                                                    HS
                So S g                                                    So S g                                                So S g                                               So           gr
                   m           ra
                                  d                                          m           ra
                                                                                            d                                      m           ra
                                                                                                                                                  d                                     m            ad
                      e                                                         e                                                     e                                                    e
                         co                                                        co                                                    co                                                   co
                Co          lle                                           Co          lle                                       Co          lle                                      Co          lle
                   lle                                                       lle                                                   lle                                                  lle
                                                                                                                                                                     Education




                                                                                                                Education
                                ge                                                        ge                                                    ge                                                  ge




Education
                                                          Education
                       ge                                                        ge                                                    ge                                                   ge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 4. Coping ability by specific ADLs




                           gr                                                        gr                                                    gr                                                   gr
                              ad                                                        ad                                                    ad                                                   ad
                                 +                                                         +                                                      +                                                   +
                                                                                                0                                                       0




                                                                                                                 0%
                                                                                                                10%
                                                                                                                20%
                                                                                                                30%
                                                                                                                40%
                                                                                                                50%
                                                                                                                60%
                                                                                                                70%
                                                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                        10%
                                                                                                                                                                        20%
                                                                                                                                                                        30%
                                                                                                                                                                        40%
                                                                                                                                                                        50%
                                                                                                                                                                        60%
                                                                                                                                                                        70%
                                                                                          10 - 9,9                                                10 -9,9
                                                                                             K        99                                             K         99
                                                                                               –                                                       –
                                                                                                 19                                                      19
                                                                                          20       ,9                                             20        ,9
                                                                                             K       99                                              K        99
                                                                                               –                                                       –
                                                                                                 29                                                      29
                                                                                          30       ,9                                             30        ,9
                                                                                             K       99                                              K        99
                                                                                               –                                                       –
                                                                                                 39                                                      39
                                                                                          40       ,9                                             40        ,9
                                                                                             K       99                                              K        99
                                                                                               –                                                       –
                                                                                                 49                                                      49
                                                                                                   ,9                                                       ,9


                                                                                                                                  Family income




                                                                          Family income
                                                                                                     99                                                       99
                                                                                                     50                                                        50
                                                                                                        k+                                                        k+
                                                                                          Le                                                      Le
                                                                                             ss                                                      ss
                                                                                                                      Toileting
                                                                                                                                                                              Dressing




                                                                                                 th                                                       th
                                                                                                    an                                                      an
                                                                                                        H                                                       H
                                                                                               So          S                                           So          S
                                                                                                   m                                                       m
                                                                                                     e                                                       e
                                                                                                        HS                                                      HS
                                                                                                  H                                                       H
                                                                                          So S g                                                  So S g
                                                                                             m           ra                                          m           ra
                                                                                                e           d                                           e           d
                                                                                                   co                                                      co
                                                                                          Co          lle                                         Co          lle
                                                                                             lle                                                     lle




                                                                          Education
                                                                                                                                  Education




                                                                                                          ge                                                      ge
                                                                                                 ge                                                      ge
                                                                                                     gr                                                      gr
                                                                                                        ad                                                      ad
                                                                                                           +                                                       +




Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age and sex mix of the population.
                     0                                                                                   0                                                                                0-                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40%




                                                                                                                      0%
                                                                                                                           10%
                                                                                                                                 20%
                                                                                                                                       30%
                                                                                                                                             40%




                                     0%
                                          10%
                                                20%
                                                      30%
                                                            40%
                10 - 9                                                                              10 - 9,                                                                          10      9,                                                                              10 - 9,
                  K      ,9                                                                           K      99                                                                           K    99                                                                              K      99
                    –       99                                                                          –       9                                                                             –   9                                                                              –       9
                20 19,                                                                              20 19,                                                                           20 19,                                                                                  20 19,
                  K       99                                                                          K      99                                                                        K       99                                                                              K      99
                    –        9                                                                          –      9                                                                         –       9                                                                               –      9
                30 29,                                                                              30 29                                                                            30 29,                                                                                  30 29,
                  K       99                                                                          K     ,9                                                                         K       99                                                                              K      99
                    –        9                                                                          –     99                                                                         –       9                                                                               –      9
                40 39,                                                                              40 39,                                                                           40 39,                                                                                  40 39
                  K       99                                                                          K      99                                                                        K       99                                                                              K     ,9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                    –        9                                                                          –      9                                                                         –       9                                                                               –      9
                      49                                                                                  49                                                                               49                                                                                      49
                                                                                                                                                                                              ,9




                                                                                                                                                                     Family Income
                                                                                                            ,9                                                                                                                                                                       ,9




                                                                                    Family Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Family Income
                        ,9




Family Income
                           99                                                                                 99                                                                                99                                                                                     99
                       50                                                                                  50                                                                                50                                                                                     50
                           k+                                                                                 k+                                                                                k+                                                                                     k+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Shopping




                                                                                                    Le                                                                               Le                                                                                      Le
                Le                                                                                                                                                                      ss



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Managing Money
                                                                                                       ss                                                                                                                                                                       ss




                                                                                                                                                   Preparing Meals
                   ss                                                                                                                                                                      th




                                                                  Heavy Housework
                      th                                                                                  th                                                                                 an                                                                                    th
                        an                                                                                  an                                                                                                                                                                       an
                                                                                                        So H S                                                                           So H S                                                                                  So H S
                    So H S
                                                                                                           m                                                                                 m                                                                                      m
                        m                                                                                    e                                                                                 e                                                                                      e
                          e                                                                                                                                                                      HS                                                                                      HS
                             HS                                                                           H
                                                                                                                HS                                                                         H                                                                                       H




                                                                                                                                                                     Education
                       H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Education




                                                                                    Education
                                                                                                                                                                                     So S




Education
                So      S                                                                           So S
                                                                                                                                                                                       m        g ra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             So S
                  m        g                                                                          m       gr
                                                                                                                                                                                          e          d                                                                         m gra
                     e
                              ra                                                                         e       ad                                                                                                                                                               e        d
                                 d                                                                  Co col                                                                           Co col                                                                                  Co col
                Co col                                                                                                                                                                 lle leg
                           l e                                                                        lle leg                                                                                       e                                                                          lle leg
                  lle
                      ge       g e                                                                       ge       e                                                                       ge                                                                                      ge      e
                                                                                                             gr                                                                               gr                                                                                      gr
                         gr                                                                                                                                                                      ad
                                                                                                               ad                                                                                    +                                                                                  ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 5. Coping ability by specific IADLs




                             ad
                                 +                                                                                +                                                                                                                                                                       +
                                                                                               0                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40%




                                                                                                              0%
                                                                                                                   10%
                                                                                                                         20%
                                                                                                                               30%
                                                                                                                                     40%
                                                                                                                                           50%
                                                                                          10 - 9                                                                                       10 - 9,
                                                                                            K      ,9                                                                                    K      99
                                                                                              –       99                                                                                   –       9
                                                                                          20 19,                                                                                       20 19,
                                                                                            K       9                                                                                    K      99
                                                                                              –      99                                                                                    –      9
                                                                                          30 29,                                                                                       30 29,
                                                                                            K       99                                                                                   K      99
                                                                                              –        9                                                                                   –      9
                                                                                          40 39,                                                                                       40 39,
                                                                                            K       99                                                                                   K      99
                                                                                              –        9                                                                                   –      9
                                                                                                49                                                                                           49
                                                                                                                                                                                               ,9


                                                                                                                                                                       Family Income
                                                                                                  ,9




                                                                          Family Income
                                                                                                     99                                                                                          99
                                                                                                 50                                                                                           50
                                                                                                     k+                                                                                          k+


                                                                                          Le                                                                                           Le
                                                                                                                                                                                          ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Light housework




                                                                                             ss
                                                                                                 th                                                                                          th
                                                                                                                                                 Using the telephone
                                                                                                    an                                                                                         an
                                                                                                                                                                                           So HS
                                                                                               So H S
                                                                                                   m                                                                                          m
                                                                                                     e                                                                                          e
                                                                                                        H                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                   HS
                                                                                                                                                                       Education




                                                                                                  H S




                                                                          Education
                                                                                          S         S                                                                                  So S
                                                                                            om        gr                                                                                 m gra
                                                                                                e        ad                                                                                 e        d
                                                                                          C        c                                                                                   Co col
                                                                                           o l olle                                                                                      lle leg
                                                                                              le        g                                                                                   ge      e
                                                                                                 ge       e                                                                                     gr
                                                                                                     gr                                                                                           ad
                                                                                                       ad                                                                                           +
                                                                                                          +




Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age and sex mix of the population.
Figure 6. Coping ability by gender, income and education

  35%

  30%                                          *
  25%

  20%

  15%

  10%

    5%

    0%
              99


              99


              99


              99




                                                             99


                                                             99


                                                             99


                                                             99
               9




                                                              9
                                          K+




                                                                                         K+
             99




                                                            99
            ,9


            ,9


            ,9


            ,9




                                                           ,9


                                                           ,9


                                                           ,9


                                                           ,9
                                       50




                                                                                      50
           9,




                                                          9,
          19


          29


          39


          49




                                                         19


                                                         29


                                                         39


                                                         49
        0-




                                                       0-
       K-


       K-


       K-


       K-




                                                      K-


                                                      K-


                                                      K-


                                                      K-
    10


    20


    30


    40




                                                   10


                                                   20


                                                   30


                                                   40
                        Males                                           Females




       35%
                                                                                     *
       30%
                                                                             *                *
       25%

       20%

       15%

       10%

         5%
         0%
                        ge




                                                                         ge
                          S




                                                                          S
                          +




                                                                          +
                         S




                                                                          S
                         d




                                                                         ad
                        H




                                                                        H
                        H




                                                                        H
                       ra




                     ad




                                                                     ad
                      le




                                                                     ll e
                                                                     gr
            So S g
         an




                                                         an
                     e




                                                                     e
                    ol




                                                                   co
                   gr




                                                                   gr
                   m




                                                                   m

                                                                   S
                   c
       th




                                                       th
                So




                                                                So
                 H




                                                                 H
                ge




                                                                ge
                 e




                                                                 e
    ss




                                                     ss
               m




                                                               m
              le




                                                              le
                                                            So
  Le




                                                   Le
            ol




                                                            ol
           C




                                                           C




                           Males                                        Females

Note: Estimates are adjusted for the age, race, marital status and severity of disability.
* Significantly different from lowest income or education category (p-value < 0.05 ).
                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                                                         10%
                                                                                                                                                               20%
                                                                                                                                                                     30%
                                                                                                                                                                           40%
                                                                                                                                                                                 50%
                                                                                                                                                                                       60%
                                                                                                                                                                                             70%
                        0-                                                                                                               0-




                                    0%
                                         5%
                                              10%
                                                    15%
                                                          20%
                                                                25%
                                                                      30%
                                                                            35%
                                                                                  40%
                                                                                                                                         9,
                  10 9,9                                                                                                         10         9
                      K - 99                                                                                                        K - 99
                         1                                                                                                             19
                  20 9 ,9                                                                                                        2 0 ,9
                                                                                                                                    K - 99
                      K - 99
                         2                                                                                                             2
                  30 9 ,9                                                                                                        3 0 9 ,9
                                                                                                                                    K - 99
                      K - 99
                         3                                                                                                             3
                  40 9 ,9                                                                                                        4 0 9 ,99
                      K - 99                                                                                                        K-         9
                         49                                                                                                            49
                            ,9                                                                                                            ,9
                                                                                                                                             99
                               99                                                                                                        50




                                                                                                              Family Income
                           50                                                                                                                 K+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    intrinsic ADL disability




Family Income
                              K+
                Le                                                                                                            Le
                   ss                                                                                                              ss
                                                                                                                                        th
                       th                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Equipment help




                          an
                                                                                                                                     So H S
                      So HS                                                                                                             m
                         m                                                                                                                 e




                                                                                        Spouse/child/parent
                            e                                                                                                         H HS
                       HS HS                                                                                                   So S g
                 So                                                                                                                m         ra
                                                                                                                                                d




                                                                                                              Education
                    m gr a                                                                                                    C o e co
                Co e c d                                                                                                         l le l leg




Education
                  l le ol le                                                                                                         ge        e
                      ge g e                                                                                                            gr
                          gr                                                                                                              ad
                            ad                                                                                                                  +
                                +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 7. Use of help by income and education among respondents reporting
                         0-                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                       0%
                                                                                                                                            5%
                                                                                                                                                 10%
                                                                                                                                                       15%
                                                                                                                                                             20%
                                                                                                                                                                   25%
                                                                                                                                                                         30%
                                                                                                                                                                               35%




                                       0%
                                            5%
                                                 10%
                                                       15%
                                                             20%
                                                                   25%
                                                                         30%
                   10 9,9                                                                                             10 -9,9
                       K        9                                                                                        K - 99
                         -1 9                                                                                               1
                   20 9 ,9                                                                                            2 0 9 ,9
                       K                                                                                                 K - 99
                                                                                                                            2
                         -2 99
                   30 9 ,9                                                                                            3 0 9 ,9
                       K                                                                                                 K - 99
                                                                                                                            3
                         -3 99                                                                                        4 0 9 ,9
                   40 9 ,9
                       K                                                                                                 K - 99
                                                                                                                            49
                         -4 99                                                                                                 ,9
                            9,                                                                                                    99
                               99
                                  9                                                                                           50




                                                                                                   Family Income
                            50                                                                                                   K+
                               K




Family Income
                Le                +                                                                                Le
                                                                                                                      ss
                                                                                                                                                                                     Paid help




                   ss                                                                                                     th
                        th                                                                                                   an
                           an                                                                                            So HS
                       So HS                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                               e




                                                                               Other unpaid help
                          m
                             e                                                                                            H H
                        H       H                                                                                   So S S
                 So S S                                                                                                m gr
                     m gr                                                                                          C o e c ad
                C e c ad                                                                                              lle olle
                  ol                                                                                                     ge g

                                                                                                   Education
                     le olle                                                                                                 gr e
                       ge g




Education
                                                                                                                               ad
                           gr e                                                                                                    +
                             ad
                                   +
                     0-                                                                                                   0-




                                   0%
                                        5%
                                             10%
                                                   15%
                                                         20%
                                                               25%
                                                                     30%
                                                                           35%
                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                         5%
                                                                                                                                        10%
                                                                                                                                        15%
                                                                                                                                        20%
                                                                                                                                        25%
                                                                                                                                        30%
                                                                                                                                        35%
                                                                                                                                        40%
                                                                                                                                        45%
                                                                                                                                        50%
                                                                                                                                                                                              0%
                                                                                                                                                                                              5%
                                                                                                                                                                                             10%
                                                                                                                                                                                             15%
                                                                                                                                                                                             20%
                                                                                                                                                                                             25%
                                                                                                                                                                                             30%
                                                                                                                                                                                             35%
                                                                                                                                                                                             40%
                                                                                                                                                                               0-
                        9,                                                                                                  9,                                                    9,
                          99                                                                                                  99                                                    99
                  10         9                                                                                         10        9                                          10        9
                    K-                                                                                                   K-                                                   K-
                       19                                                                                                  19                                                    19
                          ,9                                                                                                  ,9                                                   ,9
                            99                                                                                                  99                                                   99
                  20                                                                                                   20                                                   20
                    K-                                                                                                   K-                                                   K-
                       29                                                                                                  29                                                    29
                          ,9                                                                                                  ,9                                                   ,9
                            99                                                                                                  99                                                   99
                  30                                                                                                   30                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         intrinsic IADL disability




                    K-                                                                                                   K-                                                   K-
                       39                                                                                                  39                                                    39
                          ,9                                                                                                  ,9                                                   ,9
                            99                                                                                                  99                                                   99
                  40                                                                                                   40                                                   40
                    K-                                                                                                   K-                                                   K-
                       49                                                                                                  49                                                    49
                          ,9                                                                                                  ,9                                                   ,9
                            99                                                                                                  99                                                   99

                        50                                                                                                   50                                                    50




                                                                                                     Family Income
                                                                                                                               K+




Family Income
                          K+                                                                                                                                                         K+
                                                                                                                                                          Family Income

                Le                                                                                                   Le                                                   Le
                  ss                                                                                                   ss                                                   ss
                       th                                                                                                   th                Paid help                          th
                         an                                                                                                   an                                                   an
                              H                                                                                                    H                                                    H
                               S                                                                                                    S                                                    S




                                                                                 Other unpaid help
                    S                                                                                                    S                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Spouse/child/parent




                     om                                                                                                   om                                                   om
                       e                                                                                                    e                                                    e
                              H                                                                                                    H                                                    H
                               S                                                                                                    S                                                    S
                      H                                                                                                    H                                                    H
                        S                                                                                                    S                                                    S
                S         gr                                                                                         S         gr                                         S         gr
                                                                                                                                                          Education




                                                                                                                                  ad




Education
                  om         ad                                                                                        om                                                   om         ad




                                                                                                     Education
                      e                                                                                                    e                                                    e
                        co                                                                                                   co                                                   co
                C         lle                                                                                        C         lle                                        C         lle
                 ol          ge                                                                                       ol          ge                                       ol          ge
                   le                                                                                                   le                                                   le
                     ge                                                                                                   ge                                                   ge
                         gr                                                                                                   gr                                                   gr
                           ad                                                                                                   ad                                                   ad
                              +                                                                                                    +                                                    +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 8. Use of help by income and education among respondents reporting
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of 65 and over population from NHIS-D, 1994 & 1995
                                                    Percent of people
                                          (N = 24,791; weighted N = 31,245,306)

Male                                                    41.7

Married                                                 57.0
Div/sep                                                  6.4
Widowed                                                 32.5
Never married                                           4.0
Unknown marital status                                  0.1

Black/other                                             10.5

Age
65-69                                                   31.0
70-74                                                   27.7
75-79                                                   19.8
80-84                                                   12.8
85 and over                                             8.6

Education
Less than high school                                   21.8
Some HS                                                 15.4
HS grad                                                 34.7
Some college                                            13.7
College grad or higher                                  13.3
Unknown educational                                     1.1
attainment


Annual Family Income
0-9,999                                                 18.3
10K – 19,999                                            30.8
20K – 29,999                                            21.3
30K – 39,999                                            11.6
40K – 49,999                                             6.5
50k+                                                    11.5
Table 2. Intrinsic and residual disability in the population and ability to cope among the intrinsically
disabled, by type of ADL and IADL (N = 24,791)
                                         % Reporting         % Reporting           % of respondents with
                                         intrinsic           residual disability instrinsic disability
                                         disability                                who cope effectively

Activities of Daily Living (any)              9.5                  6.4                    32.3
 Bathing                                      7.7                  4.7                    39.1
 Getting Around Inside                        4.4                  3.2                    26.6
 Dressing                                     4.4                  2.9                    33.5
 Transferring                                 4.1                  3.1                    25.4
 Toileting                                    3.7                  2.3                    36.9
 Eating                                       1.4                  0.9                    37.8

Instrumental Activities of Daily Living       22.7                 17.0                   25.3
(any)
 Heavy Housework                              21.6                 15.7                   27.0
 Shopping                                     9.8                  6.7                    31.9
 Light Housework                              7.3                  5.4                    26.1
 Preparing Meals                              5.9                  4.1                    31.3
 Managing Money                               4.8                  3.0                    36.9
 Using the Telephone                          2.5                  1.7                    32.1
Table 3. Logistic regression models for intrinsic disability
                                Any Disability            Any ADL disability         Any IADL disability
Independent Variable         Coefficient   Adjusted Coefficient Adjusted            Coefficient Adjusted
                               (SE)         percent         (SE)      percent         (SE)       percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                       -            28.4            -          10.3             -          26.6
$10K - $19,000              -0.24 (0.05)*      24.2     -0.20 (0.06)*     8.7       -0.21 (0.05)*     22.9
$20K - $29,999              -0.29 (0.06)*      23.4      -0.11 (0.08)     9.4       -0.25 (0.06)*     22.3
$30K - $39,999              -0.32 (0.07)*      22.9      -0.10 (0.10)     9.4       -0.29 (0.08)*     21.7
$40K - $49,999              -0.18 (0.09)*      25.2      -0.05 (0.11)     9.9        -0.16 (0.09)     23.8
$50K +                      -0.43 (0.08)*      21.1      -0.14 (0.11)     9.1       -0.41 (0.08)*     19.8

Education
Less than high school              -           27.9            -          11.3             -          26.3
Some HS                      -0.08 (0.05)      26.5      -0.07 (0.07)     10.7       -0.07 (0.05)     25.1
HS graduate                 -0.24 (0.05)*      23.7     -0.30 (0.06)*     8.8       -0.24 (0.05)*     22.2
Some college                -0.40 (0.06)*      21.1     -0.45 (0.09)*     7.7       -0.39 (0.06)*     20.0
College grad or higher      -0.38 (0.07)*      21.4     -0.62 (0.09)*     6.6       -0.34 (0.07)*     20.7

Male                        -0.33 (0.07)*                0.01 (0.12)                -0.38 (0.07)*

Age 70-74                    0.18 (0.06)*               0.43 (0.10)*                0.15 (0.06)*
Age 75-79                    0.55 (0.07)*               0.73 (0.10)*                0.51 (0.07)*
Age 80-84                    0.98 (0.07)*               1.42 (0.11)*                0.93 (0.07)*
Age 85+                      1.57 (0.08)*               1.94 (0.11)*                1.52 (0.08)*

Age*sex
70-74*male                    0.05 (0.10)                 0.28 (0.17)                0.06 (0.10)
75-79*male                   -0.02 (0.11)                -0.14 (0.17)               -0.06 (0.11)
80-84*male                    0.11 (0.10)                 0.24 (0.17)                0.09 (0.10)
85plus*male                   0.01 (0.12)                 0.23 (0.17)                0.02 (0.12)

Widowed                      0.32 (0.05)*               0.29 (0.07)*                0.33 (0.05)*
Divorced/separated/single    0.26 (0.18)*               0.34 (0.10)*                0.24 (0.08)*

Marital status*sex
Widowed*male                 0.02 (0.09)                 -0.07 (0.13)                0.05 (0.09)
Divorced/separated/          0.02 (0.11)                 -0.11 (0.16)                0.13 (0.11)
Single*male

Black/other race             0.11 (0.06)                0.18 (0.08)*                0.12 (0.06)*

N                                24,476                       24,476                      24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
Table 4. Logistic Regression Models for Residual Disability
                               Any Disability         Any ADL disability             Any IADL disability
                            Coefficient  Adjusted Coefficient Adjusted              Coefficient Adjusted
                              (SE)        percent        (SE)     percent             (SE)       percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                        -          21.5             -           7.1             -          19.8
$10K - $19,000              -0.19 (0.05)*     18.7      -0.20 (0.07)*      5.9      -0.17 (0.06)*     17.4
$20K - $29,999              -0.26 (0.06)*     17.8       -0.15 (0.09)      6.2      -0.25 (0.07)*     16.3
$30K - $39,999              -0.24 (0.08)*     18.0       -0.07 (0.12)      6.6      -0.23 (0.09)*     16.5
$40K - $49,999               -0.16 (0.09)     19.2        0.03 (0.13)      7.3       -0.15 (0.10)     17.6
$50K +                      -0.42 (0.09)*     15.7       -0.27 (0.15)      5.5      -0.42 (0.09)*     14.2

Education
Less than high school             -           22.1            -            8.3             -          20.0
Some HS                     -0.11 (0.05)*     20.4      -0.18 (0.08)*      7.1       -0.09 (0.05)     18.7
HS graduate                 -0.26 (0.05)*     18.2      -0.41 (0.07)*      5.8      -0.22 (0.05)*     16.9
Some college                -0.48 (0.06)*     15.4      -0.63 (0.11)*      4.7      -0.43 (0.06)*     14.3
College grad or higher      -0.49 (0.07)*     15.3      -0.67 (0.11)*      4.5      -0.42 (0.07)*     14.4

Male                        -0.31 (0.08)*                0.04(0.13)                 -0.33 (0.05)*

Age 70-74                     0.12 (0.07)               0.45 (0.11)*                 0.10 (0.07)
Age 75-79                    0.49 (0.07)*               0.72(0.12)*                 0.48 (0.07)*
Age 80-84                    0.89 (0.07)*               1.37 (0.12)*                0.83 (0.08)*
Age 85+                      1.40 (0.09)*               1.81 (0.13)*                1.33 (0.09)*

Age*sex
70-74*male                   0.10 (0.11)                -0.42 (0.20)*                0.14 (0.11)
75-79*male                   0.01 (0.11)                  0.06 (0.19)               -0.06 (0.12)
80-84*male                   0.11 (0.12)                 -0.22 (0.18)                0.11 (0.12)
85plus*male                  0.16 (0.13)                 -0.26 (0.20)                0.15 (0.13)

Widowed                      0.27 (0.06)*                0.12 (0.09)                0.29 (0.06)*
Divorced/separated/single    0.32 (0.07)*               0.30 (0.11)*                0.31 (0.08)*

Marital status*sex
Widowed*male                  0.01 (0.10)               -0.04 (0.16)                 0.01 (0.10)
Divorced/separate/           -0.04 (0.12)               -0.20 (0.19)                 0.03 (0.12)
single*male

Black/other race             0.10 (0.07)                 0.16 (0.09)                 0.12 (0.07)

N                                24,476                       24,476                      24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
Table 5. Logistic Regression Models for Ability to Cope
                                 Any Disability        Any ADL disability              Any IADL disability
                            Coefficient Adjusted Coefficient      Adjusted            Coefficient  Adjusted
                                (SE)       percent       (SE)      percent              (SE)       percent
Income
$0 - $9,999                       -           23.2         -        30.3                    -            25.0
$10K - $19,000              -0.06 (0.10)      22.3    0.10 (0.14)   32.1              -0.05 (0.10)       24.0
$20K - $29,999               0.04 (0.11)      23.9    0.16 (0.16)   33.4               0.10 (0.11)       26.8
$30K - $39,999              -0.12 (0.15)      21.2    0.01 (0.19)   30.5              -0.06 (0.16)       23.9
$40K - $49,999               0.06 (0.18)      24.2    0.03 (0.26)   30.8               0.04 (0.16)       25.8
$50K +                       0.16 (0.16)      26.0    0.43 (0.26)   38.7               0.17 (0.16)       28.2

Education
Less than high school              -           20.9            -           27.3             -            24.4
Some HS                       0.13 (0.10)      23.0      0.31 (0.14)*      33.1        0.06 (0.09)       25.5
HS graduate                   0.11 (0.09)      22.6      0.44 (0.13)*      35.6       -0.06 (0.08)       23.5
Some college                 0.35 (0.12)*      27.0      0.54 (0.21)*      37.5        0.20 (0.12)       28.2
College grad or higher       0.38 (0.12)*      27.6      0.19 (0.21)       30.8       0.26 (0.12)*       29.3

Male                          0.01 (0.15)                -0.12 (0.27)                -0.11 (0.15)

Age 70-74                     0.22 (0.11)                -0.14 (0.20)                0.17 (0.12)
Age 75-79                     0.11 (0.13)                -0.07 (0.21)                0.04 (0.13)
Age 80-84                     0.14 (0.13)                0.03 (0.19)                 0.18 (0.14)
Age 85+                       0.09 (0.14)                0.13 (0.19)                 0.18 (0.14)

Age*sex
70-74*male                   -0.25 (0.19)                0.52 (0.32)                 -0.29 (0.20)
75-79*male                    0.04 (0.21)                0.31 (0.33)                 0.07 (0.21)
80-84*male                    0.05 (0.21)                -0.04 (0.33)                0.00 (0.22)
85plus*male                  -0.32 (0.22)                0.30 (0.35)                 -0.24 (0.23)

Widowed                       0.07 (0.10)                0.34 (0.16)*                0.04 (0.10)
Divorced/separated/single    -0.20 (0.14)                0.01 (0.21)                 -0.19 (0.14)

Marital status*sex
Widowed*male                 -0.01 (0.17)                -0.15 (0.26)                0.17 (0.17)
Divorced/sep/single*male      0.13 (0.23)                0.19 (0.39)                 0.31 (0.23)
Black/other race              0.08 (0.11)                0.07 (0.17)                 0.03 (0.11)

Limitations
IADL only                         Ref                         NA                          NA
1-2 ADLs                     -0.31 (0.08)*                    Ref                         NA
3 or more ADLs               -1.61 (0.16)*               -1.72 (0.14)*                    NA
3 or more IADLs                   NA                          NA                     -0.86 (0.08)*

N                                 5868                         2266                       5557
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability
*p<0.05
Table 6. Logistic regression models for ability to dope, including functional limitations
                     Any Disability                ADL Only                  IADL Only
                Coefficient   Adjusted    Coefficient      Adjusted   Coefficient     Adjusted
                   (SE)       Percent         (SE)         Percent        (SE)        Percent

Income
$0 - $9,999           -           23.8            -            30.8            -           25.4
$10K -          -0.09 (0.10)      22.2       0.05 (0.14)       31.7      -0.07 (0.10)      24.0
$19,000
$20K -          -0.02 (0.11)      23.5       0.14 (0.16)       33.4       0.06 (0.11)      26.5
$29,999
$30K -          -0.17 (0.16)      21.1       0.01 (0.19)       30.9      -0.08 (0.16)      23.9
$39,999
$40K -          0.02 (0.17)       24.2       -0.03 (0.26)      30.3       0.03 (0.16)      25.9
$49,999
$50K +          0.08 (0.17)       25.2       0.42 (0.27)       38.7       0.13 (0.16)      27.7

Education
Less than             -           21.6            -            28.0            -           24.8
high school
Some HS         0.10 (0.10)       23.2       0.27 (0.14)       33.0       0.04 (0.10)      25.6
HS graduate     0.05 (0.09)       22.4          0.39           35.3      -0.08 (0.08)      23.4
                                               (0.13)*
Some college       0.27           26.2          0.45           36.4       0.16 (0.12)      27.8
                  (0.12)*                      (0.20)*
College grad       0.29           26.6       0.14 (0.21)       30.5       0.20 (0.12)      28.6
or higher         (0.13)*

N                    5868                         2266                         5557
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment;
the definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and the number of
reported IADLs and ADLs. For the any disability model, categorical variables for included 1-2
ADLs and 3 or more ADLs were included (IADL only was reference category). For the ADL and
IADL only models, dichotomous variables for 3 or more ADLs or 3 or more IADLs were
included in the models, respectively.
*p<0.05
Table 7. Use of equipment and personal help among respondents with intrinsic disability, by
ADL and IADL category
                                  Equipment      Any personal       Equipment and/or
                                                     help             personal help
Activities of Daily Living (any)     56.1            64.4                  90.3
(n = 2266)
Bathing                              40.8            70.8                  90.9
(n = 1835)
Getting Around Inside                61.6            49.0                  87.0
(n = 1025)
Dressing                              5.0            84.9                  86.4
(n = 1066)
Transferring                         28.3            60.9                  74.6
(n = 995)
Toileting                            60.9            54.7                  91.0
(n = 881)
Eating                                9.5            81.1                  84.6
(n = 336)

Instrumental Activities of Daily      N/A             88.4                  88.4
Living (any)
Heavy Housework                       N/A             86.6                  86.6
(n = 5274)
Shopping                              N/A             91.3                  91.3
(n = 2399)
Light Housework                       N/A             87.1                  87.1
(n = 1765)
Preparing Meals                       N/A             86.9                  86.9
(n = 1432)
Managing Money                        N/A             92.5                  92.5
(n = 1155)
Using the Telephone                   N/A             82.8                  82.8
(n = 596)
Table 8. Logistic regression models for use of equipment and help for “any ADL”,
conditioned on reported intrinsic ADL disability
                    Model 1:      Model 2:      Model 3:    Model 4:     Model 5:           Model 6:
                       Any       Any help       Any paid    Any other    Any type           Any type
                   equipment from spouse,           help   unpaid help of personal         of personal
                                  child, or                                 help           help and/or
                                   parent                                                  equipment
Income
$0 - $9,999             -             -              -           -            -                 -
$10K - $19,000        0.01          0.57           -0.30       0.17         0.13              0.15
                     (0.12)       (0.17)*         (0.16)      (0.16)       (0.15)            (0.21)
$20K - $29,999        -0.19         0.85           -0.40       0.06         0.17              0.14
                     (0.15)       (0.19)*        (0.17)*      (0.19)       (0.15)            (0.25)
$30K - $39,999        -0.04         0.90           -0.32       0.38         0.39              0.44
                     (0.18)       (0.23)*         (0.20)      (0.20)       (0.21)            (0.35)
$40K - $49,999        0.03          1.28           -0.87       0.30         0.63              0.40
                     (0.23)       (0.28)*        (0.28)*      (0.25)      (0.25)*            (0.40)
$50K +                -0.32         1.10           -0.55       0.56         0.85              0.14
                     (0.21)       (0.26)*        (0.23)*     (0.23)*      (0.22)*            (0.30)

Education
Less than HS            -               -              -            -              -            -
Some HS               0.35            -0.36         -0.10         -0.49          -0.49        -0.09
                     (0.13)*         (0.19)        (0.15)       (0.16)*        (0.16)*       (0.21)
HS graduate           0.49            -0.36          0.22         -0.45          -0.26        0.06
                     (0.12)*        (0.15)*        (0.15)       (0.15)*         (0.14)       (0.21)
Some college          0.61            -0.74          0.34         -0.30          -0.49        0.22
                     (0.17)*        (0.22)*        (0.20)        (0.20)        (0.19)*       (0.32)
College grad +        0.42            -0.99          0.40         -0.25          -0.65        -0.13
                     (0.17)*        (0.25)*       (0.20)*        (0.23)        (0.21)*       (0.28)

Average use           56.1%         22.1%          25.3%         21.3%         64.4%         30.2%

N                       2266         2266           2266           2266          2266          2266
Models control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations and whether respondents
report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
 Table 9. Logistic regression models for use of help for “any IADL”, conditioned on
reporting intrinsic IADL disability
                       Model 1:        Model 2:           Model 3:        Model 4:
                    Any help from Any paid help          Any unpaid       Any help
                    Spouse, child,                           help
                       or parent
Income
$0 - $9,999                -               -                   -              -
$10K - $19,000       0.25 (0.08)*    -0.19 (0.09)*       -0.13 (0.09)   -0.10 (0.14)
$20K - $29,999        0.20 (0.10)    -0.29 (0.11)*      -0.27 (0.11)*   -0.27 (0.15)
$30K - $39,999       0.55 (0.14)*    -0.41 (0.14)*      -0.32 (0.14)*   -0.11 (0.20)
$40K - $49,999       0.60 (0.16)*    -0.51 (0.18)*       -0.34 (0.18)    0.21 (0.28)
$50K +               0.59 (0.15)*    -0.52 (0.15)*      -0.40 (0.14)*   -0.19 (0.23)

Education
Less than HS               -                  -                 -                  -
Some HS              -0.34 (0.10)*      0.36 (0.10)*       0.10 (0.10)       -0.11 (0.13)
HS graduate          -0.43 (0.08)*      0.63 (0.08)*      -0.07 (0.09)       -0.19 (0.11)
Some college         -0.83 (0.13)*      1.08 (0.11)*      -0.12 (0.12)        0.09 (0.18)
College grad +       -1.35 (0.16)*      1.30 (0.12)*       0.05 (0.13)       -0.05 (0.16)

Average use             25.49              29.90              27.31             88.44

N                        5557              5557                5557               5557
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and
whether respondent reports difficulty with 3 or more IADLs
*p<0.05
Table 10. Logistic regression models for ADL coping, including covariates for use of
equipment and help
                          Coefficient (SE)    Adjusted       Coefficient (SE)    Adjusted percent
                                               percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                        -                 34.3                 -                  34.9
$10K - $19,000                0.05 (0.15)            35.1            0.01 (0.16)             35.1
$20K - $29,999                0.18 (0.17)            37.5            0.13 (0.18)             37.2
$30K - $39,999               -0.10 (0.21)            32.4           -0.13 (0.21)             32.5
$40K - $49,999               -0.03 (0.27)            33.8           -0.06 (0.28)             33.8
$50K +                        0.45 (0.28)            42.6            0.34 (0.29)             41.0

Education
Less than high school             -                  31.3                 -                  30.7

Some HS                       0.28 (0.15)            36.3           0.32 (0.16)*             36.3
HS graduate                  0.42 (0.14)*            38.9           0.48 (0.14)*             39.3
Some college                 0.46 (0.21)*            39.7           0.51 (0.22)*             39.7
College grad or higher       0.18 (0.22)             34.5           0.27 (0.22)              35.4

Equipment and help
AT only                           -                                  0.10 (0.25)
Spouse, child, parent             -                                  0.04 (0.29)
help only
Paid help only                    -                                 -0.16 (0.31)
Unpaid help only                  -                                       -
Multiple types of help            -                                 1.05 (0.29)*
AT and any help                   -                                 -0.16 (0.25)

N                                2045                                     2045
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or
AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and whether respondents
report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
Table 11. Logistic Regression Models for IADL Coping, including covariates for use of
equipment and help
                        Coefficient Adjusted    Coefficient    Adjusted      Coefficient            Adjusted
                            (SE)       percent     (SE)         percent         (SE)                percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                     -          28.2            -             27.5             -            27.5
$10K - $19,000            -0.06 (0.10)     27.0       0.02 (0.11)        27.9        0.03 (0.11)       28.0
$20K - $29,999             0.14 (0.12)     30.8       0.20 (0.12)        30.8        0.19 (0.12)       30.7
$30K - $39,999            -0.05 (0.16)     27.2       0.03 (0.17)        28.0        0.03 (0.17)       28.0
$40K - $49,999            -0.01 (0.17)     28.0       0.05 (0.18)        28.4        0.04 (0.18)       28.2
$50K +                     0.17 (0.17)     31.5       0.27 (0.17)        32.1        0.26 (0.17)       32.0

Education
Less than high school           -          27.8             -            29.1             -            29.0
Some HS                    0.05 (0.10)     28.7       -0.00 (0.11)       29.0       -0.00 (0.11)       29.0
HS graduate               -0.04 (0.09)     27.0       -0.11 (0.09)       27.2       -0.11 (0.10)       27.2
Some college               0.14 (0.12)     30.6        0.02 (0.14)       29.3        0.02 (0.14)       29.4
College grad or higher     0.21 (0.13)     32.0        0.08 (0.13)       30.5        0.09 (0.13)       30.5

Help
Spouse, child, parent          -                     -0.27 (0.13)*                 -0.28 (0.13)*
help only
Paid help only                 -                      -0.07 (0.13)                  -0.07 (0.13)
Unpaid help only               -                            -                             -
Multiple types of help                                1.59 (0.13)*                  1.59 (0.13)*

Mobility Aids
Cane or crutch                                                                      -0.10 (0.09)
Walker                                                                              -0.11 (0.13)
Manual Wheelchair                                                                    0.03 (0.15)
Electric Wheelchair or                                                              0.70 (0.33)*
scooter
Brace                                                                               -0.21 (0.16)

N                            4905                        4905                           4905

These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of help
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations and whether respondents
reported difficulty with 3 or more IADLs
*p<0.05
Table 12. Use of equipment and personal help among respondents with intrinsic disability,
by any ADL and any IADL category, separately for men and women*
                                        Men                             Women
                               Any ADL       Any IADL         Any ADL            Any IADL
Any equipment                    54.6            -               56.8                 -
Any personal help                69.3          87.5              62.0               88.9
  Spouse/child/parent            31.0          27.4              17.7               24.6
  Paid                           20.5          28.1              27.7               30.7
  Other unpaid                   21.2          24.2              21.3               28.7
Either equipment or personal     91.5            -               89.7                 -
help

N                                   751        1729              1515            3828

*Categories are not mutually exclusive
         Table 13. Logistic regression models for coping for getting around inside and dressing,
         including covariates for use of equipment and help
                                   Getting Around Inside                                  Dressing
                      Coefficient Adjusted Coefficient Adjusted Coefficient Adjusted Coefficient                   Adjusted
                          (SE)       percent      (SE)       percent      (SE)       percent       (SE)            percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                  -         33.6             -        33.6            -         34.6           -          34.4
$10K - $19,000            -0.13        31.1          -0.13       31.2          0.32        41.2         0.32         41.0
                         (0.22)                     (0.22)                   (0.23)                    (0.23)
$20K - $29,999            -0.44        25.6          -0.43       25.7          0.30        40.7         0.31         40.9
                         (0.28)                     (0.28)                   (0.27)                    (0.27)
$30K - $39,999            -0.15        30.7          -0.15       30.7         -0.04        33.9         0.02         34.9
                         (0.31)                     (0.31)                   (0.30)                    (0.30)
$40K - $49,999            -0.59        23.2          -0.61       22.9         -0.67        22.5         -0.66        22.7
                         (0.43)                     (0.43)                   (0.45)                    (0.44)
$50K +                     0.23        38.3           0.23       38.2          0.51        45.4         0.53         45.6
                         (0.33)                     (0.33)                   (0.30)                    (0.31)

Education
Less than HS                -          27.3            -         27.1            -         32.2            -         31.9
Some HS                   0.37         34.2          0.40        34.5          0.51        42.7          0.52        42.5
                         (0.23)                     (0.23)                   (0.21)*                   (0.21)*
HS graduate               0.18         30.6          0.19        30.6          0.24        37.0          0.28        37.5
                         (0.21)                     (0.22)                    (0.20)                    (0.20)
Some college              0.49         36.5          0.52        36.9          0.45        41.3          0.46        41.2
                         (0.32)                     (0.33)                    (0.28)                    (0.28)
College grad +            0.20         30.8          0.20        30.7          0.99        53.4          1.03        53.8
                         (0.34)                     (0.34)                   (0.28)*                   (0.28)*

Equipment and help
Equipment and help          -                          -                        -                          -
Equipment only              -                        0.17                       -                        0.59
                                                    (0.27)                                              (0.75)
Help only                   -                        0.34                       -                        0.94
                                                    (0.27)                                             (0.41)*

N                          890                       890                        924                     924
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations and whether respondents report difficulty
with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
         Table 14. Logistic regression models for coping for shopping and light housework, including
         covariates for specific mobility aids
                                          Shopping                                   Light Housework

                     Coefficient    Adjusted    Coefficient    Adjusted    Coefficient   Adjusted Coefficient Adjusted
                       (SE)         percent       (SE)         percent       (SE)        percent    (SE)      percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -          33.6            -          33.6            -         25.9            -         25.7
$10K - $19,000           0.06         34.8          0.06         34.9          0.23        30.4          0.24        30.4
                        (0.13)                     (0.13)                     (0.17)                    (0.17)
$20K - $29,999           0.13         36.4          0.12         36.2          0.41        34.3          0.43        34.4
                        (0.16)                     (0.16)                    (0.20)*                   (0.20)*
$30K - $39,999           0.31         40.3          0.30         40.1          0.26        31.0          0.27        31.0
                        (0.19)                     (0.19)                     (0.24)                    (0.24)
$40K - $49,999           -0.16        30.3          -0.19        29.9          0.44        34.8          0.46        35.1
                        (0.22)                     (0.22)                     (0.27)                    (0.27)
$50K +                   -0.07        32.1          -0.09        31.8          0.33        32.5          0.32        31.9
                        (0.21)                     (0.21)                     (0.25)                    (0.25)

Education
Less than HS               -          34.7            -          34.6           -          28.7           -          28.7
Some HS                  0.06         35.9          0.05         35.7         0.10         30.6         0.09         30.5
                        (0.15)                     (0.16)                    (0.17)                    (0.17)
HS graduate              -0.03        34.1          -0.02        34.2         0.10         30.7         0.10         30.7
                        (0.13)                     (0.13)                    (0.15)                    (0.15)
Some college             0.01         34.8          0.02         34.9         0.12         31.1         0.14         31.5
                        (0.20)                     (0.20)                    (0.22)                    (0.23)
College grad +           -0.04        33.7          -0.04        33.7         0.23         33.4         0.22         33.2
                        (0.22)                     (0.22)                    (0.23)                    (0.24)

Mobility Aids
Cane or crutch                                      -0.18                                                0.06
                                                   (0.10)                                              (0.11)
Walker                                              0.04                                                -0.20
                                                   (0.11)                                              (0.14)
Manual                                              0.07                                                -0.02
Wheelchair                                         (0.14)                                              (0.16)
Electric                                            0.49                                                 0.56
wheelchair or                                      (0.34)                                              (0.39)
scooter
Brace                                               -0.26                                               -0.01
                                                   (0.23)                                              (0.25)

N                        2187                       2187                       1534                    1534
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations and whether respondents reported difficulty
with 3 or more IADLs
*p<0.05
Appendix
Table A. Logistic Regression Models for Ability to Cope by Sex
                                 Any Disability: Men                 Any Disability: Women
                        Coefficient (SE)   Adjusted percent Coefficient (SE)      Adjusted percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                        -                  18.2                    -                   24.6
$10K - $19,000                0.11 (0.20)             19.9              -0.09 (0.11)              23.0
$20K - $29,999                0.41 (0.22)             24.9              -0.08 (0.13)              23.2
$30K - $39,999                0.08 (0.28)             19.4              -0.14 (0.17)              22.2
$40K - $49,999                0.40 (0.30)             24.7              -0.01 (0.20)              2445
$50K +                       0.63 (0.28)*             29.0               0.00 (0.18)              24.7

Education
Less than high school              -                  22.2                    -                   20.5

Some HS                      -0.11 (0.19)             20.4               0.22 (0.12)              24.2
HS graduate                  -0.21 (0.18)             18.9              0.21 (0.10)*              24.1
Some college                  0.05 (0.23)             23.0              0.46 (0.15)*              28.6
College grad or higher        0.31 (0.24)             27.8              0.34 (0.16)*              26.4

Age
70-74                         0.00 (0.16)                               0.23 (0.12)*
75-79                         0.14 (0.18)                                0.13 (0.13)
80-84                         0.14 (0.18)                                0.18 (0.13)
85plus                       -0.29 (0.19)                                0.13 (0.14)

Marital status
Widowed                      0.08 (0.15)                                 0.04 (0.10)
Dsepsing                     0.02 (0.20)                                -0.21 (0.15)

Race
Black/other race             0.04 (0.20)                                0.11 (0.13)

Severity of Limitations
1-2 ADLs                     -0.12 (0.15)                              -0.39 (0.10)*
3 or more ADLs              -1.32 (0.24)*                              -1.73 (0.18)*

N                               1865                                       4003

The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability
Reference groups for age, marital status, race and severity of limitations are age 65-59, married respondents,
white respondents and respondents reporting only IADL disability respectively.
*p<0.05
               Table B. Logistic Regression Models for Intrinsic Disability, Income Only
                          Any Disability                 Any ADL                      Any IADL
Independent          Coefficient     Adjusted    Coefficient      Adjusted      Coefficient  Adjusted
Variable                (SE)         percent         (SE)         percent         (SE)       percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -            29.8             -             11.1             -           27.8
$10K - $19,000       -0.28 (0.05)*      24.6       -0.27 (0.06)*       8.9        -0.26 (0.05)*     23.2
$20K - $29,999       -0.38 (0.06)*      23.1       -0.23 (0.08)*       9.2        -0.34 (0.06)*     22.0
$30K - $39,999       -0.44 (0.07)*      22.0       -0.27 (0.10)*       8.8        -0.40 (0.07)*     21.0

$40K - $49,999       -0.31 (0.08)*      24.1       -0.24 (0.11)*       9.0        -0.28 (0.08)*     22.9
$50K +               -0.59 (0.07)*      19.8       -0.36 (0.11)*       8.2        -0.55 (0.07)*     18.7


Education
Less than high               -                               -                              -
school
Some HS                      -                               -                              -
HS graduate                  -                               -                              -
Some college                 -                               -                              -
College grad or              -                               -                              -
higher
N                         24,476                         24,476                          24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
            Table C. Logistic Regression Models for Intrinsic Disability, Education Only
                         Any Disability                 Any ADL                     Any IADL
Independent         Coefficient    Adjusted     Coefficient     Adjusted      Coefficient  Adjusted
Variable               (SE)         percent        (SE)          percent         (SE)      percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -                             -                              -
$10K - $19,000             -                             -                              -
$20K - $29,999             -                             -                              -
$30K - $39,999             -                             -                              -
$40K - $49,999             -                             -                              -
$50K +                     -                             -                              -

Education
Less than high             -            28.8             -             11.4             -           27.0
school
Some HS              -0.10 (0.05)*      26.9        -0.08 (0.07)       10.7        -0.09 (0.05)     25.5
HS graduate          -0.29 (0.04)*      23.5       -0.31 (0.06)*       8.7        -0.29 (0.05)*     22.1
Some college         -0.48 (0.06)*      20.6       -0.47 (0.09)*       7.6        -0.46 (0.06)*     19.5

College grad or      -0.49 (0.06)*      20.5       -0.64 (0.09)*       6.6        -0.44 (0.07)*     19.8
higher

N                         24,476                         24,476                          24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
            Table D. Logistic Regression Models for Residual Disability, Income Only
                        Any Disability               ADL Only                     IADL Only
Independent        Coefficient    Adjusted    Coefficient     Adjusted       Coefficient Adjusted
Variable              (SE)         percent        (SE)        percent          (SE)       percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -            22.9             -             7.8              -           20.9
$10K - $19,000       -0.24 (0.05)*      19.1       -0.28 (0.07)*       6.1        -0.22 (0.05)*     17.7

$20K - $29,999       -0.36 (0.06)*      17.5       -0.29 (0.09)*       6.0        -0.34 (0.07)*     16.1
$30K - $39,999       -0.38 (0.08)*      17.2       -0.27 (0.11)*       6.1        -0.36 (0.08)*     15.8

$40K - $49,999       -0.32 (0.09)*      18.0        -0.19 (0.13)       6.6        -0.30 (0.10)*     16.6

$50K +               -0.60 (0.08)*      14.4       -0.52 (0.15)*       4.9        -0.58 (0.09)*     13.2


Education
Less than high             -                             -                              -
school
Some HS                    -                             -                              -
HS graduate                -                             -                              -
Some college               -                             -                              -
College grad or            -                             -                              -
higher


N                          24,476                        24,476                          24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
            Table E. Logistic Regression Models for Residual Disability, Education Only
                         Any Disability                 Any ADL                    Any IADL
Independent         Coefficient    Adjusted     Coefficient    Adjusted      Coefficient  Adjusted
Variable               (SE)         percent         (SE)        percent         (SE)      percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -                             -                              -
$10K - $19,000             -                             -                              -
$20K - $29,999             -                             -                              -
$30K - $39,999             -                             -                              -
$40K - $49,999             -                             -                              -
$50K +                     -                             -                              -

Education
Less than high             -            22.8             -             8.4              -           20.6
school
Some HS              -0.13 (0.05)*      20.7       -0.19 (0.08)*       7.1        -0.11 (0.05)*     19.0
HS graduate          -0.30 (0.05)*      18.2       -0.43 (0.08)*       5.7        -0.27 (0.05)*     16.8

Some college         -0.54 (0.06)*      15.0       -0.66 (0.11)*       4.6        -0.50 (0.06)*     13.9

College grad or      -0.58 (0.07)*      14.6       -0.70 (0.10)*       4.5        -0.52 (0.07)*     13.7
higher


N                          24,476                        24,476                          24,476
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
                    Table F. Logistic Regression Models for Coping, Income Only
                          Any Disability                Any ADL                  Any IADL
Independent          Coefficient     Adjusted    Coefficient    Adjusted    Coefficient Adjusted
Variable                (SE)          percent      (SE)          percent       (SE)      percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                 -           22.4             -             29.3              -          24.6
$10K - $19,000        -0.02 (0.09)      22.1        0.15 (0.14)        32.2        -0.04 (0.10)     23.9

$20K - $29,999         0.11 (0.11)      24.3        0.25 (0.16)        34.0         0.12 (0.11)     26.9
$30K - $39,999        -0.02 (0.15)      22.1        0.11 (0.19)        31.3        -0.00 (0.15)     24.6

$40K - $49,999        0.16 (0.17)       25.2         0.11 (0.27)       31.4        0.10 (0.16)      26.4
$50K +                0.28 (0.15)       27.4        0.52 (0.24)*       39.5        0.24 (0.15)      29.2


Education
Less than high             -                             -                              -
school
Some HS                    -                             -                              -
HS graduate                -                             -                              -
Some college               -                             -                              -
College grad or            -                             -                              -
higher


N                          5868                           2266                           5557
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
                   Table G. Logistic Regression Models for Coping, Education Only
                           Any Disability                Any ADL                  Any IADL
Independent          Coefficient     Adjusted    Coefficient    Adjusted     Coefficient Adjusted
Variable                 (SE)         percent       (SE)         percent       (SE)       percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                -                             -                              -
$10K - $19,000             -                             -                              -
$20K - $29,999             -                             -                              -
$30K - $39,999             -                             -                              -
$40K - $49,999             -                             -                              -
$50K +                     -                             -                              -

Education
Less than high             -            20.7             -             26.9             -           24.2
school
Some HS               0.13 (0.10)       22.9        0.33 (0.14)*       32.9        0.06 (0.09)      25.4
HS graduate           0.11 (0.08)       22.6        0.47 (0.13)*       35.7       -0.04 (0.08)      23.5
Some college         0.36 (0.12)*       27.0        0.58 (0.20)*       37.9        0.21 (0.11)      28.3
College grad or      0.41 (0.11)*       28.1        0.27 (0.20)        31.7       0.29 (0.11)*      29.9
higher

N                          5868                           2266                           5557
The definition of intrinsic ADL disability includes difficulty alone or without help or equipment; the
definition for intrinsic IADL disability includes only difficulty alone or without help.
Individuals missing values for educational attainment (n = 295) and/or marital status (n = 25) were dropped
from regression analyses
*p<0.05
Table H. Logistic regression models for ADL coping among males only, including covariates
for use of equipment and help
                                                   ADL Only: Men
                        Coefficient     Adjusted percent Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent
                        (SE)

Income
$0 - $9,999                      -               33.4                  -                 33.4
$10K - $19,000             -0.13 (0.29)          31.2            -0.09 (0.30)            31.9
$20K - $29,999              0.14 (0.35)          35.9             0.14 (0.36)            35.8
$30K - $39,999              0.03 (0.44)          33.9             0.08 (0.44)            34.8
$40K - $49,999              0.70 (0.45)          46.3             0.61 (0.48)            44.1
$50K +                      0.24 (0.45)          37.6             0.14 (0.44)            35.8

Education
Less than high school           -                30.3                  -                 29.3
Some HS                    0.40 (0.25)           37.3             0.40 (0.26)            36.0
HS graduate                0.24 (0.23)           34.4             0.39 (0.24)            35.7
Some college               0.55 (0.32)           40.1             0.66 (0.35)            40.6
College grad or higher     0.19 (0.39)           33.6             0.36 (0.38)            35.4

Equipment and help
AT only                         -                                -0.00 (0.39)
Spouse, child, parent           -                                 0.19 (0.41)
help only
Paid help only                  -                                -0.43 (0.54)
Unpaid help only                -                                      -
Multiple types of help          -                                1.25 (0.48)*
AT and any help                 -                                -0.33 (0.40)

N                               689                                     689
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help
and/or AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and whether
respondents report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
Table I. Logistic regression Models for ADL coping among females only, including
covariates for use of equipment and help
                                                  ADL Only: Women
                         Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                       -                34.9                   -                35.4
$10K - $19,000               0.18 (0.18)           38.2              0.15 (0.19)           38.1
$20K - $29,999               0.20 (0.20)           38.6              0.15 (0.20)           38.1
$30K - $39,999              -0.13 (0.24)           32.5             -0.17 (0.24)           32.4
$40K - $49,999              -0.38 (0.35)           28.3             -0.34 (0.35)           29.4
$50K +                       0.52 (0.35)           44.7              0.44 (0.36)           43.5

Education
Less than high school            -                 32.4                  -                 32.0

Some HS                      0.22 (0.19)           36.5             0.27 (0.20)            36.9
HS graduate                 0.48 (0.18)*           41.3            0.52 (0.18)*            41.4
Some college                0.39 (0.25)            39.6            0.44 (0.26)             39.9
College grad or higher      0.11 (0.30)            34.5            0.18 (0.31)             35.1

Equipment and help
AT only                          -                                   0.12 (0.30)
Spouse, child, parent            -                                  -0.07 (0.35)
help only
Paid help only                   -                                 -0.08 (0.35)
Unpaid help only                 -                                       -
Multiple types of help           -                                 0.98 (0.36)*
AT and any help                  -                                 -0.07 (0.32)

N                               1356                                      1356
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or
AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and whether
respondents report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
Table J. Logistic regression models for IADL coping for males only, including covariates for
use of equipment and help
                                                     IADL Only: Men
                           Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                         -                 20.4                  -                 19.5
$10K - $19,000                 0.27 (0.20)            24.9             0.42 (0.22)            25.5
$20K - $29,999                0.62 (0.23)*            31.6            0.79 (0.25)*            31.6
$30K - $39,999                 0.32 (0.30)            25.7             0.50 (0.34)            26.9
$40K - $49,999                 0.30 (0.34)            25.4             0.45 (0.34)            25.9
$50K +                        0.89 (0.27)*            37.1            1.13 (0.30)*            37.7

Education
Less than high school               -                 27.2                  -                 28.4
Some HS                       -0.15 (0.21)            24.5            -0.24 (0.25)            24.7
HS graduate                   -0.25 (0.19)            22.8            -0.37 (0.20)            22.7
Some college                   0.11 (0.21)            29.2             0.08 (0.23)            29.8
College grad or higher         0.32 (0.25)            33.6             0.21 (0.25)            31.9


Help
Spouse, child, parent               -                                 -0.45 (0.25)
help only
Paid help only                      -                                 -0.29 (0.22)
Unpaid help only                    -
Multiple types of help              -                                 1.50 (0.21)*

N                                 1510                                     1510
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or
AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and whether respondents
report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
Table K. Logistic regression models for IADL coping for females only, including covariates
for use of equipment and help#†
                                                  IADL Only: Women
                         Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent Coefficient (SE) Adjusted percent

Income
$0 - $9,999                        -                 30.5                   -                 29.8
$10K - $19,000               -0.14 (0.12)            27.9             -0.06 (0.12)            28.8
$20K - $29,999               -0.01 (0.15)            30.2              0.02 (0.16)            30.1
$30K - $39,999               -0.13 (0.18)            28.0             -0.07 (0.19)            28.6
$40K - $49,999               -0.04 (0.19)            29.7             -0.00 (0.20)            29.8
$50K +                       -0.07 (0.19)            29.2             -0.01 (0.20)            29.6

Education
Less than high school              -                 28.6                   -                 29.8
Some HS                       0.10 (0.11)            30.4              0.05 (0.13)            30.7
HS graduate                   0.00 (0.10)            28.6             -0.06 (0.11)            28.8
Some college                  0.14 (0.15)            31.3             -0.05 (0.16)            28.9
College grad or higher        0.05 (0.16)            29.5             -0.10 (0.17)            28.1

Help
Spouse, child, parent              -                                  -0.20 (0.15)
help only
Paid help only                     -                                 -0.02 (0.15)
Unpaid help only                   -                                       -
Multiple types of help             -                                 1.66 (0.14)*

N                                3395
These models include only respondents who reported intrinsic disability and use of either help and/or
AT
Models all control for race, age*sex, sex*marital status, functional limitations, and whether respondents
report difficulty with 3 or more ADLs
*p<0.05
