                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                OFFSHORE FINANCIAL CENTERS:
                                  PARASITES OR SYMBIONTS?

                                            Andrew K. Rose
                                            Mark M. Spiegel

                                         Working Paper 12044
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12044


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




Rose is B.T. Rocca Jr. Professor of International Trade and Economic Analysis and Policy in the Haas
School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, NBER research associate and CEPR Research
Fellow. Spiegel is Vice President, Economic Research, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. We thank
Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti for inspiration, conversations, and data. Jessica Wesley provided excellent
research assistance. For comments, we thank: two anonymous referees, Joshua Aizenman, Sven Arndt,
Michael Dooley, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Galina Hale, Ann Harrison, Andrew Scott and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Santa Cruz, and Singapore. The views expressed below do not represent those of
the Federal Reserve System, or their staffs. A current (PDF) version of this paper and the STATA data set
used in the paper are available at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Andrew K. Rose and Mark M. Spiegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Offshore Financial Centers: Parasites or Symbionts?
Andrew K. Rose and Mark M. Spiegel
NBER Working Paper No. 12044
February 2006
JEL No. F23, F36

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the causes and consequences of offshore financial centers (OFCs). Since OFCs
are likely to be tax havens and money launderers, they encourage bad behavior in source countries.
Nevertheless, OFCs may also have unintended positive consequences for their neighbors, since they
act as a competitive fringe for the domestic banking sector. We derive and simulate a model of a
home country monopoly bank facing a representative competitive OFC which offers tax advantages
attained by moving assets offshore at a cost that is increasing in distance between the OFC and the
source. Our model predicts that proximity to an OFC is likely to have pro-competitive implications
for the domestic banking sector, although the overall effect on welfare is ambiguous. We test and
confirm the predictions empirically. OFC proximity is associated with a more competitive domestic
banking system and greater overall financial depth.
Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business Administration
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu

Mark M. Spiegel
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
mark.spiegel@sf.frb.org
1. Introduction

       Offshore financial centers (OFCs) are jurisdictions that oversee a disproportionate level

of financial activity by non-residents. Financial activity in OFCs is usually dominated by the

provision of intermediation services for larger neighboring countries. In this paper, we ask two

distinct questions concerning the causes and consequences of OFCs. First, why do some

countries become OFCs? Second, what are the consequences of OFCs for their neighbors?1

       What makes a country likely to become an offshore financial center? We approach this

question with both bilateral and multilateral data sets. Using bilateral data from over 200

countries in the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS), we examine the determinants

of cross-border asset holdings for 2001 and 2002 using a gravity model. We confirm these

results using a probit model applied to a multilateral cross-section of over 200 countries for the

same time period. Unsurprisingly, tax havens and money launderers host more assets and are

more likely to be OFCs. These results are intuitive; one attraction of moving assets offshore is

the ability to pursue activities that are prohibited in source countries.

       Do OFCs make bad neighbors? One might expect proximity to an OFC to be bad for the

neighborhood, since OFCs encourage tax evasion and other illegal activities. However, the

presence of nearby offshore financial centers may also have beneficial effects. Most

importantly, the presence of an OFC with an efficient financial sector may increase the

competitiveness of a source country’s banking sector, though this benefit is tempered by

transactions costs. The tradeoff between the positive and negative externalities of OFCs lies at

the heart of our paper.

       To analyze this tradeoff, we develop a model where OFCs have this benign effect, even

though shifting assets offshore is costly. In our model a home country monopoly bank faces a




                                                   1
competitive fringe of OFCs that survive by offering tax advantages, subject to a fixed cost of

moving assets offshore. We use the model to examine the impact of OFC proximity on the

distribution of assets between the home country bank and the OFC. In general, proximity to an

OFC has ambiguous effects on welfare and asset distribution. When we simulate our model, we

find that OFCs have strong pro-competitive effects on the domestic banking sector. We then

take the predictions of the model to the data, and examine the impact of OFC proximity on

banking-sector competitiveness and financial depth. We robustly confirm the prediction that

OFCs have a pro-competitive impact on their neighbors. Proximity to an OFC also has a

positive effect on financial depth.

       To summarize, we find that countries identified as tax havens and money launderers are

likely to be OFCs, encouraging tax evasion and nefarious activity in neighboring source

countries. Nevertheless, OFCs still provide substantial offsetting benefits in the form of

competitive stimulus for their neighbors’ financial sectors. This benign impact on local banking

conditions tends to mitigate the adverse effects of OFCs on tax evasion and illegal activity.

       The next section analyzes OFC determination, using both bilateral and multilateral data

sets. Section 3 develops a theoretical model of OFCs that compete with a domestic monopolist

bank by providing tax benefits. Simulations of the model allow us to gauge the offsetting effects

on assets and welfare; these predictions are tested in section 4. The paper concludes with a brief

summary.



2. Determinants of Offshore Financial Centers

       The costs of shifting assets offshore have fallen over time; but they remain non-trivial.

Why do assets get shifted offshore? More generally, why do offshore financial centers exist?




                                                 2
We begin our study by showing that OFCs are created to facilitate bad behavior in source

countries such as tax evasion and money laundering.

       The small literature of relevance leaves little doubt that offshore financial centers

encourage tax evasion. Indeed, in their survey of OFC activity Hampton and Christensen (2002)

use the terms tax haven and OFC interchangeably; see also Masciandaro (forthcoming).

Recently, steps have been taken to mitigate the opportunities for tax evasion afforded by OFCs.

In 2000, the OECD identified over thirty countries as engaging in harmful tax evasion practices,

including countries such as Andorra, Bahrain, Cook Islands, and Dominica. Countries on the list

were given deadlines to change their policies and avoid sanctions.2 Most nations complied with

the OECD.3 The G7 has also pursued initiatives against money laundering practices, including

the creation of a Financial Action Task Force.4 Hampton and Christensen (2002) predict that

such initiatives will eventually erode OFCs’ advantages and push capital back “onshore.” Still,

the facilitation of tax evasion remains one of the most obvious determinants of OFC status.



2a. A Bilateral Approach to Cross-Border Asset Holdings

       We begin by taking advantage of the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS)

data set. This data set is useful for studying the generic behavior of cross-border asset holdings.5

While there is no special place for offshore financial centers in the data set, all the conventional

OFCs are included in the data set (more on this below). This data set has its flaws; for instance,

certain areas (e.g., Aruba) have a large number of missing entries. Still, investigating these

bilateral asset stocks seems a good place to begin identifying why assets are held overseas, the

essential feature of offshore financial centers. This data set has been used by a number of other

scholars, including most prominently Lane and Milesi-Ferretti.6




                                                  3
       The CPIS data are freely available at the IMFs website at year-ends for 2001 and 2002.7

In particular, we use Table 8, which provides a geographic breakdown of total portfolio

investment assets. These data form a bilateral matrix; they show stocks of cross-border holdings

of assets, measured at market prices. Thus, one can determine that e.g., at the end of 2001,

Argentine residents were reported to hold $29 million in total portfolio investment assets in

Austria.

       Since the CPIS data set is bilateral, it is natural to use the well-known “gravity model” of

trade as a baseline. The gravity model explains activity between two countries as being a

positive function of the economic masses of the countries, and a negative function of the distance

between them. Variants of gravity models have been widely used in the literature by e.g.,

Alworth and Andresen (1992), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004), and Portes and Rey (2005). In

practice we use population and real GDP per capita to proxy economic mass, and great-circle

distance and a few other measures to proxy economic distance. After controlling for these

influences, we then investigate whether there is any additional role for institutional measures.

       We use CPIS data for both 2001 and 2002. We drop a few insignificant areas because of

data difficulties.8 We are left with a bilateral data set with data from 69 source and 222 host

countries.9 (A list of the countries is provided in appendix table A1.) We then merge in a host of

bilateral variables taken from the gravity literature in international trade. These include: source

and host country population and real GDP per capita (both taken essentially from the World

Bank’s World Development Indicators). We also include colonial history, geographic features,

and measures of bilateral distance, common language, and common currency. The latter data are

mostly taken from Glick and Rose (2002). Further details and the datasets are available online.




                                                 4
       To all these conventional variables, we add three sets of additional variables. First, we

add dummy variables for source/host countries that are tax havens and/or money launderers.10

For the former, we combine three indicators on tax havens, provided by the OECD, CIA, and

Hines and Rice (1994).11 For the latter, we use the June 2000 OECD Report from the Financial

Action Task Force on Money Laundering.12 Second, we add variables (again, for both source

and host countries) that measure the rule of law, political stability, and regulatory quality. These

are continuous variables (where higher values better governance), and are taken from

“Governance Matters III” by Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2003).13 Third, we add variables

for the legal origins (of both source and host countries), focusing on countries with legal origins

in common, civil, and French law.14

       We estimate the following equation:

      ln ( X ijt ) = β 0 + β1 ln ( Dij ) + β 2 ln (Yit ) + β 3 ln (Yij ) + β 4 ln ( Popit ) + β 5 ln ( Pop jt )
      + β 6Contij + β 7 Langij + β 8CU ijt + β 9ComColij + β10Colijt + β11 Island i
      + β12 Island j + β13 Landli + β14 Landl j + β15 ln ( Areaij ) + β16 ln ( Areait )
                                                                                                                  (1)
      +γ 1Taxhi + γ 2Taxh j + γ 3 Moneyli + γ 4 Moneyl j + γ 5 Rulei + γ 6 Rule j + γ 7 Poli
      +γ 8 Pol j + γ 9 Regi + γ 10 Reg j + γ 11Commoni + γ 12Common j + γ 13Civili
      +γ 14Civil j + γ 15 Frenchi + γ 16 French j + ε ijt

where i denotes the source country, j denotes the host, t denotes time, ln(.) denotes the natural

logarithm operator, and the variables are defined as:


•   Xij denotes cross-holdings from i held in j, measured in millions of dollars,
•   D is the distance between i and j,
•   Y is annual real GDP per capita in dollars,
•   Pop is population,
•   Cont is a binary variable which is unity if i and j share a land border,




                                                              5
•   Lang is a binary “dummy” variable which is unity if i and j have a common language and
    zero otherwise,
•   CU is a binary variable which is unity if i and j use the same currency at time t,
•   ComCol is a binary variable which is unity if i and j were both colonized by the same
    country,
•   Col is a binary variable which is unity if i and j are colonies at time t,
•   Island is the number of island nations in the pair (0, 1, or 2),
•   Landl is the number of landlocked countries in the country-pair (0, 1, or 2),
•   Area is the area of the country (in square kilometers),
•   Taxh is a binary variable which is unity for tax havens,
•   Moneyl is a binary variable which is unity for money-launderers,
•   Rule is a measure of the rule of law,
•   Pol is a measure of political stability,
•   Reg is a measure of regulatory quality,
•   Common is a binary variable which is unity for common-law countries,
•   Civil is a binary variable which is unity for civil-law countries,
•   French is a binary variable which is unity for French-law countries,
•   β is a vector of nuisance coefficients, and
•   εij represents the omitted other influences on bilateral exports, assumed to be well behaved.

        We estimate this equation with conventional OLS, using a robust covariance estimator to

handle heteroskedasticity, adding year-specific fixed effects. Rather than drop the observations

for which the stock of cross-holdings is zero, we substitute a very small number for zero (and the

occasional negative) values.15 The coefficients of interest to us are {γ}.

        Our baseline results, excluding the institutional variables, are tabulated in the extreme left

column of Table 1. The model delivers sensible estimates. For instance, higher population and

GDP per capita in either the source or host countries encourage greater cross-holdings. Second,

geography matters, in the sense that more distance between the two countries lowers cross-



                                                   6
holdings, while a shared land border, language, or money raises them. All these effects are

sensible, economically large, and statistically significant at conventional significance levels.

Further, the model fits the data well, accounting for over half the variation in an essentially

cross-sectional data set. The results also seem robust to splitting the data into individual years,

and to dropping the zero values of the regressand (these sensitivity checks are tabulated in

successive columns).

       We then add institutional details in the fifth column. The coefficients are collectively

significant and have sensible interpretations. Host countries that are tax havens and/or money

launderers are more likely to attract cross-holding; comparable source country effects are present

but smaller. Neither the rule of law nor the political stability of host countries seems to be

relevant. But politically unstable countries and those with a strong rule of law are both more

likely to send funds overseas. Finally, while regulatory quality in the source country has little

effect on cross-holdings, host countries with higher regulatory quality are much more likely to

attract assets. All this make sense.

       Finally, in the last column (on the extreme right) of Table 1 we add dummy variables for

the legal origins of both source and host countries. These are of only minor relevance.

Common- and civil-law countries are more likely to be the source of cross-holdings; countries

with French law are less likely to be hosts.

       We take two primary results from the bilateral sample: First, geography plays a

significant role in the determination of cross-border flows, even after conditioning for other

factors that may be correlated with distance that could affect cross-border flows. While a role

for geography would be obvious in the case of flows of goods, the role of distance in asset flows

is less obvious, but appears to be important in the data. Second, identification as a tax haven or




                                                  7
money launderer is associated with an increase in cross-border flows, suggesting that the desire

to circumvent local taxes or other local laws plays a role in the decision to move assets offshore.

Both of these considerations are addressed in the model introduced below.



2b. Multilateral Evidence on Offshore Financial Center Determination

       We now corroborate our key findings from the bilateral CPIS data set with a multilateral

approach. In particular, we test for the importance of e.g., being a tax haven, using the common

law, or having political stability on the likelihood of being an offshore financial center.

       Our multilateral approach is cross-sectional in nature. Since we are interested in

determining which countries have chosen to become OFCs, it is important first to identify the

OFCs themselves. Rather than develop our own methodology to identify OFCs, we gather these

data from three basic sources (which have considerable overlap). We use the dummy variables

indicating either “Financial Centre with Significant Offshore Activities” or “Major Financial

Centre with onshore and offshore activity” from Report of the Working Group on Offshore

Centres of the Financial Stability Forum.16 We also include “Countries and Territories with

Offshore Financial Centers” from Errico and Musalem (1999). Finally, we include

“International and Offshore Financial Centers” from IMF (2004), whether “Contacted – Module

2 Assessment” or “Contacted under the FSAP”.17 We further impose the requirement that the

OFC host at least $10 million in total assets, and that it not be an OECD country.18 This delivers

our default set of forty OFCs, which are listed in appendix Table A2. As can be seen from the

table, OFCs are clustered regionally; notable groupings are in the Caribbean and Europe.

Consistent with our results, they tend to be clustered around places with high taxes and a high

demand for nefarious financial activity.19




                                                  8
        Our default set of OFCs is a 0/1 binary variable; a country either is or is not an offshore

financial center. To check the robustness of our results, we also construct a continuous variable.

This is derived by combining the three dummy variables above with two others. The first is a

dummy that is one if and only if the CIA mentions that the country is an “offshore financial

center” in its discussion of illicit drugs in the World Factbook.20 The second is derived by

aggregating (across source countries) the residuals from the default pooled model of Table 1.21

We then combine the variables by using the first principal factor from the five underlying

variables.22 This gives us a continuous version of our default binary variable. The two variables

are highly correlated (the correlation coefficient is .84).23

        We gathered data on 223 countries (listed in appendix Table A3), including our default

set of forty OFCs. We use data averaged from 2001 and 2002, both to smooth the data and to

stick as close to our bilateral data set as closely as possible. We condition on the natural

logarithms of both population and real GDP per capita throughout (again, taken mostly from the

World Bank’s World Development Indicators). We then sequentially add: a) dummy variables

for tax havens and money launderers, b) the three institutional measures (rule of law, political

stability, and regulatory quality), and c) the three legal regimes. In panel A of Table 2 we use

our default dummy variable measure of OFCs, estimated using probit. Panel B is the analogue

that uses OLS (with robust standard errors) on our continuous measure of OFC activity.

        The most striking results in Table 2 are in column (2), where we consider the first two

institutional features: tax haven and money laundering status. Being either a tax haven or a

money launderer has an economically and statistically strong effect in raising the probability of

being an OFC.24 This confirms our findings from the bilateral results that sinful countries are

strongly associated with offshore financial centers. On the other hand, our other measures of




                                                   9
institutional quality and the legal regime have no strong consistent effect on OFC determination.

Conditioning on population and GDP per capita seems to have little consistent strong effect.

        We have engaged in extensive sensitivity analysis with respect to the determination of

OFCs; part of it is reflected in Table C. This shows the results of adding ten different variables

to the specification of column (2), which includes tax haven and money laundering status. Two

estimates are supplied: the middle column is the result of adding the variable to the probit

estimation for the default binary measure of OFCs, while the right column tabulates the OLS

coefficient from adding the variable to the continuous OFC specification.

        We have successively added: a) a dummy variable that is unity if the country is English-

speaking; b) the official supervisory power aggregate from Barth, Caprio and Levine (2001)25; c)

a dummy variable for the presence of capital controls taken from the IMFs Annual Report on

Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; d) the corporate tax rate, essentially taken

from Ernst & Young26; e) the country’s average Polity IV score27; f) average openness, the ratio

of exports plus imports to GDP, taken from the WDI; g) the UNDPs human development index28;

and lastly h) measures of political rights, civil rights, and freedom, all provided by Freedom

House.29 None of these variables are consistently strongly tied to our measures of OFCs despite

our best attempts. We also tabulate the p-values for the joint significance of two sets of dummy

variables: a) a set of regional variables; and b) a set of variables for colonial history (so that the

British variable is unity for all ex-British colonies, and so forth). We have also experimented

with a large number of other variables with a similar lack of success.30

        Our most robust results from our probit estimation mirror those of the bilateral sample

above. The main characteristics of those countries identified as offshore financial centers are

identification as either tax havens or money launderers. This corroborates the bilateral results




                                                  10
from section 2a; a primary motivation for investors in moving assets offshore is circumvention of

domestic tax laws or other illegal activities. None of this seems terribly surprising to us; OFCs

seem to facilitate bad behavior. The more interesting question is whether they also provide

positive externalities as well; we now turn to that issue.



3. Consequences of Offshore Financial Centers

        The evidence presented in section 2 indicates that tax havens and money launderers are

likely to be offshore financial centers. OFCs offer the advantage of e.g., lower taxes to domestic

investors that can bear the costs of shifting assets. That is, they compete with the domestic

banking sector. While OFCs lower the costs of unsavory practices such as tax evasion, they also

provide a benefit in the form of competition for the domestic financial sector. We now develop a

model that focus on the tradeoffs that OFCs present for source countries.31



3a. A Simple Theoretical Model of OFC Activity

        We assume that the domestic (source) country is populated by a continuum of depositors,

indexed by i=1…m. Depositors are endowed with initial wealth, w(i). We number the depositors

such that the initial wealth of depositor i is less than or equal to the initial wealth of depositor

i+1. Depositors allocate their wealth to maximize their after-tax income. They can hold three

assets: onshore deposits; offshore deposits; and an outside alternative. All the assets we consider

below are risk-free.

        We assume that the alternative asset (perhaps a government bond) yields an exogenous

rate of interest; r* is defined as one plus the interest rate on this asset. We define rH as one plus

the contractual rate of interest paid by the domestic bank on deposits and rO as one plus the




                                                  11
offshore contractual rate of interest on deposits. Since depositors allocate their savings to

maximize disposable wealth, each faces two arbitrage conditions, one for offshore deposits and

one for home deposits.

        We assume that there is a fixed cost, denoted ax, of making an offshore deposit, where a

is a constant and x represents the “distance” from the home country to the offshore country. This

is modeled as an “iceberg” cost that melts away with offshore financial activity. This cost can be

offset by the tax advantage of offshore deposits, since we assume that offshore deposits are taxed

at a lower rate than the true tax rate. Onshore deposits, by way of contrast, are less costly but are

taxed at a higher rate.

        If a representative depositor i places his deposits in the offshore bank, his final after-tax

wealth satisfies (1 − τ ) ⎡⎣θ rO w ( i ) − ax ⎤⎦ , where τ represents the nominal domestic tax rate and θ

is a parameter representing the tax advantage of the offshore nation, 1 ≤ θ ≤ 1/ (1 − τ ) . It follows

that depositor i will prefer to place his funds in the offshore bank relative to the risk free asset if

and only if

                                               r *w ( i * ) + ax
                                        rO ≥                                                    (2)
                                                  θ w (i* )

The smaller are a, x, and r*, the more likely that depositor i is to take his assets offshore rather

than place them in the risk-free asset; ditto the larger are θ, rO, and w(i). We define i* as the

depositor that satisfies (2) with equality, i.e. as the depositor who is indifferent between taking

assets offshore and placing them in the risk-free asset. Since w(i) is positively monotonic in i,

(2) shows that all depositors i > i * will also take their assets offshore.

        Alternatively, suppose that depositor i places his deposits in the domestic bank. We

model this as a monopoly; an extreme assumption to be sure, but one that allows us to focus on


                                                       12
the competitive effects easily (an alternative derivation using the assumption of a

monopolistically competitive domestic banking sector is provided in the appendix). The

depositor’s final wealth earns a return of (1 − τ ) rH . Thus depositors prefer the home bank if

rH ≥ r * . We demonstrate below that the profit-maximizing deposit rate for the home monopolist

bank is when this condition just binds, i.e. rH = r * . It follows that when condition (2) holds with

equality, depositor i is indifferent between taking his assets offshore and holding them in the

home country bank. The offshore bank then lends out all its deposits, LO , which equal

                                             m
                                       LO = ∫ w ( i ) di                                  (3)
                                             i*


        Borrowers in the model are assumed to obtain funds from banks under standard debt

contracts, taking the home-country demand for loans as given. Borrowers are indifferent

between bank sources, so a single lending rate will prevail in the home country. Let R represent

one plus the contractual interest rate on lending. We assume that R is decreasing in aggregate

lending, L, which is the sum of home bank lending, LH and offshore bank lending, LO, where

R ' < 0 , and R " < 0 .

        The offshore bank acts as a competitor and a Stackelberg follower. The offshore bank

faces diseconomies of scale in lending because of the fixed cost of moving assets offshore. The

minimum interest rate consistent with any value of i * is that which induces all depositors i * and

greater to take their assets offshore. Having exhausted this segment of the population, however,

the offshore bank can only further increase its deposits by attracting depositors that are less

wealthy. The fixed cost of moving assets offshore bites these poorer depositors more intensely,

as the fixed cost is spread over a smaller deposit. As a result, the offshore bank must offer a




                                                  13
greater premium over the domestic risk free rate to increase its deposits. This effectively results

in an upward-sloping supply of funds facing the offshore bank.

        Taking domestic lending as given, the offshore bank raises deposits at rates where (2) is

binding and issues loans until it satisfies its zero profit condition



                                  θ w ( i * ) R = r *w ( i * ) + ax .                    (4)


        Totally differentiating (4), the comparative static relationship between LO and LH

satisfies

                                       θ w ( i* ) R '
                                                       2
                            ∂LO
                                =                                  <0                    (5)
                            ∂LH (θ R − r * ) w '− θ w ( i * )2 R '



        Equation (4) demonstrates that lending by the domestic bank crowds out lending by the

OFC. However, note that dLO / dLH < 1 , which implies that crowding out is less than one for

one, so that an increase in LH increases overall lending levels.

        We next turn to the lending decision of the home country bank. The domestic bank acts

as a profit-maximizing Stackelberg leader. It takes in deposits equal to LH , which results in an

end-of-period liability of rH LH . Domestic profits are equal to



                                        π = [ R − rH ] LH                                (6)




                                                      14
       As profits are decreasing in rH , it follows that the profit-maximizing decision of the

home country bank entails setting rH = r * and maximizing with respect to the choice of LH . By

the envelope theorem, the first-order condition of the home country bank satisfies



                                     R − r * + R ' LH = 0                                (7)


       Equations (4) and (7) form a system of equations in two unknowns, LH and i * . In the

appendix, we conduct some comparative static exercises to evaluate the properties of the model.

We demonstrate that an increase in the OFC tax advantage, θ , increases offshore lending, LO ,

and reduces home country bank lending, LH , but less than one for one, resulting in an increase in

overall lending. We also demonstrate that OFC lending is decreasing in distance to the home

country, x . We again find a crowding out effect, as decreased OFC distance reduces home

country lending, but again by less than the primary effect of increasing lending by the OFC.

Effectively, proximity to the OFC increases the competitiveness of the domestic banking market.

We take the latter result to the data below.

       An alternative strategy for the home country bank to the interior solution above is to

“limit-price” by issuing sufficient loans that the OFC can not compete in the home market. By

(4), the home bank can limit-price by issuing an amount of loans that satisfies



                                                r * w ( i * ) + ax
                                   R ( LH ) ≤                                            (8)
                                                   θ w ( i* )




                                                     15
       Satisfaction of equation (8) with inequality implies that the OFC would lose money upon

entry. Note that as x (the distance between the OFC and the home country) grows, (8) implies

that the domestic loans necessary to achieve limit-pricing becomes arbitrarily small. Indeed, it

may fall below the pure monopoly solution for the home country bank in the absence of the

OFC, which is the solution to (7) given LO = 0 .

       It follows that as x increases from 0, the solution for the home country bank passes

through three distinct ranges: First, it follows the interior solution to (7), competing head-to-

head with the OFC. As distance between the OFC and the home country grows further, the

home bank switches to the limit pricing strategy in (8). Finally, when the OFC is sufficiently

distant, the limit pricing solution falls below the monopoly optimum, which is the level of LH

that satisfies (7) conditional on LO = 0 , and the domestic bank switches to the pure monopoly

solution. These transitions are illustrated in our simulations below.

       Finally, we turn to the question of the impact of the OFC on home country welfare. We

assume that taxes are redistributed lump sum, so that home-country welfare is invariant to the

level of government revenues.32 Home country welfare can therefore be measured in terms of

the net gains from intermediation relative to placing all deposits in the alternative asset. This is

the sum of borrower consumer surplus, home bank profitability and depositor revenues, net of

taxes and the cost of moving funds offshore. Adding these together and simplifying yields:



                                     L
                               W = ∫ ( R − r * )dl − ( m − i * ) ax                        (9)
                                     0




       Equation (9) demonstrates the welfare tradeoff associated with proximity to an OFC. On

one hand, the OFC induces the home country bank to behave more competitively, increasing


                                                    16
lending and overall welfare. On the other hand, depositors are partially motivated to take their

funds offshore for purely redistributive reasons, in particular to lower their taxes. While the

redistribution does not affect welfare, the resource cost of moving those assets offshore is a

deadweight loss. As a result, the overall impact on domestic welfare of OFC-proximity is

ambiguous.



3b. Simulations

       To gauge the impact of the OFCs’ proximity and tax advantage on overall activity in the

home country, we now simulate the model. For simplicity, we model w(i) as a linear function,

setting w to an exogenous constant. We also assume that the domestic interest rate is a

(negative) linear function of domestic lending, L that satisfies

                                        R = R + R'L                                     (10)

where R and R ' are constants R > 0 , R ' < 0 .

       Given these assumptions, we derive the expressions for (4) and (7) in the appendix. This

yields a system of two equations in two unknowns, LH and i*. The solution allows us to

determine both the equilibrium loan rate and aggregate welfare.

       We parameterize the model by setting the return on the alternative asset r* equal to 1.2.

We set the tax advantage of the OFC, θ, to 1.2 (though we have also examined alternative values

without any large change in results). We set the cost of moving assets offshore, a, to 1.33 We set

w equal to 2 and m equal to 1. This normalization implies that the equilibrium value of i*

represents the share of depositors who do not take their assets offshore, as depositors 0 through

i* leave their assets in the home country. Finally, we normalize local interest rates by setting R

equal to 2 and R’ equal to -0.85, although we entertain other values of R ' below.



                                                  17
         While numerical values are a necessary part of our simulations, we concentrate on their

qualitative results. Figure 1 plots home-bank lending ( LH ) , total lending ( L) , interest rates ( R ) ,

and welfare as a function of distance to the OFC ( x ) , for different values of R ' . It can be seen

that proximity to the OFC has the pro-competitive impact that we anticipated. It can also be seen

that there are three distinct ranges, with discrete jumps in all values when the home bank

switches from competing head-to-head to a limit pricing strategy.

         It is useful to consider the impacts on all of the endogenous variables as x increases.

Beginning at x=0, we are first in the range where the monopoly bank competes with the OFC

head to head. As distance to the OFC increases, the home country bank expands its lending,

taking advantage of the deterioration in competitiveness of the OFC. Nevertheless, the increase

in LH is more than offset by a decline in LO , so that overall lending is declining. It can be seen

that over this range R increases with distance, so that increased proximity to the OFC has the

expected impact of increasing the competitiveness of the domestic banking sector.

         Note that welfare falls dramatically with increased distance within this range, even

relative to the pure monopoly solution. Welfare losses with increased distance come from two

sources: the decreased competitiveness of the banking sector , and the increased cost of moving

assets offshore. Of course, the latter eventually reduces the amount of offshore activity taking

place.

         As x increases beyond xLP , the home country bank switches to a limit-pricing strategy,

lending the amount necessary to keep the OFC out of its market. It can be seen that there is a

discrete increase in both home and overall lending at this point, resulting in a discrete decline in

R, as well as a discrete increase in overall welfare. As x increases within the limit pricing




                                                   18
range, overall lending and welfare decline, as the amount of home bank lending necessary to

preclude entry by the OFC decreases.

        Finally, when x reaches xM the minimum level of lending to achieve limit pricing

matches the pure monopoly solution. At this point, home country lending, as well as the other

variables, are invariant to further increases in x.



4. Evidence on the Impact of OFCs on their Neighbors

        We now take the theoretical predictions of the previous section to the data. Our model

suggests that home country bank profits are declining in proximity to the OFC, while overall

local lending is increasing in OFC proximity.34 Accordingly, we use our multilateral data set to

address two questions. First, is OFC proximity actually associated with increased domestic

banking competitiveness? Second, is OFC proximity also associated with greater financial

intermediation? We use different measures of both banking competitiveness and financial

intermediation that are common in the literature, and control for a number of auxiliary

explanatory variables.

        We use the multilateral data set that we developed and employed in section 2b above.

This is a cross-section from 2001-02 that includes 40 OFCs (tabulated in Table A2) among the

223 countries in our sample (tabulated in Table A3). Our measure of OFC proximity is (the

natural logarithm of the) distance to the nearest OFC.35 This serves as the regressor for our

coefficient of interest.

        Our base specification conditions on the natural logarithms of both population and real

GDP per capita, as well as a dummy variable for countries that are OFCs themselves. In

subsequent specifications, we add a number of additional conditioning variables to check the



                                                  19
sensitivity of our results. These controls include dummy variables for legal regimes based on

Civil or French Law, hours of latitude, a landlocked nation dummy variable, and the percentage

of population that is Christian or Muslim. Remoteness for country i is defined traditionally, as

the average (log) distance between i and (log) GDP in the rest of the world; this variable is

intended to serve as an indicator of overall remoteness, rather than the remoteness associated

with distance from an OFC.36 We also add a variable for openness, measured as total trade as a

percentage of GDP. We also tabulate simple bivarate regression results, without any controls at

all (except a constant). Finally, we provide instrumental variable results, motivated by the

results of Table 2. As instrumental variables for distance to the closest OFC, we use: 1) OFC

remoteness; 2) distance to the closest tax haven; and 3) distance to the closest money launderer.

       Our estimating equation takes the form:



                       y i = β ln(min DistOFC ) i + γ 0 + γ 1OFC i
                                                                                         (11)
                      + γ 2 ln( Pop) i + γ 3 ln(Y / Pop ) i + Controls + ε i




where the notation follows that of equation (1), and the coefficient of interest is β.

       We first test the effect of OFC proximity on domestic banking competitiveness. Thus for

the regressand, y, we use three measures of the degree of competitiveness of the local banking

sector: a) the interest rate spread (loan-deposit) charged by commercial banks, b) the

concentration ratio of the domestic banking industry, measured as the industry share accounted

for by the top five commercial banks, and c) the number of commercial banks in a country

divided by the log of domestic GDP.37 The coefficient of interest to us is β1, the effect of OFC

proximity on domestic banking competitiveness; we expect this to be positive for the first two



                                                    20
regressands (interest spread and concentration ratio) and negative for the last (banks/GDP). We

estimate our models with OLS/IV, employing standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity.

        Our results are shown in Panel A of Table 3. All of our estimates suggest that OFC

remoteness is associated with an increase in monopoly power at statistically and economically

significant levels. The standard deviation of the minimum distance from OFC variable is 1.07, so

our point estimates suggest that a one standard deviation increase in distance to an OFC is

associated with, e.g., between an increase of 1.41 and a 2.21 percent in the interest rate spread

and an increase of 1.77 to 8.22 percent in the share of the banking industry controlled by the five

largest commercial banks. The results for interest rate spreads and bank concentration are

statistically significant at standard significance levels when controls are included (only the

second is clearly significant with IV). The effect of OFC proximity on the number of banks

(scaled by log GDP) is more marginally significant, but improves with the number of controls.

It seems that OFC proximity is in fact associated with more competitive domestic banking.

        We next turn to the impact of distance from an OFC on the depth of domestic financial

intermediation. We use three measures of intermediation commonly used in the literature: a)

credit to the private sector, b) quasi-liquid liabilities, and c) M2, all three measures normalized

by GDP.38 We now expect the coefficient of interest, β, to be consistently negative, since OFC

proximity should increase domestic financial intermediation.

        Our results are shown in Panel B of Table 3. The effect of distance to the closest OFC on

financial intermediation is consistently negative. Moreover, it is significantly different from zero

at conventional statistical levels for two of our three proxies, the ratios of quasi-liquid liabilities

to GDP and M2 to GDP. Distance from OFC has a negative but insignificant effect on credit to

the private sector as a percentage of GDP, except for the (less interesting) bivariate regression.39




                                                   21
Again, these results are robust to a number of alternative specifications. The point estimates also

indicate that proximity to an OFC is consistently of economic significance.40

       In summary, we find evidence that distance from an OFC is associated with a lack of

competitiveness in the local banking sector as indicated by our theory. Moreover, financial

depth is positively associated with OFC proximity. While the results are not always of strong

statistical significance, we interpret them as broadly confirming the prediction of the model.41



5. Conclusion

       This paper examines both the determinants of offshore financial centers and the

consequences of OFCs for their neighbors. Using both bilateral and multilateral samples, we

find empirically that successful offshore financial centers encourage bad behavior in source

countries, since they facilitate tax evasion and money laundering. At first blush, it thus appears

that OFCs are best characterized as “parasites,” since their attraction stems in part from allowing

their source-country clients to engage in activities detrimental to the well-being of their homes.

       Nevertheless, offshore financial centers created to facilitate undesirable activities can still

have unintended positive consequences. In particular, the presence of OFCs enhances the

competitiveness of the local banking sector. Using a model of a domestic monopoly bank facing

a competitive fringe of OFCs, we demonstrate that OFC proximity enhances the competitive

behavior of the monopoly bank and may increase overall welfare. This is true despite the fact

that deadweight losses are borne when funds are transferred offshore to an OFC. We test these

predictions using a multilateral data set, and show that proximity to an OFC is indeed associated

with a more competitive domestic banking sector, and greater financial intermediation. We

tentatively conclude that OFCs are better characterized as “symbionts.”




                                                 22
Table 1: Bilateral Determinants of Cross-Border Asset Holdings

                                 Pooled         2001            2002        Pooled, without    Pooled, with      Pooled, with
                                                                               0 values        institutions      institutions,
                                                                                                                 legal regime
               Log Distance       -1.14         -1.24            -1.04            -.49             -1.23             -1.13
                                  (.08)         (.09)            (.09)           (.05)             (.08)             (.08)
        Log Host Population        1.22         1.23             1.21             .49              1.26               1.25
                                  (.04)         (.05)            (.05)           (.04)             (.04)             (.04)
     Log Source Population         .57           .50               .67             .68               .61               .55
                                  (.05)         (.05)            (.05)           (.04)             (.05)             (.05)
    Log Host Real GDP p/c         3.44          3.35             3.53            1.92              2.01               1.92
                                  (.05)         (.05)            (.05)           (.05)             (.09)             (.09)
  Log Source Real GDP p/c          2.84         2.88             2.80            3.13              1.84               1.82
                                  (.10)         (.11)            (.11)           (.07)             (.17)             (.17)
            Common Border         1.10          1.06             1.14             .94              1.31               1.32
                                  (.37)         (.40)            (.39)           (.19)             (.38)             (.37)
         Common Language          1.67          1.49             1.87            1.13                .95               .96
                                  (.16)         (.18)            (.17)           (.11)             (.16)             (.16)
            Currency Union        2.86          3.03             2.68            2.22              2.58               2.63
                                  (.28)         (.29)            (.30)           (.14)             (.27)             (.28)
         Common Colonizer          .78           .40             1.23            1.09                .39               .56
                                  (.36)         (.39)            (.40)           (.27)             (.35)             (.36)
           Currently Colony        .65          1.69              -.59           3.89               .35                .64
                                 (3.53)        (3.46)           (3.74)           (.85)            (2.98)            (3.15)
                 Island Host       .66           .75               .56            .52               -.00               .00
                                  (.19)         (.20)            (.20)           (.14)             (.18)             (.19)
               Island Source       .88           .83              .88            1.07               .43                .65
                                  (.16)         (.18)            (.18)           (.11)             (.17)             (.18)
            Tax Haven Host                                                                          1.19              1.33
                                                                                                   (.24)             (.25)
          Tax Haven Source                                                                           .70              1.23
                                                                                                   (.20)             (.22)
    Money Laundering Host                                                                           2.06              2.06
                                                                                                   (.24)             (.24)
  Money Laundering Source                                                                            .55               .29
                                                                                                   (.23)             (.23)
             Rule Law, Host                                                                         -.27              -.24
                                                                                                   (.17)             (.17)
           Rule Law, Source                                                                         2.32              2.33
                                                                                                   (.24)             (.24)
     Political Stability, Host                                                                      -.14              -.19
                                                                                                   (.10)             (.10)
   Political Stability, Source                                                                     -1.65             -2.03
                                                                                                   (.18)             (.18)
   Regulatory Quality, Host                                                                         2.19              2.21
                                                                                                   (.15)             (.15)
 Regulatory Quality, Source                                                                         -.50              -.06
                                                                                                   (.23)             (.24)
         Common Law Host                                                                                               .13
                                                                                                                     (.18)
      Common Law Source                                                                                               2.48
                                                                                                                     (.34)
             Civil Law Host                                                                                            .64
                                                                                                                     (.20)
           Civil Law Source                                                                                           2.95
                                                                                                                     (.36)
            French law Host                                                                                           -.48
                                                                                                                     (.13)
          French law Source                                                                                            .42
                                                                                                                     (.14)
                Observations     12,220        6,364            5,856            6,063           12,220             12,220
                          R2      .56           .54              .57              .54             .60                  .60
                  Root MSE       4.572         4.646            4.486            2.442           4.362              4.337
Regressand is log of asset stocks, with 0 replaced by .0001 (except in fourth column, where 0 values dropped).




                                                        23
OLS. Fixed year intercepts included but not recorded. Also included but not recorded: log area source, log area
host, landlocked source dummy, landlocked host dummy.
Robust standard errors (clustered by country-pairs) in parentheses.




                                                        24
Table 2: Multilateral Determinants of Cross-Border Asset Holdings
Table 2a: Dummy Variable for OFC
                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
Population          -.11             .11             .01             .01
                    (.04)           (.06)           (.09)           (.10)
GDP p/c              .44             .39             .35             .49
                    (.11)           (.13)           (.30)           (.31)
Tax Haven                           1.34            1.05             .87
                                    (.36)           (.43)           (.45)
Money                               1.51            1.87            1.87
Launderer                           (.35)           (.48)           (.48)
Rule of Law                                         -.24            -.39
                                                    (.50)           (.52)
Political                                           -.13            -.07
Stability                                           (.29)           (.31)
Regulatory                                           .32             .32
Quality                                             (.46)           (.46)
Common                                                              -.05
Law                                                                 (.50)
Civil Law                                                           -.94
                                                                    (.60)
French Law                                                           .60
                                                                    (.44)
Observations        223             223              184             184
Pseudo-R2           .16              .42             .41             .44
Regressand is dummy variable for offshore financial center.
Constants included but not recorded. Probit estimation; standard errors recorded in parentheses

Table 2b: Continuous Variable for OFC activity
                     (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
Population          -.12             .01            -.01             -.01
                    (.03)           (.02)           (.02)            (.02)
GDP p/c              .23             .11             .01              .04
                    (.04)           (.03)           (.04)            (.05)
Tax Haven                           1.12            1.08             1.02
                                    (.25)           (.31)            (.30)
Money                                .91             100              .96
Launderer                           (.29)           (.36)            (.36)
Rule of Law                                         -.11             -.15
                                                    (.14)            (.14)
Political                                            .04              .06
Stability                                           (.06)            (.06)
Regulatory                                           .18              .18
Quality                                             (.12)            (.13)
Common                                                                .11
Law                                                                  (.14)
Civil Law                                                            -.11
                                                                     (.13)
French Law                                                            .10
                                                                     (.08)
Observations        221             221              184              184
R2                   .23             .58             .59              .59
Regressand is continuous measure of offshore financial center activity.
Constants included but not recorded. Probit estimation; standard errors recorded in parentheses.



                                                        25
Table 2c: Potential Additional Determinants of OFC
                                   Binary OFC Measure                      Continuous OFC Measure
English Language                                         .09                                   -.04
                                                        (.29)                                  (.09)
Official Supervisory Power from                          .05                                    .02
Barth, Caprio and Levine                                (.04)                                  (.01)
Capital Controls                                         .23                                    .14
                                                        (.34)                                  (.15)
Corporate Tax Rate                                       -.01                                  -.00
                                                        (.01)                                  (.01)
Polity                                                   -.06                                  -.00
                                                        (.03)                                  (.01)
Openness                                                .001                                   .002
                                                       (.003)                                 (.002)
Human Development Index                                 -1.66                                  -.47
                                                       (2.72)                                  (.37)
Political Rights                                         .12                                   -.01
                                                        (.08)                                  (.02)
Civil Rights                                             .21                                    .00
                                                        (.10)                                  (.03)
Freedom                                                  .24                                   -.02
                                                        (.21)                                  (.05)
Regional Dummies (p-value)                               .54                                    .08
Colonial Dummies (p-value)                              1.00                                    .00
Regressors included but not recorded: log(population); log(real GDP per capita); tax haven dummy; money
laundering dummy; intercept.
Binary OFC measure regressand: probit estimation. Continuous OFC measure regressand: OLS estimation with
robust standard errors.




                                                    26
Table 3a: OFC Proximity and Domestic Banking Competitiveness
             Measure Bivariate   Controls #1 Controls #2 Controls #3                                   IV
        Loan-Deposit     2.21         1.45       1.41         1.63                                    1.44
 Interest rate Spread    (.62)        (.69)      (.70)        (.79)                                   (.92)
               5-Bank    1.77         4.66       7.53         6.91                                    8.22
Concentration Ratio     (1.75)       (1.38)     (1.79)       (1.98)                                  (2.86)
# Commercial Banks       -.67         -.99      -1.16        -1.52                                   -1.49
  (ratio to Log GDP)     (.68)        (.78)      (.65)        (.81)                                   (.89)

Table 3b: OFC Proximity and Financial Depth
  Measure (% GDP) Bivariate       Controls #1                  Controls #2      Controls #3            IV
   Domestic Private     -13.7         -1.9                        -3.1             -4.1               -3.4
       Sector Credit     (3.6)        (3.0)                       (2.9)            (3.1)              (3.4)
       Quasi-Liquid     -16.3         -8.9                       -11.4            -11.6               -7.8
            Liability    (4.2)        (3.3)                       (3.6)            (3.4)              (3.2)
                 M2     -17.1         -9.7                       -11.1            -11.5               -5.3
                         (4.1)        (3.4)                       (4.0)            (3.8)              (3.7)
Coefficients recorded are for log distance to closest OFC.
Controls #1: OFC dummy; log (2001-02 average) population; log (2001-02 average) real GDP per capita; intercept.
Controls #2: controls #1 plus trade remoteness; civil law dummy; French law dummy; landlocked dummy; latitude
in hours; % Christian; % Muslim.
Controls #3: controls #2 plus (2001-02 average) trade as a percentage of GDP.
IV: controls #3. IVs for log minimum distance to OFC include: 1) log minimum distance to tax haven; 2) log
minimum distance to money launderer; 3) remoteness from OFCs.
OLS estimation unless labeled; robust standard errors recorded in parentheses.




                                                      27
Table A1: Host Countries in CPIS
Afghanistan              Albania                 Algeria               American Samoa           Andorra
Angola                   Anguilla                Antigua and Barbuda   Argentina*               Armenia
Aruba*                   Australia*              Austria*              Azerbaijan               Bahamas*
Bahrain*                 Bangladesh              Barbados              Belarus                  Belgium*
Belize                   Benin                   Bermuda               Bhutan                   Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina   Botswana                Brazil                British Virgin Islands   Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria*                Burkina Faso            Burundi               Cambodia                 Cameroon
Canada*                  Cape Verde              Cayman Islands*       Central African Rep.     Chad
Chile*                   China                   Colombia*             Comoros                  Congo (Zaire/Kinshasa)
Congo (Brazzaville)      Cook Islands            Costa Rica*           Côte d'Ivoire            Croatia
Cuba                     Cyprus*                 Czech Republic*       Denmark*                 Djibouti
Dominica                 Dominican Republic      Ecuador               Egypt*                   El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea        Eritrea                 Estonia*              Ethiopia                 Falkland Islands
Faeroe Islands           Fiji                    Finland*              France*                  French Guiana
French Polynesia         Gabon                   Gambia                Georgia                  Germany*
Ghana                    Gibraltar               Greece*               Greenland                Grenada
Guadeloupe               Guam                    Guatemala             Guernsey*                Guinea
Guinea-Bissau            Guyana                  Haiti                 Honduras                 Hong Kong*
Hungary*                 Iceland*                India                 Indonesia*               Iran
Iraq                     Ireland*                Isle of Man*          Israel*                  Italy*
Jamaica                  Japan*                  Jersey*               Jordan                   Kazakhstan*
Kenya                    Kiribati                Korea*                Kuwait                   Kyrgyz Republic
Laos                     Latvia                  Lebanon*              Lesotho                  Liberia
Libya                    Liechtenstein           Lithuania             Luxembourg*              Macau*
Macedonia                Madagascar              Malawi                Malaysia*                Maldives
Mali                     Malta*                  Marshall Islands      Martinique               Mauritania
Mauritius*               Mexico                  Micronesia            Moldova                  Monaco
Mongolia                 Montserrat              Morocco               Mozambique               Myanmar
Namibia                  Nauru                   Nepal                 Netherlands*             Netherlands Antilles*
New Caledonia            New Zealand*            Nicaragua             Niger                    Nigeria
North Korea              Norway*                 Oman                  Pakistan*                Palau
Panama*                  Papua New Guinea        Paraguay              Peru                     Philippines*
Poland*                  Portugal*               Puerto Rico           Qatar                    Réunion
Romania*`                Russian Federation*     Rwanda                St. Helena               St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia                St. Pierre & Miquelon   St. Vincent & Gren.   Samoa                    San Marino
São Tomé and Príncipe    Saudi Arabia            Senegal               Serbia and Montenegro    Seychelles
Sierra Leone             Singapore*              Slovak Republic*      Slovenia                 Solomon Islands
Somalia                  South Africa*           Spain*                Sri Lanka                Sudan
Suriname                 Swaziland               Sweden*               Switzerland*             Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan                   Tajikistan              Tanzania              Thailand*                Togo
Tonga                    Trinidad and Tobago     Tunisia               Turkey*                  Turks & Caicos Islands
Turkmenistan             Tuvalu                  Uganda                Ukraine*                 United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom*          United States*          Uruguay*              Uzbekistan               Vanuatu*
Venezuela*               Vietnam                 Virgin Islands        Yemen                    Zambia
Zimbabwe
Note: Source countries also marked with an asterisk.




                                                       28
Table A2: Offshore Financial Centers: Default Definition
Caribbean
Aruba               Bahamas               Barbados            Belize
Bermuda             Brit. Virgin Islands Cayman Islands       Costa Rica
Dominica            Neth. Antilles        St. Kitts & Nevis   Turks and Caicos Is.
United Arab Emir.

Europe
Andorra              Cyprus                Gibraltar          Guernsey
Isle of Man          Jersey                Liechtenstein      Malta
Monaco

East Asia
Hong Kong            Macau                Malaysia            Marshall Islands
Philippines          Singapore            Thailand

Middle East
Bahrain              Israel               Kuwait              Lebanon
Oman

Other
Liberia              Mauritius            Morocco             Panama
Russia               Uruguay




                                            29
Table A3: Countries in Multilateral Data Sample
Afghanistan                Albania                    Algeria             American Samoa           Andorra
Angola                     Anguilla                   Antigua & Barbuda   Argentina                Armenia
Aruba                      Australia                  Austria             Azerbaijan               Bahamas
Bahrain                    Bangladesh                 Barbados            Belarus                  Belgium
Belize                     Benin                      Bermuda             Bhutan                   Bolivia
Bosnia & Herzegovina       Botswana                   Brazil              British Virgin Islands   Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria                   Burkina Faso               Burundi             Cambodia                 Cameroon
Canada                     Cape Verde                 Cayman Islands      Central African Rep.     Chad
Chile                      China                      Colombia            Comoros                  Congo
Cook Islands               Costa Rica                 Cote d'Ivoire       Croatia                  Cuba
Cyprus                     Czech Rep                  Denmark             Djibouti                 Dominica
Dominican Rep              Ecuador                    Egypt               El Salvador              Eq. Guinea
Eritrea                    Estonia                    Ethiopia            Falkland Islands         Faeroe Islands
Fiji                       Finland                    France              French Guiana            French Polynesia
Gabon                      Gambia                     Georgia             Germany, West            Ghana
Gibraltar                  Greece                     Greenland           Grenada                  Guadeloupe
Guam                       Guatemala                  Guernsey            Guinea                   Guinea-Bissau
Guyana                     Haiti                      Honduras            Hong Kong                Hungary
Iceland                    India                      Indonesia           Iran                     Iraq
Ireland                    Isle of Man                Israel              Italy                    Jamaica
Japan                      Jersey                     Jordan              Kazakhstan               Kenya
Kiribati                   Korea                      Kuwait              Kyrgyz Republic          Laos
Latvia                     Lebanon                    Lesotho             Liberia                  Libya
Liechtenstein              Lithuania                  Luxembourg          Macau                    Macedonia (FYR)
Madagascar                 Malawi                     Malaysia            Maldives                 Mali
Malta                      Marshall Islands           Martinique          Mauritania               Mauritius
Mexico                     Micronesia                 Moldova             Monaco                   Mongolia
Montserrat                 Morocco                    Mozambique          Myanmar (Burma)          Namibia
Nauru                      Nepal                      Netherlands         Netherlands Antilles     New Caledonia
New Zealand                Nicaragua                  Niger               Nigeria                  Niue
North Korea                Northern Mariana Islands   Norway              Oman                     Pakistan
Palau                      Panama                     Papua New Guinea    Paraguay                 Peru
Philippines                Poland                     Portugal            Puerto Rico              Qatar
Reunion                    Romania                    Russia              Rwanda                   San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe      Saudi Arabia               Senegal             Serbia/Ex-Yugoslavia     Seychelles
Sierra Leone               Singapore                  Slovakia            Slovenia                 Solomon Islands
Somalia                    South Africa               Spain               Sri Lanka                St. Helena
St. Kitts & Nevis          St. Pierre & Miquelon      St. Lucia           St. Vincent & Grens.     Sudan
Suriname                   Swaziland                  Sweden              Switzerland              Syria
Taiwan                     Tajikistan                 Tanzania            Thailand                 Togo
Tonga                      Trinidad & Tobago          Tunisia             Turkey                   Turkmenistan
Turks and Caicos Islands   Tuvalu                     UK                  US Virgin Islands        Uganda
Ukraine                    United Arab Emirates       United States       Uruguay                  Uzbekistan
Vanuatu                    Venezuela                  Vietnam             Western Samoa            Yemen
Zaire                      Zambia                     Zimbabwe




                                                               30
Appendix 1: A Monopolistically-Competitive Model

       In this appendix, we examine a monopolistically-competitive domestic banking sector.

We make the same assumptions concerning domestic depositors and the offshore bank, so that

equation (4) still represents the zero-profit condition for the offshore bank.

       To introduce monopolistic competition, we assume that there are a large number n of

homogeneous monopolistically-competitive banks who paid a fixed entry cost, c . The

representative domestic bank takes n, lk          ( k ≠ j ) , and    LO as given and faces an individual

downward-sloping demand curve R , which is assumed to be more elastic than the overall

demand curve faced by the offshore bank, i.e. R ' > R ' . Moreover, the elasticity of demand

faced by the representative domestic bank is assumed to be an increasing function of n ; the

greater is n , the greater is the capacity to improve market share from local rivals.

Representative bank profits satisfy

                           π j = ⎡⎣ R ( n, l j + ( n − 1) l j + LO ) − r * ⎤⎦ l j

       The representative bank maximizes its profits with respect to its choice of l j . The first-

order condition of the representative domestic bank satisfies

                          ⎡ R ( l j + ( n − 1) lk + LO ) − r * ⎤ + R ' l j = 0
                          ⎣                                    ⎦

       In equilibrium, all domestic banks are assumed to be identical, and the overall demand

curve is assumed to be the same as that faced by the offshore bank, so that the first order

condition becomes

                                 ⎛m                  ⎞
                               R ⎜ ∫ w ( i ) di + nl ⎟ − r * + R ' l = 0
                                 ⎜*                  ⎟
                                 ⎝i                  ⎠




                                                         31
        It is convenient to rewrite the zero profit condition for the offshore bank in terms of

individual domestic bank lending levels and n :

                                          ⎛m                  ⎞
                             θ w ( i* ) R ⎜⎜ ∫ w ( i ) di + nl ⎟⎟ − r * w ( i* ) − ax = 0
                                          ⎝ i*                ⎠

        Finally, banks will enter until their zero profit condition is satisfied:

                                       ⎡ ⎛m                     ⎞ *⎤
                                       ⎢ R ⎜⎜ ∫ w ( i ) di + nl ⎟⎟ − r ⎥ l = c
                                       ⎣⎢ ⎝ i*                   ⎠     ⎦⎥

        The last three equations form a system in three unknowns, i * , n , and l :

 ⎡ w ' (θ R − r * ) − θ w ( i * )2 R ' θ w ( i * ) R ' n      θ w ( i* ) R ' l ⎤ ⎡ di * ⎤⎡ w ( i* ) R −a ⎤
 ⎢                                                                             ⎥
                                                                                 ⎢ ⎥ ⎢                   ⎥ ⎡ dθ ⎤
⎢           − w ( i* ) R '               R'n + R'           R ' l + ∂ R '/ ∂n ⎥ ⎢ dl ⎥ = ⎢ 0           0 ⎥⎢ ⎥
⎢                                                                             ⎥                            ⎣ dx ⎦
                                                                                 ⎢ dn ⎥ ⎢ 0            0⎥
⎢           − w ( i* ) R ' l           R − r * + R ' nl           R'l 2       ⎥  ⎣ ⎦ ⎢⎣                  ⎥
                                                                                                         ⎦
⎣⎢                                                                            ⎦⎥

        The determinant of the system satisfies:

                D = w ' (θ R − r * ) ( R ' l ) ⎡ R ' l − ( R − r * ) ⎤
                                               ⎣                     ⎦
                −∂ R '/ ∂n ⎡ w ' (θ R − r * ) ⎡⎣( R − r * ) + R ' nl ⎤⎦ − θ w ( i* ) R ' ( R − r * ) ⎤
                                                                                    2

                           ⎢⎣                                                                        ⎥⎦

        Since R ' > R ' by assumption, ( R − r * ) + R ' nl < 0 by the domestic bank’s first order

condition. A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for signing the determinant is then that

∂ R '/ ∂n is not too large.

        The comparative statics for a change in x then satisfy:

                di * 1 ⎡ ⎡
                    = a R ' l − ( R − r * ) ⎤ ( R ' l ) − ( R − r * + R ' nl ) ∂ R '/ ∂n ⎤ > 0
                dx D ⎣ ⎣                    ⎦                                            ⎦

                                  dl 1 ⎡
                                                 (                )(
                                    = a w ( i * ) R ' l ∂ R '/ ∂n ⎤ < 0
                                  dx D ⎣                          ⎦          )


                                                               32
                              dn 1
                                = aw ( i * ) R ' ⎡ R ' l − ( R − r * ) ⎤ > 0
                              dx D               ⎣                     ⎦

Note that l and n move in opposite directions with a change in x . For example, with closer

proximity to an OFC, n declines as there is exit from the domestic banking sector in the face of

heightened competition from the OFC. However, the declines in domestic lending is partially

offset by the increase in l , lending per bank. The change in overall lending satisfies:

                            dL    1           ∂R '
                               = − aw ( i * )      ( R − r* ) < 0 .
                            dx    D           ∂n

        Since overall lending increases as x declines, it is easy to show that domestic interest

rates fall as well.




                                                   33
Appendix 2: Comparative Statics and Simulation Details for the Monopolistic Model

1. Comparative static exercises

       We first examine the impact of changes in the tax advantage enjoyed by the OFC, which

is proxied by changes in θ . By equations (4) and (7), the system of equations satisfies:

        ⎡ w ' (θ R − r * ) − θ w ( i * )2 R ' θ w ( i * ) R ' ⎤ ⎡ di * ⎤ ⎡ w i * R −a ⎤ dθ
        ⎢                                                     ⎥⎢         =⎢
                                                                            ( )          ⎡ ⎤
                                                                                      ⎥⎢ ⎥
                                                                       ⎥
        ⎢ − w ( i * ) ( R '+ R " L )          2 R '+ R " LH ⎥⎦ ⎣ dLH ⎦ ⎢⎣ 0         0 ⎥⎦ ⎣ dx ⎦
        ⎣                             H



       The determinant of the matrix of the system satisfies:

                     D = w ' (θ R − r * ) ( 2 R '+ R " LH ) − θ w ( i* )
                                                                           2
                                                                               ( R ')
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            <0

       The comparative statics for a change in θ satisfy:

                             di *
                             dθ
                                  =−
                                     1
                                     D
                                          (          )
                                       w ( i * ) R ( 2 R '+ R " LH ) < 0


                             dLH    1
                                 = − w ( i * ) R ( R '+ R " LH ) < 0
                                              2

                             dθ     D

which implies that

                                      dL 1
                                        = Rw ( i * ) R ' > 0
                                                    2

                                      dθ D

       The comparative statics for a change in x satisfy


                                   di * 1
                                       = a ( 2 R '+ R " LH ) > 0
                                   dx D

                                     dLH  1
                                         = aw ( i * ) ( R '+ R " LH ) > 0
                                      dx  D

which implies that


                                      dL    1
                                         = − aw ( i * ) R ' < 0 .
                                      dx    D


                                                         34
2. Simulation solution

       Given the assumption that w ( i ) = wi , the deposit rate paid by the OFC satisfies

                                                  r * wi + ax
                                           rO =
                                                      θ wi

and by (3) OFC lending given i * satisfies

                                                  w 2 *2
                                         LO =
                                                  2
                                                    (m − i )
so that overall lending satisfies

                                                   w 2 *2
                                        L = LH +
                                                   2
                                                     (m − i )
       Given the functional form for R in (10), the equilibrium condition for OFC lending

given LH in (4) satisfies:

                               θ wi* ( R + R ' L ) − r * wi* − ax = 0

       By (8) the first-order condition of the home country monopoly bank satisfies

                                    ( R + R ' L) − r   *
                                                           + R ' LH = 0

The above two equations form a system of two equations in two unknowns, LH and i * .

       Finally, our welfare measure satisfies


                                    (
                             W = R − r* L +)       1
                                                   2
                                                     R ' L2 − ( m − i * ) ax




                                                           35
References

Alworth, Julian S. and S. Andresen (1992) “The Determinants of Cross-Border Non-Bank
Deposits and the Competitiveness of Financial Market Centres” Money Affairs V-2, 105-133.

Barth, James R. Gerard Caprio Jr., and Ross Levine (2001) “Bank Regulation and Supervision:
What Works Best” available at http://econ.worldbank.org/files/2733_wps2725.pdf

Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven (2004) “What Drives Bank Competition? Some International
Evidence” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36-3, 563-583.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levine (2001) Financial Structure and Economic Growth
(Cambridge, MIT Press).

Errico, Luca and Alberto Musalem (1999)”Offshore Banking: An Analysis of Micro- and
Macro-Prudential Issues” IMF Working Paper 99/5 available at
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=2867.0.

Glick, Reuven and Andrew K. Rose (2002) “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade?” European
Economic Review 46-6, 1111-1123.

Hampton, Mark P. and John Christensen (2002) “Offshore Pariahs? Small Island Economies,
Tax Havens, and the Reconfiguration of Global Finance, World Development, 30(9), 1657-1673.

Hines, James R., and Eric M. Rice (1994) “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
Business” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109-1, 149-182.

Huizinga, Harry and Søren Bo Nielsen (2002) “Withholding Taxes or Information Exchange: the
Taxation of International Interest Flows” Journal of Public Economics 87, 39-72.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2003) “Governance Matters III” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 3106.

Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004) “International Investment Patterns” IMF
Working Paper WP/04/134.

Levine, Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck (2000) “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(1), 31-77.

Masciandaro, Donato (forthcoming) “False and Reluctant Friends? National Money Laundering
Regulation, International Compliance and Non-Cooperative Countries” European Journal of
Law & Economics.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2000) Improving Access to Bank
Information for Tax Purposes (Paris: OECD).




                                              36
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2004) The OECD’s Project on
Harmful Tax Practices: The 2004 Progress Report (Paris: OECD)

Portes, Richard and Hélène Rey (2005) “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows”
Journal of International Economics 65, 269-296.




                                            37
                                         Figure 1
                              Simulation results over distance
Lh                                                                L
                                                                  1


0.8                                                              0.9


0.6                                                              0.8



0.4                                                              0.7



0.2                                                              0.6

                                           R' = -0.8
  0                                        R' = -0.85            0.5
                                           R' = -0.9

-0.2                                                             0.4
       0       0.5 Xlp    1       Xm 1.5                2              0       0.5   Xlp   1   Xm1.5   2

                                                    X                                                  X
  R                                                          Welfare
 1.65                                                              0.4

  1.6                                                            0.35

 1.55
                                                                   0.3
  1.5
                                                                 0.25
 1.45

  1.4                                                              0.2

 1.35                                                            0.15

  1.3
                                                                   0.1
 1.25
                                                                 0.05
  1.2

 1.15                                                                  0
           0    0.5 Xlp   1      Xm 1.5             2                      0    0.5 Xlp    1   Xm1.5   2

                                                   X                                                   X

  Figure 1 plots home bank lending, LH , overall lending, L, interest rate levels, R, and welfare as
  function of distance to the OFC, x . xlp represents the minimum value of x for which the home
  country bank chooses to limit price rather than pursue the Stackelberg leader solution. xm
  represents the minimum value of x consistent with the pure monopoly solution.




                                                            38
Endnotes
1
   We use “country” below to refer to nations, territories, colonies, and so forth.
2
  http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/9/61/2090192.pdf
3
  There were some notable holdouts; as of 2004, Andorra, Liberia, Liechtenstein, the Marshall Islands, and Monaco
were still listed by the OECD as pursuing harmful tax practices (OECD, 2004).
4
  More details on the FATF are available at: http://www.fatf-gafi.org/; see also Masciandaro (forthcoming) and
references therein.
5
  Alworth and Andresen (1992) is an antecedent of our work that estimates the determinants of cross-country bank
deposits using BIS data between 17 source and 23 host countries for 1983, 1986, and 1990. They find a significant
role for bank secrecy in attracting deposits, presumably to facilitate tax evasion and/or money-laundering. Portes
and Rey (2005) focus instead on equity using a bilateral panel of data between 14 rich countries (including Hong
Kong and Singapore) from 1989 through 1996; they find a strong role for information in explaining asset flows.
6
  For instance, Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004) conduct an analysis that is complementary to ours. While we both
use gravity models, our analysis includes all assets for 2001-02 and focuses on the role of OFCs. In contrast, they
analyze portfolio equity for 2001 using the CPIS data set and exclude OFCs.
7
  http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/pi/geo.htm. Further details are available at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/pi/cpis.htm.
8
  In particular, the CPIS data show no cross-border holdings for e.g., the British Indian Ocean Territory (Diego
Garcia), Christmas Island, and others; we drop them from our sample. We also drop areas with small holdings but
other data problems, such as the French Southern Territories (Iles Crozet, Iles Kerguelen, Ile Amsterdam, and Ile
Saint-Paul), and Niue.
9
  We use the word “country” to denote any territory or area for which we have data (of relevance); these need not be
e.g., diplomatically recognized sovereign states with UN seats. Thus we include: territories (e.g., American Samoa);
physical disparate parts of countries (e.g., Aruba); self-governing areas (e.g., Cook Islands); special administrative
areas (e.g., Hong Kong); dependencies (e.g., Guernsey); commonwealths in political unions (e.g., Northern Mariana
Islands); disputed areas (e.g., Taiwan) and so forth.
10
   Huizinga and Nielsen (2002) provide a related theoretical analysis of the differences between information
provision and withholding taxes in the context of taxing interest across national boundaries. See also OECD (2000).
In future work it would be interesting to treat tax havens and money launderers endogenously.
11
   Further details and the underlying data themselves are available at the sources. The OECD identifies tax havens
on the basis of underlying policies. For instance, pp 9-10 of the OECDs’s 2000 Report to the Ministerial Council
Meeting Towards Global Tax Co-operation lists the four main factors that are used to 47 tax havens identified by
the OECD: 1) low or no nominal taxes on the relevant income; 2) a regime that is ring-fenced from the domestic
economy; 3) low transparency about the regime’s disclosure, regulatory supervision, tax details and/or application,
and 4) no effective exchange of information. More details are available at
www.oecd.org/dataoecd/9/61/2090192.pdf. The CIA also provides (a little) more information on its data, at
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/fields/2116.html.
12
   We use the 2000 data since it was the first review by the FATF, and use jurisdictions either reviewed or reviewed
and deemed non-cooperative countries or territories. More details are available at
http://www1.oecd.org/fatf/pdf/AR2000_en.pdf. For an analysis that treats money laundering as a choice variable
determined by the national authorities, see Masciandaro (forthcoming).
13
   http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/pubs/govmatters3.html
14
   For legal origins, we start with the well-known LaPorta, López-de-Silanes, Shliefer and Vishny data set available
at http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/rafael.laporta/publications/LaPorta%20PDF%20Papers-
ALL/Law%20and%20Finance-All/Law_fin.xls and fill in gaps with data from the CIA, available at:
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/fields/2100.html.
15
   We use $100 in place of 0 or negative values.
16
   Available at http://www.fsforum.org/publications/publication_23_31.html.
17
   Available at http://www.imf.org/external/np/mfd/2004/eng/031204.pdf
18
   The “offshore financial centers” that are caught by the latter requirement since they are OECD countries are:
USA; UK; Austria; Luxembourg; Netherlands; Switzerland; Japan; Ireland; Australia; and Hungary. In our analysis,
we label these as non-OFCs, but retain the in the sample. Of the potential OECD OFCs, we consider only
Luxembourg to be a potentially serious issue.




                                                         39
19
   OFCs also tend to be largely absent from places with poor banking systems (such as Africa and Central Asia),
consistent with the results we present below.
20
   Available at http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/fields/2086.html.
21
   The aggregated residual has at the top: Cayman Islands; British Virgin Islands; Netherlands Antilles; Liberia; and
Tuvalu. While this – and the set of countries ranked slightly lower down – makes sense, the countries at the other
end are more suspicious. They include: Faroe Islands; French Polynesia; Greenland; Puerto Rico; and Isle of Man.
The last entry and a few others towards the bottom (e.g., Macau, Malta, UAE, and Aruba) make us take this measure
with a grain of salt.
22
   Each of the five has positive factor loadings and scoring coefficients; the first factor explains essentially all of the
variance of the five variables.
23
   The continuous variable has at the top: Cayman Islands; British Virgin Islands; Panama; Bahamas; and Singapore.
The countries at the other end include: Faroe Islands; French Polynesia; Greenland; Martinique; and Syria.
24
   This result is consistent with the approach of Huizinga and Nielsen (2002) who treat policies like withholding
taxes and information provision as substitute policies.
25
   The data set is available at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/interest/2003_bank_survey/wb_banking_survey_032904.xls
26
   Available at
http://www.ey.com/global/download.nsf/Argentina/WorldwCorporateTaxGuide/$file/WHOLE_FILE.pdf
27
   Available at http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/.
28
   Available at http://hdr.undp.org/docs/statistics/indices/index_tables.pdf
29
   Available at http://www.freedomhouse.org/research/freeworld/2004/tables.htm
30
   We have also a) redefined our OFC dummy to include the ten OECD countries sometimes as identified as OFCs;
and b) dropped these same ten countries from our analysis. Nothing of substance changes when we do this
sensitivity analysis.
31
   The logic of our approach is similar to that of Claessens and Laeven (2004).
32
   One could easily imagine an extension of the model where taxes had a distortionary impact and the loss of
revenues to the home country government resulted in higher tax rates and therefore welfare-reducing increases in
domestic distortions.
33
   Note that the value of a effectively only determines the normalization for x (the distance parameter) as x only
enters into the cost function in conjunction with a.
34
   Our model predicts this behavior within the range where the home country bank was not engaged in limit-pricing,
which we perceive to be the norm.
35
   Our concentration on the nearest individual OFC is in the spirit of constant returns to scale in the banking
technology of the OFC in our theoretical model. We also examined the sum of distances in miles to all of the OFCs
as a robustness check. These results were very similar to those reported below.
36
   Thus the most remote countries are the Cook Islands, New Zealand, Niue, and French Polynesia, while the least
remote countries are Croatia, Slovenia, Italy, and Austria.
37
   Data for local bank concentration and the number of commercial banks come from Demirguc-Kunt and Levine
(2001).
38
   The first measure is obtained from Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) and is the average over 1980-1995. The
latter are obtained from Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001).
39
   The distance from OFC variable does robustly enter significantly as a determinant of credit to the private sector
when the GDP per capita variable is omitted from the specification. However, this yields a rather uninteresting
specification because it is well-documented that GDP per capita is highly correlated with measures of financial
depth, e.g. Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2001).
40
    We have searched for a scale effect by interacting our measure of OFC proximity with the natural logarithms of
either real GDP or the population. However, the coefficients on these terms are consistently economically and
statistically small and insignificant. We have also attempt to link the Claessens and Laeven (2004) measure of bank
competitiveness to our determinants without success. This is almost surely a result of the much smaller sample size;
while their Table 3 provides estimates of H-statistics for fifty countries, that is still less than a third the size of the
sample in our Tables 3 and 4.
41
   It is possible that channels other than the pro-competitive impact stressed in our model are also at work generating
this result. In particular, it is possible that proximity to OFCs changes government policies towards its financial
system, which may alter the cost of conducting intermediation for domestic banks.



                                                            40
