NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME ANSWERS TO THE RETIREMENT-CONSUMPTION PUZZLE
Michael D. Hurd
Susann Rohwedder
Working Paper 12057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12057
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

Research support from the Social Security Administration via a grant to the Michigan Retirement Research
Center (UM04-13) and from the National Institute on Aging (P01-AG008291 and P30-AG12815) are
gratefully acknowledged. We are also thankful for helpful comments from participants of the Aging
Workshop at the NBER Summer Institute 2004, the Sixth Annual Conference of the Retirement Research
Consortium, and the Seventh Annual Research Conference at DNB (De Nederlansche Bank). All remaining
errors are our responsibility alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Some Answers to the Retirement-Consumption Puzzle
Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 12057
February 2006
JEL No. D91, J26
ABSTRACT
The simple one-good model of life-cycle consumption requires "consumption smoothing."
According to previous results based on partial spending and on synthetic panels, British and U.S.
households apparently reduce consumption at retirement. The reduction cannot be explained by the
simple one-good life-cycle model, so it has been referred to as the retirement-consumption puzzle.
An interpretation is that at retirement individuals discover they have fewer economic resources than
they had anticipated prior to retirement, and as a consequence reduce consumption. This
interpretation challenges the life-cycle model where consumers are assumed to be forward-looking.
Using panel data, we find that prior to retirement workers anticipated on average a decline of 13.3%
in spending and after retirement they recollected a decline of 12.9%: widespread surprise is not the
explanation for the retirement-consumption puzzle. Workers with substantial wealth both anticipated
and recollected a decline. Therefore, for many workers the decline is not necessitated by the fall in
income that accompanies retirement. Poor health is associated with above-average declines. At
retirement time spent in activities that could substitute for market-purchased goods increases.
Apparently a number of factors contribute to the decline in spending, which, for most of the
population, can be accommodated in conventional models of economic behavior.
Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org
Susann Rohwedder
RAND Corporation
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org

1. Introduction
The simple one-good model of life-cycle consumption requires “consumption
smoothing:” the trajectory of consumption by an individual should be continuous in time. If the
trajectory is not continuous, a reallocation of consumption so as to reduce the size of the
discontinuity will increase lifetime utility without an increase in the use of resources. However,
British households apparently reduce consumption at the ages associated with retirement, and the
reduction cannot be explained by the life-cycle model (Banks, Blundell and Tanner, 1998).
Households in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) sharply reduced several components
of consumption at retirement (Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, 2001). Because the
mechanisms underlying this observed drop in consumption at retirement are not well understood,
it has been referred to as the retirement-consumption puzzle.
There are a number of interpretations or explanations for this drop. The most obvious has
to do with the cessation of work-related expenses, but it appears that such expenses are not large
enough to explain the observed drop in consumption at retirement (Banks, Blundell and Tanner).
A second explanation, which is emphasized by Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, is that workers
do not adequately foresee the decline in income associated with retirement. On reaching
retirement they assess their financial resources, and, finding them less than anticipated, reduce
consumption. This interpretation is damaging to the life-cycle model, which assumes that
economic agents are forward-looking planners. For most workers, retirement is a predicable
event, and workers should be assessing continuously their financial situation so that they will not
be surprised. They should have saved enough so that they would not have to reduce
consumption at retirement.

3

A third interpretation is that workers under-saved but they were aware they had undersaved: they were not surprised by the inadequacy of their resources. A lack of self control
caused the under-saving and the decline in income forced them to reduce consumption. This
interpretation is also damaging to the life-cycle model, which assumes that people are both
forward-looking and that they follow through on their (optimal) plans. A fourth interpretation is
that the timing of retirement is uncertain. Some workers retire earlier than anticipated because of
a health event or unemployment, resulting in an unexpected reduction in lifetime resources, and
the reduction leads to a concurrent reduction in consumption. Such a reduction in consumption
is well within the spirit of the life-cycle model.

A final explanation is that retired households

have considerably more leisure than working households. The increased leisure can be used to
purchase goods more efficiently or to substitute home-produced goods for purchased goods. In
this interpretation, spending declines, but actual consumption does not. We note, however, that
the increased leisure time could also lead to increases in purchased goods because of
complementarities such as spending on travel. If some uses of time are substitutes for marketpurchased goods and some are complements, the overall effect is an empirical matter, but we
would expect consumption to change at retirement, not that it be smooth.
This paper provides evidence about the retirement-consumption puzzle and several
explanations for it. First, based on recollections by retirees both in cross-section and panel data,
we find that average spending declined at retirement.1 The average magnitude of the decline is
approximately the same as has been found in previous literature. However, fewer than half of
retirees report that spending declined, so that a decline is not the experience of the population in

1

While we recognize the distinction between consumption and spending, mostly we will use them interchangeably.
In practice the empirical results in the literature are based either on food spending or nondurables spending, both of
which should be approximately the same as consumption of those items because spending and consumption are
almost simultaneous.

4

general. Second, both in cross-section and in panel workers anticipate that their spending will
decline when they retire. This result rules out one explanation for the decline: that there is
widespread surprise at the lack of resources at retirement. This explanation would be
particularly damaging to the life-cycle model, which, were it verified, would require rethinking
of the basic approach to models of intertemporal decision making.
Our third result is that in panel the distributions of anticipated and recollected spending
changes are approximately the same. Thus, on average the population that retired between
waves had, in this sense, rational forecasts.
Accurately forecasting that spending would decline does not establish that workers were
consuming optimally. For example, they could have foreseen that income would decline at
retirement, yet not have the self-control to save. Upon reaching retirement and lacking adequate
savings retirees would be forced to reduce consumption because of the drop in income. We
find, however, that at least for a substantial part of the population, a decline in income does not
necessitate a decline in spending: Many workers in the upper part of the wealth distribution
anticipated similar declines in spending as those in the lower part of the wealth distribution; and
many retirees in the upper part of the wealth distribution recollected a decline similar to those at
the lower end of the wealth distribution. For these people the decline was not forced by the
reduction in income that accompanies retirement.
A fifth result is that health plays an important role in explaining the observed drops in
spending. Poor health was an important reason for retirement among 28 percent of retirees.
Those retirees reported substantially higher spending declines than those whose health was not
an important factor in retirement. An implication is that an unanticipated decline in lifetime
resources caused by early retirement could explain a spending decline for part of the population.

5

Finally, we find that the increase in leisure time accompanying retirement led to an
increase in time spent on seven activities that could substitute for market-purchased goods or
lead to more efficient shopping. In panel, time spent on activities such as food preparation and
shopping increased by about 5.5 hours per week following retirement. This evidence supports
the view that the increased ability to engage in home production or more thrifty shopping is an
important reason for the observed spending declines.

2. Prior Literature
The literature on this topic began with Banks, Blundell and Tanner (1998) who found that
at ages associated with retirement spending declined more rapidly than could be explained by a
simple life-cycle model. Their study is based on nondurable consumption in synthetic panel in
the U.K. Family Expenditure Survey. They interpret the drop to be the result of “unanticipated
shocks occurring around the time of retirement (p. 784)” such as an over-estimate of pension
income. According to Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg spending on food declined sharply at
retirement in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID): the two-year change in log food
consumption following retirement averaged –0.14 with the greatest decline among households in
the lowest income or wealth quartile. Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg interpret the decline in
food spending (as well as patterns of wealth holdings) to be evidence against models of behavior
in which agents are rational and forward-looking. “If households follow heuristic rules of thumb
to determine saving prior to retirement, and if they take stock of their financial situation and
make adjustments at retirement (so that the adequacy of saving is “news”), then one would
expect to observe the patterns documented in this paper (p. 855).” If these interpretations of the

6

retirement-consumption puzzle are correct, they cast doubt on models of rational forwardlooking economic behavior such as the life-cycle model.
Lower spending by those of retirement age in synthetic panel is also found by Blau
(2004) in data from the CEX, and by Miniaci, Monfardini and Weber (2003) in the Italian
Survey on Family Budgets. A somewhat different result is found by Fisher et al. (2005) based
on synthetic panels in the CEX. Median spending on food declined by 5.9%, but total spending
on consumption, declined by just 2.5% (Table 6 of Fisher et al.).
Investigations of food spending in true panel have sometimes corroborated the results of
Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg, but not universally. Smith (2004) divided retirees as observed
in the British Household Panel Survey into four groups and found over two groups comprising
57% of the sample that food spending did not decline at retirement. Another group, about 24%
of the sample, had a decline in spending but their retirement was involuntary, often associated
with unemployment or poor health. This group likely suffered a wealth shock due to early
retirement and so would be expected to reduce spending within the framework of the life-cycle
model. There remained a group comprising about 19% of retirees. They left the labor force at
the normal retirement age, yet experienced a decline of 17% in spending on food.2 Thus, among
the group that retired voluntarily, about 75% experienced no decline in food spending. These
findings suggest that any unexplained decline in food spending at retirement is fairly small and
not the norm in the U.K. population.
Haider and Stephens (2004) found in the PSID and in the Retirement History Survey that
people reduce spending on food when they retire by about 5-10% depending on the specification.
In the Health and Retirement Study they found no reduction, and there is no apparent explanation
2

Group 1 in Table 5 of Smith. However, when controlling for covariates as estimated by regression in Table 6, the
decline for this group was just 4%.

7

for this difference. Haider and Stephens address the issue of the effect of unexpected retirement
on food spending by asking whether the decline could be explained by the difference between
expected and actual retirement. Controlling for the difference between them, they find that the
decline in food spending is reduced by about one third, still leaving an unexplained reduction.
Aguiar and Hurst (2005a) used the Continuing Survey of Food Intake of Individuals,
collected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to study the fine details of food consumption as
well as on food spending. They found that although spending on food declines at retirement,
actual consumption as measured by caloric or vitamin intake, or by the quality of food did not
decline. Their interpretation is that the extra leisure associated with retirement is used to produce
the same food consumption levels but using smaller inputs of market purchased goods. To
validate this interpretation, they used scanner data and found that actual prices paid are indeed
lower among those aged 65 or over than among those 40-65 (Aguiar and Hurst, 2005b).3
Apparently, retirees use time to shop more effectively, permitting a reduction in actual spending
for the same purchases.
An entirely different approach to the retirement-consumption puzzle is via simulation of a
life-cycle model. If the model allows nonseparability between leisure and consumption, then it
will, of course, cause a discontinuous change in consumption when hours of work change
discontinuously. But even when leisure and consumption are separable, uncertainty can lead to a
decline in consumption at retirement as in the models of Blau (2004) and of Benitez-Silva,
Buchinsky and Rust (2005). The explanation is that a negative shock, say, to health will lead to
unexpected early retirement for some and, therefore, to an unexpected decline in lifetime
resources. The discontinuous decline in resources causes a discontinuous decline in
3

Scanner data are records of actual purchases by households. The purchase codes are linked to price information at
the store of purchase. The households are surveyed about demographics and income among other data items.

8

consumption. However, Blau finds that in a model calibrated to HRS data, the decline in
consumption resulting from unexpected events is not large: the drop in spending when
retirement is unexpected is only about one percentage point greater than when it is expected.
Our summary of these papers is that, as assessed in synthetic panels, there is a decline on
average in spending at retirement. But the magnitude of the estimated decline varies between
very small as in Fisher et al. (2005) to much larger as in Blau (2004) and others. Thus the
decline needs to be validated in actual panel data.
The interpretation of the decline in synthetic panel depends on the distribution of the
declines in the population: at the extremes, is the average due to a few households having very
large declines or is it due to all households have approximately the average decline? The
explanation for the latter could be a widespread lack of forward-looking behavior, work-related
expenses, substitution of leisure for spending or similar mechanisms, whereas the former would
suggest costly low probability risks. However synthetic panel cannot shed light on this issue
because it does not track individuals and it cannot associate any decline with personal and
financial characteristics such as health and wealth. Finally, these papers do not address the issue
of whether any spending changes were anticipated, which could be an important part of the
retirement-consumption puzzle.
Food spending as observed in panel declines at retirement but not over all populations at
all times. An unanswered question is what causes the difference in measurement. This question
is particularly relevant for the comparison between the HRS and PSID in Haider and Stephens
(2004). In one comparison, the sample period is approximately the same: 1991-1999 for the
PSID and 1992-1996 for the HRS. The questions formats are similar in both surveys and both

9

surveys are said to be population representative. Yet the log change in food spending at
retirement is –0.089 (with standard error of 0.043) in the PSID and 0.005 ( 0.024) in the HRS.4

2. Theoretical Background
In its simplest form the life-cycle model (LCM) with one consumption good specifies
that individuals choose a consumption path to maximize expected lifetime utility, and that the
instantaneous utility function is unchanging over time. The shape of the optimal consumption
path is partially or wholly determined by utility function parameters, the interest rate and
mortality risk. The level of the path is determined by the lifetime budget constraint; the
difference between the level of consumption and income determines the saving rate and the
equation of motion of wealth. Auxiliary assumptions, which are not controversial, are that the
marginal utility is continuous in consumption and that marginal utility declines in consumption.
A condition for lifetime utility maximization is that marginal utility be continuous in time: were
it not continuous a reallocation of consumption across the discontinuity from the low marginal
utility state to the high marginal utility state would increase total utility without a greater use of
resources. Such a reallocation should continue until there no longer is a discontinuity in
marginal utility. Because consumption is monotonic and continuous in marginal utility, an
implication is that consumption must be continuous in time. That is, consumption must be
smooth over time in a model where utility only depends on consumption.
In a more general model, which recognizes uncertainty, individuals or households
experience unanticipated windfall gains or losses to wealth, earnings or annuities, and then reoptimize to a new consumption path, causing a discontinuity in the consumption path. However,
wealth, earnings or annuity changes which are foreseeable should cause no change in the
4

Table 3 in Haider and Stephens (2004).

10

consumption path because the lifetime budget constraint has not changed. In particular
consumption should not change at retirement if retirement occurs as planned.5 But if retirement
occurs sooner than expected, lifetime resources will be less than expected so that consumption
will have to be adjusted downward. The obvious example is a stochastic health event that causes
early retirement. Negative health shocks leading to early retirement are undoubtedly empirically
important, so that we should expect to observe in the population some unanticipated decline in
consumption at retirement from these shocks alone.
A second generalization of the LCM specifies that utility depends on more than one
good, in particular leisure as well as consumption. Suppose that the within-period utility
function is u (c, l ) . The implications for consumption at retirement depend on whether the utility
function is separable; that is, whether the marginal utility of consumption uc depends on l .
If the utility function is separable, uc should be continuous in time and consumption will
also be continuous. If the utility function is not separable, but retirement is gradual so that l
increases slowly, consumption will also change in a continuous manner. But for most workers
l increases abruptly by about 2,000 hours per year. A condition of utility maximization is that

the marginal utility of consumption, uc , be the same immediately before and immediately after
retirement: the argument is the same as we gave earlier in the context of a single good model of
the LCM. Now, however, because of nonseparability and because of the sudden change in l , the
LCM requires a discontinuous change in consumption.
Some types of leisure are substitutes for the consumption of market purchased goods
such as home repairs, some are complements with consumption such as travel, and some are
neutral such as watching television. Everyday observation and introspection suggest that we
5

If some of measured consumption is, in fact, work-related expenses, consumption as measured by spending would
drop at retirement, but utility-producing spending would not. This is a measurement issue.

11

have all types, and it is an empirical question as to which dominates. But the main point is that
we would not expect consumption to be smoothed over retirement.
Because of differences in tastes and differences in economic resources we expect
heterogeneity across households in whether substitution or complementarity dominates. For
example, someone with high wealth may continue to purchase home repairs as before retirement,
but spend more on travel with a net effect of an increase in spending. Someone with a high wage
rate may have purchased home repairs before retirement but will do them himself after
retirement for a net reduction in spending.
This can be illustrated with a three good model. Suppose that utility is given by
u ( x, y, l ) , where x and y are composite goods and l is leisure. The optimal path of x will equate

ux before and after retirement and the optimal path of y will equate u y before and after
retirement. If u xl = 0 and u yl = 0 both x and y will be continuous across retirement. But if x
is a substitute for leisure ( u xl < 0 ) and y is a complement to leisure ( u yl > 0 ), then a
discontinuous but anticipated reduction in l will require a decrease in x and an increase in y .
Whether total spending increases or decreases would depend on utility function parameters,
prices and the levels of spending on each. Even with identical preferences workers facing
differing wage rates would change total spending differently at retirement.
We have stated nonseparability in terms of the utility function, but the conclusions are the
same in the context of home production. For example, suppose that instantaneous utility is given
by u ( f (c, l )) where f is a production function that uses inputs of purchased goods c and of
time l to produce actual consumption which produces utility. Then nonseparability of f will
cause a discontinuous change in c when l changes discontinuously at retirement.

12

In this discussion we have simplified the problem by assuming that retirement is given
exogenously. Whether retirement is chosen does not affect the discontinuity in consumption
when leisure and consumption are not separable provided the increase in leisure is discontinuous.
As an empirical matter a substantial majority of retirement is from full-time to completely out of
the labor force (Rust, 1990) and there are good reasons for such a sharp transition.6

3. Data
Our data come from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and from a supplemental
survey to the HRS, the Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS).7 The HRS is a
biennial panel. Its first wave was conducted in 1992. The target population was the cohorts born
in 1931-1941 (Juster and Suzman, 1995). Additional cohorts were added in 1993 and 1998 so
that beginning with the 1998 wave it represented the population from the cohorts of 1947 or
earlier. The HRS interviewed about 20,000 subjects in 13,100 households in the year 2000
wave. A random sample of 5,000 households (38.2 percent of all households interviewed in
HRS 2000) was asked to participate in CAMS. The questionnaires for CAMS wave 1 were sent
out in October, 2001.8 In married or partnered households it was sent to one of the spouses,
chosen at random. There were 3,866 responses in the CAMS wave 1, which corresponds to a
total response rate of 77.3 percent.9

6

For example, a defined benefit pension plan can have such strong incentives to retire that workers within a wide
range of tastes for retirement will all retire. Most firms will not allow a gradual reduction in work hours, so that a
worker who would like to retire gradually will be forced to change employers and possibly occupations (Hurd,
1996).
7
The HRS is sponsored by the National Institute of Aging (grant number NIA U01AG09740) and conducted by the
University of Michigan.
See Hurd and Rohwedder (2005) for a more extensive description of CAMS.
9
Although the response rate was high there was some differential non-response by demographic characteristics.
HRS has supplied weights to account for non-response, and most of our analyses will use them. Because our main
variables are about household spending we will use the household weights. We have conducted parallel analyses
using unweighted data and the results are very little different.

13

In October, 2003, CAMS wave 2 was sent to the same households. The structure of the
questionnaire was almost the same so as to facilitate panel analysis. The response rate in CAMS
wave 2 was 78.3 percent.10
CAMS has three main topics: Part A is about activities or uses of time; Part B collects
data on spending, including anticipations and realizations about changes in spending at
retirement; and Part C asks information about marital status and labor force participation.11
The main variables of interest in our analysis are anticipated and recollected spending
changes at retirement which come from the following question sequence in the CAMS
questionnaire:12

10

Response rates are lower bounds in that they are not adjusted for mortality or undeliverable questionnaires.
In wave 1 of CAMS section C included in addition questions about prescription drug usage.
12
The CAMS questionnaires for wave 1 and 2 are accessible online at
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/meta/2001/cams/qnaire/cams01abc.pdf for CAMS wave 1 and
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/meta/2003/cams/qnaire/cams2003.pdf for CAMS wave 2.
11

14

Excerpt from the CAMS Questionnaire:
Question B38 in CAMS wave 1; question B44 in CAMS wave 2.

We would like to understand more about spending in retirement.
Are you retired?
______ Yes

Complete BOX A

No

Complete BOX B

BOX A – Retired:

BOX B – Not Retired:

a. How did your TOTAL spending change with

d. How do you expect your TOTAL spending

retirement?

to change with retirement?

_____ Stayed the same

Go to c

_____ Stay the same

_____ Increased

_____ Increase

_____ Decreased

_____ Decrease

b. By how much?

Go to f

e. By how much?

______%

______%

c. For the items below, check ( ) whether the

f. For the items below, check ( ) whether you

spending increased, decreased or stayed the

expect spending to increase, decrease or stay

same in retirement:

the same in retirement:

15

We link these responses to the rich information obtained on the same respondents in
repeated HRS core interviews. For example, we obtain information on demographics and socioeconomic status from HRS 2000. We also make use of the panel nature of the HRS to obtain
from prior waves information such as the year a CAMS respondent retired, self-rated health in
the wave immediately before and after a respondent’s retirement, and reasons for retirement.13
In the empirical analysis of this paper we use responses where the qualitative and the
quantitative information on the anticipated or recollected spending decline is not missing. 14 We
use data on retirees between the ages of 50 and 74 who retired no earlier than age 50 and no later
than age 70. For those not yet retired we use the responses of those aged between 50 and 69.15
We make these restrictions to find changes in spending when retirement is “normal” and to
reduce recall bias due to retirement having occurred many years in the past.

4. Declines in Spending in the HRS: Anticipations and Realizations
In this section we provide empirical evidence about three issues. First, we find average declines
in spending at retirement of about the magnitude that has been found in previous literature.
However, we also find that only about half the population experienced a decline. Then, we
address two key questions that have not yet been resolved in the literature in a satisfactory
manner: While still working did workers anticipate that spending would decline at retirement?

13

Most HRS core variables are obtained from The RAND HRS Data file which is an easy to use longitudinal data
set based on the HRS data. It was developed at RAND with funding from the National Institute on Aging and the
Social Security Administration.
14
Response rates were quite high in both waves of CAMS: The lead-in question about retirement status was
answered by 93.8 (95.8) percent of CAMS respondents to wave 1 (wave 2); the qualitative question about change in
spending at retirement was answered by 93.5 (93.6) percent, retired and not retired respondents combined.
Questions B38b and B38e (combined) were answered by 77.4 percent in wave 1 and 78.2 percent in wave 2.
15
In addition we exclude 8 observations where the respondent filled out both sides of the box, that is answered both
the questions for the retired and for the not retired, and the answers differed from each other.

16

Were anticipations and realizations consistent on average? We have unique data that allow us to
address these issues directly.

4.1 Spending Change at Retirement in CAMS
Table 1 shows recollected spending change at retirement as reported by retirees in CAMS
wave 1.16 The observations are classified according to the age at which the respondent retired as
found in prior waves of HRS. The average recollected change was a decline of about 14%.
There is some variation with age showing a larger decline among those who were 50-54 at the
time of their retirement. Such early retirement is often associated with a health event that causes
workers to retire unexpectedly early, so the larger decline in spending is not surprising.
Because we have data on individual changes, we can examine the distribution of change,
which cannot be done in synthetic panels. Despite the similarity of the average reduction with
synthetic panel results, just 49% recollected a decline (not shown in table): the median reduction
was zero. Therefore the drop in spending is not a population-wide phenomenon:

4.2 Anticipated Changes in Spending at Retirement
An interpretation of the decline in spending is that economic resources at retirement are
less than anticipated prior to retirement either because saving was inadequate (Bernheim,
Skinner and Weinberg) or because pension income was over-estimated (Banks, Blundell and
Tanner). If that is the case, workers would not have predicted that spending would decline at
retirement for the obvious reason that they were as yet unaware of the soon-to-be-discovered

16

That part of the literature which uses synthetic panel to measure spending change refers to nondurable spending as
in Banks, Blundell and Tanner, whereas the CAMS questions refers to total spending. According to the analysis of
Blau (2004) based on the CEX the results are practically identical whether one uses spending on nondurables or on
total spending.

17

shortfall. We investigate this interpretation using data on expectations about spending change at
retirement by CAMS respondents who were not retired. Table 2 shows the average and median
anticipated change in spending at retirement among those working in wave 1 of CAMS. The
average anticipated decline was about 20%.17 The greatest anticipated declines are among the
younger workers, which is consistent with their understanding that they face a risk of early
unexpected retirement.
If there is a correlation between retirement and expectations about spending change at
retirement, the expectations of workers who are in their 60s will not reflect population
expectations because some have already retired. Because there are few retirements before age
55, the average anticipated decline among workers in their early 50s is approximately a
population average. We conclude that a decline is widely anticipated.
Because the medians are similar to the means, the average decline is not simply the result of
a relatively small number of outliers; in fact about 66 percent of workers anticipated a decline
(not shown).
Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2002) found in a sample of TIAA-CREF participants that
among those not retired 55% expected lower spending in retirement and among those already
retired 36% experienced lower spending. These percentages are somewhat lower than what we
find. The most important difference between the TIAA-CREF sample and our sample is that the
TIAA-CREF sample is much wealthier and does not represent the entire population.

4.3 Anticipated and Recollected Spending Change in Panel

17

The average anticipated decline is greater than the average recollected decline reported in Table 1. There is no
reason they should be the same as the anticipations and recollections come from different populations.

18

Using data from CAMS wave 1 and CAMS wave 2 we observe 201 retirements between
waves among those in the age range 50 to 69. Table 3 shows that among those where we have
complete data in both waves, the anticipated reduction in spending was 13.3% and the
recollected actual reduction was 12.9%. Even though the number of observations is just 146, the
recollected change is close to the change in the entire wave 1 CAMS sample, 13.8% (Table 1),
and the standard error is small enough to rule out exceptionally large declines or declines of zero.
The 95% confidence interval is 9.5% to 17.1%. The age pattern shows that both the anticipated
and actual spending decline is greatest at younger ages when a health shock would cause a larger
deviation in retirement from normal retirement age: the resulting shortfall in lifetime resources
should lead to a greater spending decline. The median actual spending change was zero. In
total, 44.5 percent recollected a spending change (not shown). This percentage is close to
percentage of retirees in CAMS wave 1 who recalled a decline in spending (49%) as stated in
Section 4.1. The panel results verify that the actual decline in spending is not population-wide.
The distributions of anticipated and actual spending change are similar as shown in
Figure 1. The figure shows the cumulative distributions of percent spending change at
retirement. The distribution of anticipations is marginally to the left of the distribution of
recollections and both show a greater tendency toward declines rather than increases.

5. Explanations for the observed drop in spending
While our results based on CAMS wave 1 and on the panel show that an actual spending
drop at retirement is limited to somewhat less than half the population, it is of considerable
interest to understand why spending dropped among that group. In this section we provide
evidence about three possible mechanisms: the affected population had little savings so that

19

spending was forced to decline when income declined; a health shock precipitated an
unexpected early retirement; greater leisure in retirement was partially used in home production
or more efficient shopping.

Spending Declines and Wealth
Models of intertemporal optimization require that agents act on the information they have
about future events. Retirement with its accompanying decline in income is forecastable for
most people. A widespread failure to save adequately could be signaled by a decline in
consumption that is forced by the drop in income. However, as shown in Table 4 even those in
the highest wealth quartile anticipated and experienced a spending decline.18 Furthermore there
is no systematic pattern in the actual decline as a function of wealth quartiles. The only
noticeable differences in the entries are the substantially lower anticipated decline among those
in the lowest wealth quartile and the smaller recollected decline in the 2nd quartile.
Because wealth is subject to considerable observation error which would result in
classification error, we display similar results but stratified by education (Table 5). Those with
more economic resources, as reflected in their higher education, reported declines in spending,
and their anticipated declines were larger than their realized declines. The table also shows that
those with the least education had similar declines to those with more education. However the
least educated had the greatest difference between anticipations and recollections. This
discrepancy is similar to the discrepancy in the lowest wealth category in Table 4. An
implication is that a small fraction of the least well-off and/or least well-educated misperceive
what their spending change will be. Despite the misperception, actual spending decline is not

Quartile boundaries are for singles: p25 = $15,200; p50 = $74,500; p75 = $258,500; and for couples: p25 = $
72,000; p50 = $186,000; p75 = $407,000.

20

greater than for others, suggesting that the misperception was due to an over-estimate of
spending needs in retirement.19

Spending Declines and Health
Workers who have worse health are more likely to have a health shock and are more
likely to retire early (McClellan, 1998). If exposed to an unexpected reduction in lifetime
resources, they will reduce spending at retirement. Table 6 classifies the CAMS respondents
who retired between waves 1 and 2 according to their health status prior to retirement. While
working, respondents anticipated spending changes that were independent of health status, but
actual spending change varied substantially with prior health status. For example, those in fair or
poor health just before retirement recollected a spending decline of 18.4% compared with the
spending decline of just 10.3% among those in excellent or very good health prior to retirement.
These results suggest the larger declines may have been due to a health shock among those in
worse health and that the early retirement led to a decline in spending.
We can study health transitions more directly in the full CAMS sample based on a
measure of health transitions at retirement using panel information derived from multiple prior
HRS waves. Table 7 shows health transitions from the wave preceding retirement to the wave
after retirement. The population that enters this table is CAMS respondents who were retired in
CAMS wave 1. The method of calculating this table is to examine prior HRS waves as far back
as wave 2 (1994) to find the wave in which the respondent had transited from working to fully or
partially retired. Health prior to retirement is reported in the preceding HRS wave, and health
after retirement is reported in the subsequent wave. The table shows that 679 (74%) reported
19

Part of the discrepancy between expectation and realizations for the least well off/or least well educated could also
be due to this group being more affected by health shocks. However, in that case one would expect this group to
experience larger declines in spending than the remainder of the population, which is not the case.

21

their health to be excellent, very good or good following retirement and that their average
spending decline was 12.0%. Spending declined by 18.7% among the 233 whose health was fair
or poor following retirement. Most maintained their health status at retirement: for example,
151 (69%) of those in fair or poor health prior to retirement remained in fair or poor health. This
group comprises about 17% of the table, and they had the largest decline in spending: 20.9%.
Because those in worse health are more likely to have a health shock than those in better health,
some in that group probably retired unexpectedly early. Others may have anticipated an early
retirement because of their health but the exact timing was uncertain.
Among those whose health improved at retirement (67 observations) spending declined
by 12.9%, approximately the same as the spending decline of those whose health was good or
better both before and after retirement. Approximately 12% of those with good or better health
prior to retirement had fair or poor health following retirement. Their spending decline was
14.6%. We conclude that worse health and a transition to worse health are associated with larger
spending declines, indicating that health risk is likely responsible for some of the decline in
spending at retirement.
Another piece of evidence linking health to spending change comes from a question that
HRS asks the newly retired. Respondents are asked their reasons for retirement, including the
importance of health. Table 8 shows for the entire CAMS sample that about 29% of retirees
mentioned health as an important reason for retirement.20 They were much more likely to be in
fair or poor health prior to retirement and they recollected that spending declined by 20.5%.

20

We coded responses of “very important” or “moderately important” as health was an “important reason for
retirement.” Most respondents affirmed the first category. Similarly, we coded responses of “somewhat important”
and “not important at all” as health was “not an important reason for retirement.” Among these, most respondents
(about 90%) affirmed that health was not important at all. The sample in Table 8 is reduced from the sample in
Table 1 because of missing data on reasons for retirement.

22

Among those where health was not an important reason for retirement just 13% said that preretirement health was fair or poor and the average decline in spending was 11.0%.
Overall there was a small decline in health at retirement as measured by the two
categories: 24% had fair or poor health prior to retirement compared with 26% after retirement.
Among those where health was an important reason for retirement, the decline in health was
about seven percentage points.
While these results strengthen the argument that health is an important factor in spending
declines, they do not isolate the causes: Spending could decline because of a health shock
leading directly to retirement.21 Poor health could be associated with greater uncertainty about
the timing of retirement. Or there could be other factors correlated with poor health. But
because a large fraction of retirees report either that health was not an important factor in
retirement or that their health was excellent, very good or good after retirement, we conclude that
a health shock was important for some but not for all.

Change in Available Leisure Time
If leisure and consumption are not separable then a discontinuous change in leisure
should lead to a discontinuous change in consumption in order to smooth the marginal utility of
consumption. In section A of CAMS, the respondent was asked about his or her use of time.
Many categories of time-use would neither be complements nor substitutes with market
purchased goods. For example, “walking,” or “watching TV” would seem to interact very little
with market purchased inputs. We chose seven activities as shown in Table 9 that might be

21

In results not shown, spending declines by about two percentage points more among those who say that health
was an important reason for retirement and who report a transition to fair or poor health, but this difference is not
economically important.

23

substitutes for market purchased goods or services.22 If home production is partly responsible
for any drop in spending, the amount of time spent on activities such as cooking, cleaning, home
maintenance and the like should increase at retirement.
For those who retired between waves 1and 2 of CAMS, the table shows the change in
hours per week spent on activities that we have classified as possible substitutes for market
purchased goods. The changes are calculated as wave 2 hours spent in the activities minus wave
1 hours. For example, the individuals who retired between the waves spent 1.42 hours more per
week in yard work and gardening at wave 2 than they did in wave 1. Overall the time spent in
market substitutes increased by about 5.5 hours per week.

6. Conclusions
In models that are based on forward-looking optimal behavior by individuals, it is
reasonable for the model to admit that some people will make optimization mistakes. In
addition, uncertainty can cause apparent mistakes by individuals even though ex ante they made
optimal choices. However, these mistakes should be symmetric in the sense that mistakes on one
side of the optimum should be approximately balanced by mistakes on the other side of the
optimum. Thus, in the absence of macro shocks, systematic deviations from the optimum at the
population level would cast doubt in the validity of the model.
In the simple one-good life-cycle model, a widespread drop in consumption at retirement
looks like a widespread or population-level systematic mistake. One explanation is that most of
the population systematically over-estimated what their resources would be following retirement:
on observing their actual income they were either compelled to reduce consumption or re22

Section A of CAMS has 31 categories of time-use, but they were not chosen for an analysis of how activities
interact with spending. An unfortunate result is that CAMS is lacking time-use categories that may be complements
to spending.

24

optimization required that they reduce consumption. In either case most of the population
experienced a loss in lifetime utility because of the discontinuity in marginal utility at retirement.
They would not have foreseen the decline in consumption because ex ante they did not foresee
that their income would be inadequate. A second explanation is that individuals did foresee that
they would reach retirement with inadequate resources, which would force a reduction in
consumption, but a lack of self control prevented them from reducing consumption prior to
retirement. Both explanations are damaging to the life-cycle model. First, at the population
level, retirement is not a surprise, and on average economic resources should not be a surprise.
Second, models of optimal behavior are neither empirically valid nor useful unless the economic
agents have the ability to make the choices that they deem optimal conditional on their
constraints.
The results we have presented in this paper are evidence against both of these
interpretations. First, at the population level, individuals are not surprised by the drop in
consumption at retirement: indeed about two-thirds of workers anticipated a drop. Second,
while some workers may have foreseen that consumption would have to drop in a sub-optimal
manner, but lacked the self-control to reduce consumption while still working, this explanation
cannot be valid at the population level: workers in the third and fourth wealth quartiles, whose
consumption would not be forced to drop at retirement, also anticipated a decline in
consumption.
If surprise at economic resources and/or lack of self control do not explain the drop in
consumption at retirement, what does? Widespread health shocks that cause an unexpectedly
early retirement could, in principle, cause the drop. In fact, in a young population where
everyone has a positive probability of a health shock which would lead to unexpectedly early

25

retirement, everyone should with some positive probability anticipate a decline in consumption
at retirement. There is no symmetric increase in consumption at retirement because with each
passing year that a worker escapes the health shock, consumption will increase a little. Then
workers who remain in the labor force unexpectedly long will have gradually increased
consumption while still working so that consumption before and after retirement will be
approximately the same.
Even though in principle health shocks could cause widespread consumption declines at
retirement, their empirical importance is not great enough to explain fully the recollected
declines in consumption: indeed about two-thirds of retirees say that health was not important at
all in their retirement decision.
Work-related expenses could explain part of the decline. We have not addressed this
issue in this paper because we do not have data on what spending can be confidently attributed to
work-related expenses.23 Most researchers believe that work-related expenses cannot be large
enough to explain the average declines in the population. Furthermore, there must be
considerable heterogeneity in work-related expenses because many retirees recollect that
spending did not change at retirement.
The use of the increased leisure time to reduce spending while maintaining constant
marginal utility is a plausible explanation for part of the population. Indeed, following
retirement, activities that are plausible substitutes for spending increased by 5.5 hours per week
in our panel data. But heterogeneity in time use is surely important: because of differing tastes
and economic situations, some may spend large budget shares on goods that are complements to
leisure and some may spend large budget shares on goods that are substitutes for leisure. Indeed
23

Work-related expenses are difficult to define because most relevant categories can be both work-related and not
work-related, such as transportation, clothing, dining and eating out. This difficulty is also mirrored in the fact that
reliable estimates of work-related expenses are hard to find in the literature, most likely for exactly this reason.

26

some 11 percent of our sample indicated that spending increased following retirement, which
indicates that complements dominate for this group.
We conclude that no single explanation is likely to be important for the large fraction of
the population that anticipated and recollected a decline in consumption at retirement. Rather
each explanation makes a contribution to the decline, and it will be an objective of future
research to quantify their respective contributions. At this point, however, evidence points to a
mix of explanations that, for most of the population, can be accommodated by conventional lifecycle economic models.

27

References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2005a, “Consumption vs. Expenditure,” Journal of Political

Economy, 113(5), pp. 919-948.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, 2005b, “Lifecycle Prices and Production,” NBER Working Paper
No. 11601.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin and John Leahy, 2002, “Retirement Consumption: Insights from
a Survey,” NBER Working Paper No. 8735.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell and Sarah Tanner, 1998, “Is There a Retirement-Savings
Puzzle?” American Economic Review, 88 (4), pp. 769-788.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky and John Rust (2005), “Is There a Decline in
Consumption after Retirement, and if so, Is It Inconsistent with the Predictions of the Life
Cycle Model,” presented at the 7th Workshop of the RTN-AGE Project, Venice, IT.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg, 2001, “What Accounts for the
Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review,
91 (4), pp. 832-857.
Blau, David, 2004, “Retirement and Consumption in a Life Cycle Model,” typescript,
Department of Economics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Consumption and Activities Mail Survey, 2001 and 2003, Early Release. Supplemental Mail
Survey to the Health and Retirement Study, funded by National Institute on Aging at NIH
(U01 AGO9740).

28

Fisher, Jonathan, David S. Johnson, Joseph Marchand, Timothy M. Smeeding and Barbara Boyle
Torrey, 2005, “The Retirement-Consumption Conundrum: Evidence from a Consumption
Survey,” Retirement Research Center at Boston College, WP 2005-14.
Haider, Stephen J. and Melvin Stephens, 2004, “Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle?
Evidence Using Subjective Retirement Expectations,” NBER Working Paper No. 10257.
Health and Retirement Study, Waves 1 through 7, public use datasets. Produced and distributed
by the University of Michigan with funding from the National Institute on Aging (grant
number NIA U01AG09740). Ann Arbor, MI, (various years).
Hurd, Michael D., 1996, "The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force Behavior of
Older Workers," in David Wise, ed., Advances in the Economics of Aging, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 11-58.

Hurd, Michael D. and Susann Rohwedder, 2005, “The Consumption and Activities Mail Survey:
Description, Data Quality, and First Results on Life-Cycle Spending and Saving,”
typescript, RAND.
Juster, F. Thomas, and Richard Suzman, 1995, “An Overview of the Health and Retirement
Study,” The Journal of Human Resources, 30. Supplement, pp. S7-S56.
McClellan, Mark, 1998, “Health Events, Health Insurance and Labor Supply: Evidence from
the Health and Retirement Survey,” in D. Wise, ed., Frontiers in the Economics of Aging,
1998, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 301-346.
Miniaci, Raffaele, Chiara Monfardini and Guglielmo Weber, 2003, “Is There A Retirement
Consumption Puzzle In Italy?” IFS Working Paper WP03/14, Institute for Fiscal Studies,
London.
RAND HRS Data, Version E. Produced by the RAND Center for the Study of Aging, with
funding from the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration. Santa
29

Monica, CA (April 2004).
Rust, John, 1990, “Behavior of Male Workers at the End of the Life Cycle: An Empirical
Analysis of States and Controls,” in David Wise, ed., Issues in the Economics of Aging,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 317-379.
Smith, Sarah, 2004, “Can The Retirement Consumption Puzzle Be Resolved? Evidence from UK
Panel Data,” IFS Working Paper WP04/07, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

30

Table 1. Recollected percent change in spending at retirement (weighted)
Retirement age
N
Mean
Std. Err.
50-54
154
-16.2
2.1
55-59
301
-12.7
1.5
60-64
592
-13.2
0.9
65-69
237
-14.7
1.5
70-74
22
-14.9
4.6
All
1,306
-13.8
0.7

Median
-1.0
0.0
0.0
-5.0
-20.0
0.0

Note: Current age greater than or equal to 50 and less than 80.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on CAMS wave 1

Table 2. Anticipated percent change in spending at retirement (weighted)
Age
N
Mean
Std. Err.
50-54
158
-19.4
1.5
55-59
289
-23.1
1.2
60-64
263
-16.1
1.4
65-69
105
-16.7
1.9
All
815
-20.1
0.7

Median
-20.0
-25.0
-20.0
-10.0
-20.0

Source: Authors’ calculations based on CAMS wave 1

Table 3. Anticipations and recollections of percent change in spending at retirement.
Panel
Anticipations
Recollections
Age in
Std.err.
Std.err.
wave 1
N
Mean of mean Median
Mean of mean
Median
50-54
18
-15.8
5.8
-20.0
-15.4
5.1
-11.5
55-59
38
-19.6
3.2
-20.0
-16.7
4.4
-10.0
60-64
65
-9.4
3.2
0.0
-11.9
3.0
0.0
65-69
25
-12.3
3.7
0.0
-7.6
3.7
0.0
All

146

-13.3

1.9

-10.0

Source: Authors’ calculations based on CAMS wave 1 and wave 2

31

-12.9

2.0

0.0

Table 4. Anticipated and recollected change in spending at retirement (percent) by wealth quartile,
panel.
Wealth quartile in HRS 2000
Lowest
2
3
Highest
All
Anticipated while working
-5.4
-17.8
-14.5
-15.9
-13.3
Recollected after retirement
-14.6
- 9.0
-16.1
-11.7
-12.9
Source: Authors’ calculations. N = 146

Table 5. Anticipated and recollected change in spending at retirement (percent) by education,
panel.
Education
Less than
Some
high school High school
college
College
All
Anticipated while working
-6.7
-12.7
-17.6
-13.9
-13.3
Recollected after retirement
-10.2
-13.9
-14.3
-11.1
-12.9
Observations
21
56
36
33
146
Source: Authors’ calculations. N=146

Table 6: Anticipated and recollected change in spending at retirement (percent) by health status
before retirement, panel
Health status in HRS 2000
Fair or poor
Good
Excellent or very good
All
Anticipated while working
-13.9
-13.4
-13.2
-13.3
Recollected after retirement
-18.4
-15.0
-10.3
-12.9
Observations
22
41
83
146
Source: Authors’ calculations

32

Table 7. Recollected change in spending (percent) and number of observations. Health
transitions at retirement
Health status after retirement
Health status prior to
retirement
fair or poor
good or better
All
fair or poor

-20.9
151

-12.9
67

-18.4
218

good or better

-14.6
82

-12.0
612

-12.3
694

All

-18.7
233

-12.0
679

-13.7
912

Note: number of observations in italics

Table 8. Health status before and after retirement, and recollected change in spending at
retirement
Fraction in fair or poor health Percent change in spending
Importance of health
for retirement
N Before retirement After retirement Mean
Median
Health important
265
0.51
0.58
-20.5
-20.0
Health not important
647
0.13
0.12
-11.0
0.0
All
912
0.24
0.26
-13.8
0.0
Note: Based on HRS 2000 question G138a-1: “I am going to read you a list of reasons why some people retire.
Please tell me whether, for you, these were very important reasons for retirement, moderately important, somewhat
important, or not important at all.” Same question was asked in all waves. We use the latest observation available
for the retirees in the sample, using all available waves 1 through 7.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Table 9. Changes in hours per week at retirement, panel.
House cleaning
0.55
Washing, ironing
Yard work/gardening 1.42
Shopping
Food preparation
1.47
Finances
Home improvements
0.83
Total substitutes 5.42 hours per week

0.16
0.91
0.08

Note: Additional restriction on sample is that the same person must have responded to the time use section in both
waves of CAMS.
Source: Authors’ calculations. N=130

33

Figure 1. Distribution of Panel Responses
100
90
80
Percentile

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-100

-75

-50

-25

0

25

50

Spending Change at Retirement [percent]
Anticipations

Recollections

34

75

100

