                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MAKING OF AN INVESTMENT BANKER:
                       MACROECONOMIC SHOCKS, CAREER CHOICE,
                                AND LIFETIME INCOME

                                                Paul Oyer

                                         Working Paper 12059
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12059


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




I thank Ken Corts, Liran Einav, Eric Forister, Dan Kessler, Kathryn Shaw, Andy Skrzypacz, Till von
Wachter and Jeff Zwiebel for comments. I thank Ed Lazear for both sharing the MBA survey data and useful
suggestions. I am also grateful to Stanford’s Vic Menen and Andy Chan and to Wharton’s Christopher
Morris and Jennifer Sheffler for providing historical placement information for their schools. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Making of an Investment Banker: Macroeconomic Shocks, Career Choice, and Lifetime
Income
Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 12059
February 2006
JEL No. M5, J31, J44

                                            ABSTRACT

New graduates of elite MBA programs flock to Wall Street during bull markets and start their careers
elsewhere when the stock market is weak. Given the transferability of MBA skills, it seems likely
that any effect of stock returns on MBA placement would be short-lived. In this paper, I use a survey
of Stanford MBAs from the classes of 1960 through 1997 to analyze the relationship between the
state of the stock market at graduation, initial job placement, and long-term labor market outcomes.
Using stock market conditions at graduation as an instrument for first job, I show that there is a
strong causal effect of initial placement in investment banking on the likelihood of working on Wall
Street anywhere from three to twenty years later. I then measure the investment banking
compensation premium relative to other jobs and estimate the additional income generated by an
MBA cohort where a higher fraction starts in higher-paid jobs relative to a cohort that starts in lower-
paid areas. The results lead to several conclusions. First, random factors play a large role in
determining the industries and incomes of members of this high-skill group. Second, there is a deep
pool of potential investment bankers in any given Stanford MBA class. During the time these people
are in school, factors beyond their control sort them into or out of banking upon graduation. Finally,
industry-specific or task-specific human capital appears to be important for young investment
bankers.
Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
         “Back in January 1987... Wall Street was booming... When the job oﬀers rolled in,
      students played one house against another. They were the supply, and the demand was
      strong... After the crash, the receptions that had once played to packed houses were
      drawing a few dozen students. Out went the tenderloin on toast and the shrimp; in
      came the dips and the hot dogs on toothpicks. The school placement oﬃce sent out
      a memo suggesting career ‘flexibility’ for finance majors like me; we should look into
      opportunities in manufacturing and consulting.” — Brown (1988)


1    Introduction

New MBAs take jobs on Wall Street in large numbers during bull markets. When stock market
conditions are less favorable, a combination of supply and demand factors make new MBAs less
likely to start their careers in the financial sector. Given the transferability of MBA skills and the
new MBAs’ reputation for job hopping, one might expect people to move in and out of finance jobs
such that the long-term labor market outcomes of MBA classes would be similar. In this paper,
I analyze the degree to which MBAs’ first jobs are driven by the stock market and whether the
eﬀects of initial conditions do, in fact, fade quickly with labor market experience.
    I use data from a 1996-1998 survey of several thousand Stanford MBAs. The Stanford Graduate
School of Business (GSB) alumni provided details on jobs between graduation and the survey, as
well as jobs before studying at Stanford. I first show that stock returns while GSB students are
in school have a large eﬀect on the fraction of any graduating cohort that starts their careers in
investment banking (which, throughout the paper, I define as working for an investment bank, in
investment management, or for a venture capital firm.) This eﬀect is substantial for the class as
a whole and for those who did not work in investment banking before getting an MBA. But the
eﬀect is particularly large for those who worked in investment banking before getting an MBA.
    I then show that this eﬀect of conditions at the time of graduation is very persistent. Specifically,
I instrument for taking a job in investment banking after graduation with stock returns while the
person was attending Stanford. Then I estimate the causal eﬀect of starting in investment banking
on working in that industry at any given point later in the person’s career. I find that starting in
investment banking increases the probability of working there at any given point three to twenty
years after graduation by 60-85%. Though it is diﬃcult to be sure that the additional investment
bankers created by bull markets would not otherwise have taken jobs similar to those taken by
other GSB graduates, I show suggestive evidence that bull markets cause GSB graduates to be less
likely to become entrepreneurs or consultants. I also show evidence that the additional investment



                                                   1
bankers created by bull markets are no less interested in finance and no less likely to stay on Wall
Street than other investment bankers. Rather than attracting people with marginal skill or interest
to Wall Street, bull markets push people towards a career they are as well suited to as those who
need less encouragement to work there. That is, bull markets create long-term investment bankers.
   These findings are consistent with a model where there is a large pool of MBAs in any given
Stanford class that would make good investment bankers and they are drawn into that field when
conditions are favorable. However, they only take the position due to the compensating diﬀerential
and would be nearly as happy taking a position in another industry. The results also suggest that
MBAs develop finance-specific human capital while in school and in their initial years on Wall Street,
which explains the persistence of initial sector choice. The empirical results are not consistent with
a model where there is significant heterogeneity in MBAs’ propensities to be investment bankers
and banks have to dig much deeper into this pool when bull markets increase their demand for
MBAs.
   The final empirical step shows that these eﬀects on career choice have large eﬀects on lifetime
labor income. I estimate the eﬀect of macroeconomic cohort eﬀects on the labor market income of
various GSB individuals and classes. Though the ability to estimate income diﬀerences precisely is
limited by the survey design, it is clear that investment bankers earn a substantial premium relative
to other GSB alumni. The premium varies from about 60% for a new MBA on Wall Street relative
to one in management consulting to over 300% for an investment banker fifteen years after leaving
Stanford relative to an average alumnus with the same amount of experience in any other industry.
Depending on assumptions about discount rates, length of career, and what other jobs people would
take if they had not gone to Wall Street, I estimate that a new MBA that goes to Wall Street can
expect between $2 million and $6 million in discounted additional lifetime income (using $1996)
relative to what he would earn if he took a job elsewhere. This premium can be interpreted in
various ways, but may simply reflect the disutility associated with working in investment banking
relative to other fields.
   An example of the “experiment” in this paper may help motivate the exercise. Members of the
Stanford MBA classes of 1988 and 1989, all of whom were in school during the stock market crash of
the Fall of 1987, were unlikely to take jobs on Wall Street relative to other classes. During the long
bull market that started a few years later, new MBAs returned to Wall Street in large numbers. But
few members of the classes of 1988 and 1989 moved into investment banking. Also, though unusually
large numbers of Stanford MBAs from mid-1980’s classes went to Wall Street, there is no evidence
that these graduates were less interested in (or committed to) Wall Street careers than those smaller
groups that went to Wall Street during the bear market. This suggests that many members of the


                                                  2
classes of 1988 and 1989 had significantly lower lifetime income (though not necessarily lower utility)
due to the timing of their graduation. Depending again on assumptions about career length and
the like, I estimate that stock return patterns between 1984 and 1989 transferred $120 million to
$300 million of discounted lifetime labor market income from the Stanford classes of 1988 and 1989
to the classes of 1986 and 1987.
   There have been numerous prior studies of how macroeconomic conditions when people enter
the labor market aﬀect their long-term outcomes. Typically, these papers study large samples
of people across a large set of occupations. Two potential weaknesses of these studies are that
many employees transition slowly into the labor force, making it diﬃcult to isolate a single “entry”
point, and that the average eﬀects in these large samples may mask interesting diﬀerences across
professions. I try to get around these issues by looking at a group of graduates who enter the
labor market at a predictable (and, as I argue in the analysis, exogenous) time. While Stanford
MBAs are surely not representative of the economy as a whole, they provide a useful example of
high-skilled “knowledge” workers.
   Two recent examples from the literature on cohort eﬀects using larger samples are Oreopoulos,
von Wachter and Heisz (2005) and Kahn (2005). Oreopoulos et al. (2005) look at the early careers
of Canadian college graduates. They find that graduating in a recession lowers wages early in
employees’ careers, though it does not have a noticeable eﬀect on employment. In their sample,
wage diﬀerences fade over the first ten years or so after graduation as those who graduated in
recessions move from small, low-paying firms to larger firms (and firms in higher-pay industries)
when the economy recovers. Kahn (2005) uses the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to study
U.S. college graduates in the classes of 1979-1988. She finds that macroeconomic conditions have
important wage eﬀects (which are more persistent than those found by Oreopoulos et al. (2005)).
Consistent with the findings in this paper, she attributes the long-term eﬀects to the types of jobs
(occupations) where graduates start.
   Other papers that look at the relationship between pay and macroeconomic conditions when jobs
start include Beaudry and DiNardo (1991), Devereaux (2004), and Baker, Gibbs and Holmstrom
(1994). Beaudry and DiNardo (1991) find that macroeconomic conditions at the time an employee
starts a job are related to wages, but that this relationship goes away when controlling for the
most favorable economic conditions (that is, the lowest unemployment rate) during the job spell.
Devereaux (2004) finds that workers who accept low-paying jobs are stuck with low wages for at
least several years, relative to observably equivalent workers. Those who switch jobs undo some
of the ill eﬀects of starting a job at the “wrong” time, but not all. Baker et al. (1994) examine a
single firm. They find that pay diﬀers for cohorts hired at diﬀerent times and that these diﬀerences


                                                  3
are persistent.
        Oyer (2005) looks at the importance of getting a “good” first job for another set of highly skilled
professionals — PhD economists. He shows that the sector of initial job placement (top research
institution, teaching institution, private sector, etc.) has a causal eﬀect on the sector of later job
placement. He also shows first placement at higher ranked research institutions leads people to
be more productive in terms of research output. Oyer (2005) and this paper both use the state
of the economy when professionals initially enter the labor market as an instrument for initial job
placement. Together, the papers lead to the conclusion that luck early in one’s career has important
long-term eﬀects on the sectors where many high-skill and highly paid people work, even in labor
markets where one might expect people to move relatively freely between firms.
        Though they comprise a large and growing segment of the labor market, there are surprisingly
few studies using micro-data focused on MBAs. Lazear (2005) and Hvide (2005), both of whom
use the same MBA dataset I use, focus on the decision to become an entrepreneur. Reder (1978)
and Tracy and Waldfogel (1997) study the determinants of starting salaries for newly graduated
MBA’s. I know of no prior academic studies that study compensation of MBAs beyond starting
salaries.1
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section lays out the theoretical background
for why initial placement might have long-term implications. Section 3 describes the data and
Section 4 analyzes how initial MBA placement is aﬀected by stock returns. Section 5 documents
a causal eﬀect of initial MBA placement on Wall Street on the likelihood of working there as the
person’s career develops. Section 6 estimates the amount of discounted lifetime labor market income
that exogenous shifts into or out of Wall Street careers create for aﬀected individuals and for MBA
cohorts as a whole. Section 7 concludes with a summary and suggestions for future research.


2        Theoretical Background

Consider a labor market with two sectors, the Financial (“f ”) sector and the General (“g”) sector.
Assume that, subject to expending some search eﬀort, any MBA can find employment in either of
these two sectors immediately after graduation. Then, as the person graduates, he compares the


    1
    There have been several academic studies of careers in a segment of what I define to be investment bankers
— mutual fund managers. Chevalier and Ellison (1999), for example, show that long-term career concerns aﬀect
mutual fund manager behavior. Brown, Harlow and Starks (1996) and Chevalier and Ellison (1997) analyze potential
conflicts of interest between investors and mutual fund managers. See Chen and Ritter (1995), Gompers and Lerner
(1999), Lin and McNichols (1998), and Michaely and Womack (1999), among others, for studies of the fees charged by
investment firms and potential conflicts of interest within these firms. These papers do not study pay of individuals,
however. See Stewart (1993) for an interesting discussion of the allocation of compensation at one investment bank.



                                                          4
expected utility streams from each of these sectors over the course of his future career. Let uf (wf0 )
be the expected utility, as of career year 0 (that is, upon graduation), of a career that starts in the
finance sector. The function captures the person’s disutility of eﬀort in the financial sector. The
w term captures the income stream he can expect from a career that starts in that sector.2 The
person may have various options (either oﬀers from multiple firms or a choice among the various
functions within an investment bank) within the financial sector, but this utility function captures
expectations about the job he believes to have the highest expected utility of his options in this
sector. Similarly, let ug (wg0 ) be the expected utility from his best option in the general sector.
       Naturally, the person will start in the financial sector if uf (wf0 ) > ug (wg0 ). If all graduating
MBAs were alike in terms of skill and preferences, then either all workers would go to one sector or
the wage diﬀerential would make employees exactly indiﬀerent between the two sectors and people
would sort randomly. In reality, skills and preferences diﬀer and people sort between the two sectors
based on this heterogeneity (as in Jovanovic (1979), Miller (1984), or McCall (1990).) As a result
of this heterogeneity, though the marginal graduate is indiﬀerent between the two sectors, some
(perhaps nearly all) graduates expect to strictly prefer the sector they choose.
       Though expected income streams in the two sectors may be correlated for any given cohort of
MBA graduates, the state of the stock market is likely to have a larger marginal eﬀect on expec-
tations about wf0 than income in the general sector. This is because favorable conditions on Wall
Street will increase demand for labor and, at least, short-term expected pay. Also, under the stan-
dard assumption that stock returns follow a random walk, any short-term change in stock market
conditions should increase long-term expectations about the level of stock prices.3 Therefore, given
that a bull market will increase uf (wf0 ) relative to ug (wg0 ) for some MBAs (and not decrease it
for any), it would not be a surprise to find that more people choose jobs in the financial sector in
classes that graduate when stock prices and returns are relatively high.
       The question of interest, however, is whether this initial eﬀect of a bull market on industry
choice is persistent. At year t, a person who took a job in the financial sector upon graduation
faces expected utility from staying in the financial sector of uf (wft ). He can also switch to the general
sector where he can expect utility of ug (wgt ). There are reasons to expect that, if uf (wf0 ) > ug (wg0 ),
then uf (wft ) will be greater than ug (wgt ). That is, people who show an initial preference for the
financial sector are likely to find the work there relatively pleasant and one would expect that to

   2
    The person can change sectors. So, w reflects the income in both sectors and the person’s expected probability
of working in each sector at any given time in the future.
   3
     Also, if MBAs make career decisions assuming momentum in stock prices (which would be consistent with the
retirement allocations studied by Benartzi (2001)), then high stock returns would encourage them to be more inclined
to take a job on Wall Street.


                                                         5
be the case later. There are three underlying models (or classes of model) that would predict those
who start in the financial sector are more likely to work there later on, each of which has distinct
empirical predictions:
      Model 1 — Worker Heterogeneity: Suppose employees diﬀer in “type”, as in the Spence (1973)
signaling model. Specifically, suppose that there are two types of people who are interested in
starting their careers in investment banking. The first type, “bankers”, will be highly productive
investment bankers because their skills match the production function well. “Non-bankers” have
a high marginal utility for money (and so seek the highest paying job possible no matter their
skills.) When times are lean on Wall Street, the second type shows less interest in working there
(that is, the expected value of wf is lower so they consider alternatives.) When conditions improve,
banking firms are reluctant to hire those who did not start their careers on Wall Street because they
have revealed themselves to be unproductive investment bankers. But, when hiring new MBAs,
they have no method for separating the productive bankers from the non-bankers. After some time
working on Wall Street, the non-bankers are revealed (after a period of enjoying a high income) and
they are either fired or choose to move to the general sector. This model predicts that bankers end
up in banking and non-bankers do not, no matter when they enter the market. Therefore, though
it implies that there would be a correlation between between starting in banking and working there
subsequently, there is no causal eﬀect of first job on subsequent jobs..
      Model 2 — Homogeneous workers with Investment-Banking Specific Human Capital : Suppose
there is a large pool of MBAs that would be productive investment bankers.4 Much of this pool
is nearly indiﬀerent between the two sectors, given the expected income diﬀerences over time.
However, anticipating opportunities in banking, those who go to school during bull markets develop
Wall-Street-specific human capital both in school and at the beginning of their post-graduation
careers.
      To be a little more concrete, consider the model in Gibbons and Waldman (2006). They model
“task-specific human capital” and show that it can lead to long-term eﬀects of initial job placement
on the types of jobs workers hold. In their model, those hired under favorable conditions are
initially given high value tasks and develop more valuable human capital that persists throughout
their careers. A similar idea, industry-specific human capital, has been shown to be important in the
labor market generally (see, for example, Parent (2000)) and it is often cited as a primary reason
that wage losses can be quite high for displaced workers (see Neal (1995).) Therefore, finance-
specific skill may widen the gap between wft and wgt as a career in the financial sector continues


  4
      This group need not be the entire MBA class, but enough to meet hiring demands during bull markets.



                                                        6
(that is, as t increases.)5
       Finance-specific human capital would lead those who go to Wall Street to be relatively produc-
tive there and would lead to a causal link between starting a career on Wall Street and working
there later on. Homogeneity implies that those who go to Wall Street during bull markets would
not be noticeably diﬀerent from those who go to Wall Street during bear markets. As a result,
even though the entering pool of bankers would be larger in bull markets, they would not be any
less prone to success in banking than those who choose to go to Wall Street during a bear market
(in stark contrast to Model 1.) This would lead to the empirical prediction that those hired during
bear markets would be as likely to stay in investment banking as those hired in bull markets and
that those hired in bull markets would be no less able (in terms of finance training and interest)
than those hired in bear markets.
       Model 3 — Some Heterogeneity and Some Specific Human Capital (“Hybrid Model”): It seems
unlikely that the world is as stark as either of the two models just sketched. So consider a world
where there is heterogeneity in how well MBAs are suited to work in banking and where bankers
develop Wall-Street-specific capital. During bull markets, increased demand for MBAs would lead
to the marginal hire being less fit for a career in banking. However, because these lower-fit bankers
develop finance-specific human capital, at least some of them stay because their specific capital
makes them better bankers than new graduates who are naturally better fits. That is, like Model
2, the hybrid model makes the empirical prediction that specific human capital will cause those
who start their careers on Wall Street to be more likely to work there later on, even controlling for
ability or fit. However, unlike Model 2, given suﬃcient heterogeneity, banks would replace the worst
fits hired in a bull market with the best fits available during a bear market. This distinction leads
to the prediction that new MBAs who go to Wall Street during bull markets will be, on average,
less fit for careers in banking than new bankers who graduate in bear markets.
       In the sections that follow, I investigate the predictions of these three models. First, I show
that new MBAs are more likely to go to Wall Street during bull markets, which is an important
assumption of each model. Second, I show that those who go from Stanford Business School directly
to Wall Street are more likely to work on Wall Street later in their careers, which is consistent with
each of the models. Then, using Wall Street conditions while MBAs are in school as an instrument


   5
     While I will discuss specific human capital as though it is a productivity investment, it could simply be the result
of lower transaction costs. For example, models where incumbent firms have more information about an individual
than other potential employers (such as Akerlof (1970) and Waldman (1984)) or pure search cost models would lead
to “stickiness” in choice of industry. The cost of search, any cost of switching industries, or aversion to the risk of
unknown features of the general sector will lower ugt (wg ) for any employee in the financial sector in the same way
that specific finance skills raise uft (wf ). Another related alternative with the same implications is that, as workers
get accustomed to a job, the disutility of eﬀort may decline.


                                                           7
for first job, I show that the link between initial placement and later employment on Wall Street
is causal in the sense that an MBA who starts on Wall Street is more likely to work there later
because he started his career there. I also show evidence that suggests that those who take jobs
on Wall Street after graduating in bull markets are no less interested or tied to Wall Street As I
explain in Section 5.2, the evidence suggests that random factors play an important long-term role
in MBA careers and that model 2 most closely matches the patterns in the data. I then go on to
measure the magnitude of the eﬀects of these random shocks.


3    Data

The data is based on a mail survey of Stanford Graduate School of Business (GSB) Alumni. The
survey was conducted in 1996 and 1998 and had a response rate of approximately 40%. Survey
respondents provided detailed job histories, including jobs before they entered Stanford’s MBA
program. I use information gathered from members of the GSB classes of 1960 through 1995. I
dropped any job where the person worked less than half time. If the person reported two jobs
simultaneously, I use the one which he reports working more hours. If the hours are the same, I use
the job where salary information is available.
    Table 1 provides summary statistics of all post-graduation person/year observations, as well as
details on each person’s job the year after graduation and at the time of the survey. Observations
in this table and throughout the analysis are a snapshot of the person’s job as of the end of January
of each year.6
    Respondents also provided details on the industries where they worked. I define investment
banking (or, in some tables and figures “I-bank”) broadly to include investment banking, investment
management, and venture capital. The final column of Table 1 provides information about all
person/year observations within this industry. Men and non-minorities are slightly over-represented
in this group. Investment banking has become more common over time. However, as will become
clear below, the fraction in investment banking does not change noticeably with age or years of
experience (unlike, for example, management consulting, which is much more likely to be a first job
than a job held later in a career.) The investment bankers as a whole are somewhat more likely to
have founded the business where they work than the rest of the sample. This is because venture


   6
     Columns 1 and 4 include all relevant person/year observations for a given person while the middle columns
include at most one observation per person. Because older people have, on average, more years of data, the data in
columns 1 and 4 are weighted towards earlier graduates. Column 2 does not include people who were unemployed in
the January after graduation and Column 3 does not include those who were unemployed (usually due to retirement)
at the time of the survey.



                                                        8
                                      Total    First Job   Survey Job    I-bank Jobs
               Female                 11.6%    19.3%       19.0%         10.4%
               Work in USA            86.1%    83.2%       83.2%         86.6%
               Minority               7.3%     12.2%       11.9%         6.8%
               Investment Banking     14.5%    14.2%       18.3%         100%
               Consulting             10.7%    18.6%       13.6%         0%
               High Technology        10.6%    10.9%       12.0%         0%
               Partner/Owner          24.9%    7.6%        31.4%         33.8%
               Founder                11.4%    2.9%        15.9%         13.6%
               Employees (median)     1,000    2,000       450           500
               Salary > $50,000       77.8%    41.4%       93.4%         89.5%
               Salary > $100,000      47.8%    5.6%        71.3%         76.1%
               Salary > $500,000      9.0%     0.1%        13.7%         31.5%
               Graduation Year        1973.5   1980.4      1980.1        1975.5
               Age                    39.6     29.4        44.4          39.1
               Total Person/years     62,115   3,782       3,886         8,844

Table 1: MBA Sample Summary Statistics. “First Job” is the job the person held in the January
after graduating. “Survey Job” is the job held when answering the survey in 1996 or 1998. “I-bank
Jobs” is the subset of column 1 person/years where the respondent was employed for an investment
bank, a money manager, or a a venture capital firm. “Employees” is the number of employees at
the firm where the respondent worked.


capitalists and money managers are much more likely to be founders, while those who work for
investment banks are less than half as likely as the rest of the sample to be founders.
   The usefulness of the income data is limited in three ways. First, the survey asked people their
salaries. Individuals may have interpreted this question diﬀerently, with some including bonuses and
the value of equity. But the reported numbers are likely understatements of labor market earnings
as a whole. Second, the survey asked for the beginning and ending (or current, if the person holds
the job at the time of the survey) salary on each job. Therefore, I cannot create a dataset with
person/year income information. I primarily rely on the cross-section of income information at
the time of the survey. Finally, the survey provided categorical answers to the income questions.
Respondents could either say that the relevant salary was under $50,000, between $50K and $75K,
between $75K and $100K, between $100K and $150K, between $150K and $200K, between $200K
and $300K, between $300K and $400K, between $400K and $500K, between $500K and $750K,
between $750K and $1 million, between $1 million and $2 million, and over $2 million. In the
analysis that follows, I assume the person’s income is the mid-point of the reported range and that
it is $3 million if the person reports income greater than $2 million.
   Despite these limitations, there are two indications that the data are reasonably accurate. First
of all, the average starting salaries for the class of 1995 reported by the Stanford GSB career oﬃce


                                                  9
is approximately equal to the average I calculated from the survey. Retrospective salary data may
not be as accurate, but I only use the wages reported at the time of the survey. Second, the fraction
of each class that the GSB career oﬃce reported taking an initial job in investment banking closely
tracks the fraction of each class that I calculated using retrospective job information. For the GSB
classes of 1976-1994 (the classes for which I have information from both the career oﬃce and the
survey), the correlation between the fraction of the class starting in investment banking based on
my calculations and on surveys by the career oﬃce at the time of graduation is 0.84. Given that
both surveys were voluntary and the industry choices varied from year-to-year in the career oﬃce
survey, this is a very high correlation.
       To get a sense of the dynamics of movement between industries for the respondents, Table
2 shows transitions into and out of investment banking for the first 14 years after graduating.
Graduates are listed as moving into investment banking in year 1 if they worked in the industry
right after graduation but had never worked in that industry before getting an MBA. Those who
move out of the industry in year 1 worked there at some point before school but did not take a job
in the industry upon receiving an MBA. In subsequent years, movement in or out simply indicates
that the person switched industries during the year.
       In the first few years after receiving MBAs, 5-10% of the people in investment banking leave
or were not in the industry the year before. Movement slows after about year five. Movement into
the industry is somewhat higher than exit in the first few years after graduation, but the fraction
of a typical graduating class that works in investment banking does not change sharply as time
progresses.
       Aside from the GSB survey, I also use macroeconomic data and data on the initial placement
of MBAs graduating from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School. I define the 2-year
S&P return for a given MBA class as the percentage change in the S&P 500 in the two-year period
through the end of June when the person graduates. This measure has the nice feature that, with
very few exceptions, it is fully determined during the period after the person has decided to enter
Stanford’s MBA program. Though it is currently common for MBA students to accept oﬀers well
before the actual graduation date, I focus on classes graduating in 1995 and earlier when recruiting
season ran closer to graduation. I also measure the unemployment rate as of June of the year of
graduation. For the Wharton classes of 1973 and later, I define a variable that is the fraction of each
class that went into investment banking. This information is based on surveys of each graduating
class done by Wharton’s career oﬃce.7


   7
    Because Wharton changed the way it reported (and, perhaps, the way it calculated) the fraction going into
investment banking starting with the class of 1984, I include a “class of 1984 or later” indicator variable in any


                                                       10
                     Post-MBA Year              Sample   I-bank   I-bank in    I-bank out
                     1                           3,754     533       362           173
                     2                           3,613     512        32            18
                     3                           3,459     493        46            26
                     4                           3,326     489        46            17
                     5                           3,143     486        52            28
                     6                           3,005     471        27            21
                     7                           2,877     445        27            23
                     8                           2,723     425        24            15
                     9                           2,584     398        20            20
                     10                          2,475     380        19            13
                     11                          2,371     356        13            16
                     12                          2,264     333        16            15
                     13                          2,156     305        15            11
                     14                          2,061     291        17             6

Table 2: MBA Transitions. “I-Bank” is the total number of people working at an investment bank,
money manager, or venture capital firm. The “in” column lists the number of people who moved
to the relevant type of firm a given number of years after receiving MBAs and “out” column lists
the number who moved out of the type of firm. Year 1 in/out refers to change relative to pre-MBA
job. Sample size changes because the last observation for a given person is the year of the survey
(1996 or 1998).


4        Initial Job Placement

Figure 1 shows how the fraction of graduates whose initial placement is at an investment bank
(normalized to one for the class of 1994) rises and falls with the two-year return on the S&P 500
as of June of the year of graduation. The graph shows that the fraction of graduates taking jobs
on Wall Street is at least somewhat responsive to recent stock market returns. The graph shows
that graduates went to Wall Street in large numbers as the market boomed in the mid-1980’s. But,
after the market crash of 1987, there was a noticeable drop in the fraction of graduates going to
Wall Street. This fraction dropped again during the recession (and weak stock market) of the early
1990’s.8
        One potential problem with interpreting Figure 1 would be if people who wanted to work in
investment banking somehow timed the market. Also, if there were predictable cycles in Wall
Street hiring and the market, then one might worry that a cohort’s interest is correlated with stock
returns rather than their first position being driven by it. If the stock market is anywhere close


analysis where I use the Wharton career data.
    8
    Details on the initial placement of Stanford MBAs from the classes of 1997-2005, including industry and com-
pensation details, can be found at http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/cmc/reports/index.html.


                                                         11
                       1.5
                       1
                       .5
                       0
                       -.5




                             1970   1975         1980       1985        1990         1995
                                                    MBA Class
                                       Inv. Bank job        2-year S&P 500 Retur n




         Figure 1: Stock Returns During School and Investment Banking Job Placement


to “perfect” and a random walk, then this concern is not an issue. Nevertheless, I deal with this
potential issue in several ways. First, throughout the analysis below, I will control for pre-MBA
investment bank experience when looking at post-MBA job selection. Second, consider Figure 2,
which shows the relationship between the fraction of an MBA cohort that worked in investment
banking before school and stock returns while the cohort was in school. The graph shows that
there has been a gradual trend up in terms of the fraction of pre-MBA investment bankers. But
the year-to-year changes in the two lines are generally unrelated, with the possible exception that
many investment bankers returned to school when the market crashed in 1987.
   While these figures provide evidence that there is a relationship between stock returns while
students are in school and their first job, I will now be more precise in investigating this relationship
as it forms the first-stage of the instrumental variables analyses that follow. Define Fit to be an
indicator for whether person i who enters the job market in year t starts his career in investment
banking. Following the notation in Section 2, Fit = 1 if uf0 (wf ) > ug0 (wg ). Fit is observable in the
survey data, so I estimate logistic regressions of the form


                                           Fit = G(θt , Xit , Ψi )                                   (1)

where θt is a measure of demand for MBAs in investment banking in year t, X is a vector of
observable characteristics (linear, quadratic, and third-power time trends, gender, and ethnicity),


                                                       12
                           1
                           .5
                           0
                           -.5




                                 1970    1975         1980       1985          1990          1995
                                                         MBA Class
                                        Pre-MBA Inv. Bank job           2-year S& P 500 Return




                            Figure 2: Stock Returns and Pre-MBA Employment


and Ψi includes unobservable individual characteristics that aﬀect the demand by investment banks
for the person’s services and the person’s preferences for working in investment banking relative to
other industries. The main measure of market demand (θ) is the two-year S&P 500 return through
the end of June of the year the person graduates, but I also use the one-year return ending at
the same time, the national unemployment as of the same June, and the fraction of the relevant
graduating class from Wharton that initially placed in investment banking.9
    The results are shown in Table 3.10 Column 1 establishes the basic relationship between stock
returns and MBA placement. It shows that, in a year when the S&P 500 increases by 18.5% (one
standard deviation) relative to another year, a typical Stanford graduate’s probability of entering
investment banking increases by about two percentage points. Given a base probability of 14%,
this means that a one standard deviation increase in stock returns increases initial investment bank
employment likelihood by about one seventh. While the state of the stock market is certainly not
the only factor that determines whether a person works in investment banking or not, it is an
important predictor.

   9
     The measures of θ do not vary within a graduating class, so all standard errors are clustered at the class level. I
also tried the analysis taking the more conservative approach of averaging at the graduating class level. This did not
alter any of the conclusions that follow.
  10
     Table 3 displays the results of logistic regressions that are basically the first-stage regressions in IV analyses
below. In that analysis, I actually use linear probability models. The results (in terms of the significance of the
estimates and the marginal eﬀects of the coeﬃcients) are nearly identical.


                                                           13
                               (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
       2-year S&P return     0.0991     0.1026      0.0851       0.3055                -0.0044
                            (0.0309)   (0.0331)    (0.0335)     (0.1098)              (0.0642)
       Pre-MBA I-bank                   0.2026     Dropped       Others     0.2366     0.2356
                                       (0.0139)                 Dropped    (0.0183)   (0.0183)
       Wharton I-bank                                                       0.5697     0.5642
                                                                           (0.1757)   (0.1613)
       Unemployment                                                                    -0.0121
                                                                                      (0.0062)
       1-year S&P return                                                               0.0474
                                                                                      (0.0488)
       Pseudo R2             0.0442     0.1178         0.0257   0.0421     0.1278     0.1293
       N (People)            3,547      3,547          3,230     317       2,410      2,410

Table 3: Initial Placement in Investment Banking. Coeﬃcients are marginal eﬀects on probabil-
ity, using a logit, where the dependent variables are indicators for the person being employed in
investment banking (including money management and venture capital) as of the January after
graduation. Each regression also controls for gender, ethnicity (through indicators for Black, His-
panic, and Asian), year, year squared, and year to the third. “Pre-MBA I-bank” equals one if,
before starting MBA studies, the person ever worked in investment banking. “Wharton I-bank” is
the fraction of graduating Wharton MBAs that took jobs in investment banking in a the year the
Stanford MBA graduated. It is only available for the class of 1975 and later, so the sample size
is smaller. Unemployment is the national average unemployment rate as of June of the year the
person graduated. The S&P returns are through June of the year the person graduated. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for any correlation within graduating class.




                                                  14
   Column 2 shows that those who worked in banking before getting an MBA are much more
likely than other students to work in investment banking immediately after graduating but that
controlling for pre-MBA industry does not change the relationship between stock returns and first
job. Column 3 limits the sample to those who did not work in banking before getting an MBA and
shows a similar eﬀect of stock returns on first job. This is not surprising, given that over 90% of
the sample in columns 1 and 2 is also in the column 3 sample.
   Column 4 limits the sample to the nine percent of the sample that worked for an investment
bank before entering the Stanford GSB. The estimated eﬀect of stock returns on this sample is
noticeably larger than for the broader sample. A one standard deviation increase in the S&P 500
return increases the probability of one of these graduates returning to investment banking by about
six percentage points. This diﬀerence compared to the full sample is to be expected for at least
two reasons. First, the unconditional probability of this group going back to investment banking
immediately after graduation is about 50%. So the increase of six percentage points is about
the same proportionately as the two percentage points for the larger sample. Second, a typical
Stanford GSB class includes a large fraction of people that would not seriously consider seeking a
job in investment banking. For these people, uf (wf0 ) is always less than ug (wg0 ), no matter what
the level of θt . These people attenuate any eﬀect of θ in columns 1-3 of Table 3.
   Column 5 shows the relationship between Stanford MBAs going to Wall Street and Wharton
MBAs going to Wall Street. The sample size is smaller because the Wharton placement data is
only available for the classes of 1975 and later. There is clearly a very strong correlation between
the fraction of graduating MBAs from the two schools that go to Wall Street. As one might
expect, when there is more Wall Street demand for Stanford MBAs and/or Stanford MBAs are
more interested in Wall Street, the same holds for Wharton MBAs.
   Finally, column 6 shows that is worth controlling for more than just the two-year return. The
positive coeﬃcient on the one-year return suggests that, while stock returns at any point while the
person is in school matter, returns in the second year of the program may matter more. Also, when
unemployment is high, employment on Wall Street is less common. I use all three macroeconomic
explanatory variables in column 6 as instruments for taking an initial job in investment banking.
   In addition to the explanatory variables in Table 3, I will also instrument for initial job choice
with a set of indicator variables for each graduating class. This allows the first stage to be estimated
less parametrically than the estimates in Table 3, which is advantageous because the class indicators
explain quite a bit more variation than the variables used in the Table. By way of comparison,
the pseudo-R2 in a logit with indicators for each class is 13%, or more than three times the level
in column 1. The R2 statistics for parallel linear probability regressions are similar to the logit


                                                  15
pseudo-R2 .
    Given that the fraction of a class that goes to Wall Street fluctuates significantly from year to
year, it might seem reasonable to think that there are important diﬀerences in the types of MBAs
that go to Wall Street in good times and in bad times. Bull markets attract many extra students
to Wall Street and one might expect these “marginal” graduates to be less interested in finance
than those who go to Wall Street when times are leaner. That is, assuming bull markets raise all
students’ estimates of uf (wf0 ), both models 1 and 3 in Section 2 suggest that the marginal student
for whom uf (wf0 ) roughly equals ug (wg0 ) will be less of a natural fit for a Wall Street career. To
investigate this idea, I matched survey responses by members of the classes of 1984-1995 with the
classes they took as students at Stanford GSB. Given that the available data only includes twelve
years, the macroeconomic variation is not as great as one might hope and I will not present formal
analyses. However, it appears that students who went to school during strong stock markets took
more finance classes and that this is especially true among those who went on to be investment
bankers. Finance enrollments dropped dramatically after the Fall of 1987 stock market crash.
While the data do not allow a great deal of statistical precision, it is clearly NOT the case that
those who went to Wall Street during the bull markets of the mid-1980’s and early 1990’s were less
prepared for finance careers than those that went to Wall Street in the bear markets of 1988-1989
and 1993-1994.
    In summary, stock returns while Stanford MBAs are in school has a statistically and econom-
ically significant eﬀect on the likelihood that they work in investment banking immediately after
graduating. That is, exogenous shocks aﬀect the initial career choices of this sample. In the rest of
the paper, I examine how long these shocks go on aﬀecting the graduates and whether it has any
eﬀects on their incomes.


5     Initial Conditions and Long-Term Outcomes

5.1   Persistence in Investment Banking

Figure 3 provides an initial look at how first job after MBA graduation is related to jobs held
later. The graph shows the fraction of each graduating class that initially takes a job in investment
banking and then what fraction of the class works in banking for up to ten years after graduation.
As the graph shows, classes where a relatively large set of people go into banking still have a
high fraction in banking at any given year over this first post-graduation decade. For example,
among those classes where there was a substantial drop in people entering investment banking in
the late 1980’s after the crash of 1987, representation on Wall Street remained low over the entire


                                                 16
                                                           .3
                      Frac tio n in Inve stm ent Ba nki ng
                               .1          0 .2




                                                                70   75            80          85          90           95
                                                                                     MBA Class
                                                                     First Year Pos t-Graduation          Fourth Year
                                                                     Seventh Year                         Tenth Year




            Figure 3: Fraction of Class in Investment Banking 1-10 Years After MBA


available sample. While this suggests that an exogenous shock has long-term eﬀects on human
capital investments and careers, I now consider this issue more formally.
   I model MBA i’s industry as of year t by updating equation (1) to


                                                                          Fit = G(θt , Xit , Ψi , Fi0 )                      (2)

where Fi0 is an indicator for whether the person worked in investment banking in the first year
after graduation. OLS or a simple logit will not reveal the causal eﬀect of Fi0 on Fit because an
individual with an appropriate set of skills and/or tastes for a given industry will be more likely to
both start in and eventually work in that industry.
   However, to establish the basic relationship between initial and long-term investment bank
employment that is predicted by all three models discussed in Section 2, I start by studying the re-
lationships between long-term investment banking attachment, initial investment bank placement,
and stock returns while in school. This provides a useful benchmark to compare with the IV esti-
mates below and allows me to see how the basic relationship between initial and later employment
(Fi0 and Fit ) varies with the state of the market at graduation (θt ). I run OLS regressions where an
observation is a person/year at least two and a half years after the person graduates from Stanford.
The dependent variable is one if the person is an investment banker at the time of the observation
and zero otherwise. Results are in Table 4.


                                                                                       17
                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
            Initially I-Bank                     0.7881      0.8072     0.7628     0.7764
                                                (0.0157)    (0.0279)   (0.0242)   (0.0227)
            I-Bank Pre-MBA                       0.0454      0.0607     0.0346     0.0257
                                                (0.0178)    (0.0176)   (0.0450)   (0.0486)
            State of Market at Graduation       All Years    Bull      Average     Bear
            N (observations)                     49,920     21,087      10,641    18,192
            N (people)                           3,313      1,787        511       1,015

Table 4: Industry of Longer-Term Job. All columns are results of linear probability regressions. The
dependent variable, which is based on a person’s job as of the end of January in a year at least two
and a half years after graduation from Stanford GSB, equals one if the person works in investment
banking (including money management or venture capital.) “Initially I-Bank” equals one if the
person was working in investment banking in the January after graduation. “I-Bank Pre-MBA”
equals one if the person worked in investment banking before studying at Stanford GSB. “Bull”
market indicates the two-year average annual return of the S&P 500 was greater than 13% while
the person attended Stanford GSB. “Bear” market indicates annual return of less than 5%. Each
regression includes indicator variables for gender, Black, Hispanic, Asian, year of observation, and
years since graduation. Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for any correlation within a
graduating class.


   As expected, there is a strong relationship between Fi0 and Fit . The probability that a person
who starts in investment banking will work there in a later year is about eighty percentage points
higher than someone who starts elsewhere. Controlling for starting in investment banking after
business school, the relationship between working in investment banking before business school and
working there later is small.
   I repeat the analysis dividing the sample into groups that were in school when returns were
above the sample average (bull markets), when returns were below an approximation of the risk
free rate (bear markets), and other years (average markets.) The most noteworthy result in Table
4 is the consistency of the relationship between starting in investment banking and working there
later. Columns (2)-(4) show that the eighty percentage point diﬀerence holds no matter what the
conditions of the market when the person graduated. To the extent that there is any diﬀerence at
all, it appears that those who go to Wall Street during bull markets are the most attached while the
sorting model would predict the opposite. Combined with the suggestive evidence on finance class
enrollments in the last section, this indicates that there is no evidence that bull markets attract
less qualified or less interested candidates.
   I now estimate the causal eﬀect of starting in investment banking (Fi0 ) on working there later
(Fit ) by using instruments for Fi0 . I use either the macro variables from column 5 of Table 3 or
a set of indicator variables for each graduating class. The macroeconomic proxies for demand for

                                                  18
new MBA’s have the ideal features of valid instruments. The return on the S&P 500 and the
unemployment rate aﬀect initial placement of MBA’s, as shown in Table 3, but I see no reason they
would aﬀect where they work later except through the eﬀect on initial placement.
       As mentioned above, year indicators are more powerful instruments. If this is because the class
indicators are more flexible and direct measures of demand for MBAs in a given year, then they
constitute a valuable instrument. That is, if classes of Stanford MBAs are generally similar in
skills and interests, at least controlling for pre-MBA industry, then the class indicators are valid
instruments because they capture diﬀerences in career prospects and demand by employment sector.
However, if there are important diﬀerences from year to year in the types of people admitted to
Stanford, then this may not be a valid approach. The fact that all the MBA results are not generally
sensitive to controlling for pre-MBA experience and that the results are generally similar (though
less precisely estimated) when using stock return and unemployment as instruments is somewhat
comforting, but it is still important to bear in mind the underlying assumptions when using the
class indicators as instruments.
       I also use the fraction of MBAs graduating from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton
School that went into investment banking as an instrument. This gets around some of the potential
problems with using class indicators as instruments, while hopefully capturing supply and demand
features of the MBA/investment bank match in a given year that are not captured by the macro-
economic variables. Unless Wharton and Stanford changed their admissions and recruiting policies
in a similar way or the types of people that applied to top MBA programs changed systematically
(neither of which is impossible), initial Wharton placement should be correlated with initial Stan-
ford placement but not longer-term Stanford career choice. Because the Wharton information is
only available after the class of 1973, the sample size is reduced when using this instrument.
       Two-stage least squares (that is, linear probability with instrumental variables) estimates of
equation (2) with instruments for Fi0 are displayed in Table 5.11 Panel A uses the two S&P returns
and unemployment as instruments for first job after graduation. Column 1, which includes all
available person/years, shows that a person who takes a job on Wall Street upon graduation has
about a 50% higher probability of working on Wall Street in a later year than someone whose first job
is elsewhere. Column 2 shows that controlling for pre-MBA experience makes the eﬀect of initial
Wall Street employment statistically insignificant, though the coeﬃcient is also not statistically
diﬀerent from the coeﬃcient in Column 1.
       Columns 3 and 4 of Panel A show that the eﬀect is more precisely estimated, and stronger, for


  11
   The linear probability specification is relatively simple to implement and keeps the interpretation straight-forward.
Angrist (2001) argues that linear probability is an appropriate empirical approach in contexts such as this.


                                                          19
                                         (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)

                  Panel A: Macro Instruments
                  Initially I-Bank  0.4982   0.4166          0.3299     0.7819
                                   (0.2411) (0.2879)        (0.4402)   (0.1400)
                  I-Bank Pre-MBA                  0.2081    Dropped     Others
                                                 (0.1359)              Dropped
                  N (observations)     49,920     49,920     47,860      2,060
                  N (people)            3,313     3,313       3,052       261

                  Panel B: Wharton and Macro Instruments
                  Initially I-Bank  0.8669   0.8793   0.9228            0.8295
                                   (0.1164) (0.1348) (0.1913)          (0.1146)
                  I-Bank Pre-MBA                  0.0295    Dropped     Others
                                                 (0.0576)              Dropped
                  N (observations)     18,658     18,658     17,229      1,429
                  N (people)            2,101     2,101       1,865       236

                  Panel C: Class Instruments
                  Initially I-Bank  0.7751   0.7959          0.8372     0.9654
                                   (0.0777) (0.0771)        (0.0941)   (0.0537)
                  I-Bank Pre-MBA                  0.0420    Dropped     Others
                                                 (0.0396)              Dropped
                  N (observations)     49,920     49,920     47,860      2,060
                  N (people)            3,313     3,313       3,052       261

Table 5: Industry of Longer-Term Job. All results are based on two-stage least squares linear
probability regressions. The dependent variable, which is based on a person’s job as of the end
of January in a year at least two and a half years after graduation from Stanford GSB, equals
one if the person works in investment banking (including money management or venture capital.)
“Initially I-Bank” equals one if the person was working in investment banking in the January after
graduation. “I-Bank Pre-MBA” equals one if the person worked in investment banking before
studying at Stanford GSB. “Macro” instruments for “Initially I-Bank”, which are all measured as
of time of MBA graduation, are 1-year and 2-year S&P return, and the national unemployment
rate. “Class” instruments is a set of graduating year indicator variables. “Wharton” instrument is
the fraction of new Wharton graduates that took investment banking jobs in the year the Stanford
MBA graduated. It is only available for the class of 1975 and later, so the sample size is smaller.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for any correlation within a graduating class.




                                                20
those who worked on Wall Street before studying at Stanford than on the rest of the sample. For
the pre-MBA Wall Street sample, returning to Wall Street right after going to Stanford makes the
person 78% more likely to work there in any given later year. For the non-Wall Street pre-MBA
sample, the estimated coeﬃcient is still fairly large, but it is very imprecisely estimated. Overall,
Panel A indicates that there is a strong causal eﬀect of initial Wall Street employment on longer-
term Wall Street employment and that this eﬀect is focused on the subset of the class that worked
on Wall Street before getting an MBA.
   Panel B repeats the analysis adding the Wharton placement instrument for first jobs. This
makes the estimates in Panel B more precise than those that use only the macroeconomic instru-
ments. Though the coeﬃcients are somewhat higher than in Panel A, the economic conclusions
are unchanged. However, if Wharton placement is a valid instrument, the causal eﬀect of initial
investment bank employment on later investment bank employment is strongly significant for the
sample as a whole and both subsamples. Finally, Panel C shows the results when using the class
indicators as instruments. The coeﬃcients and significance levels are very similar to the Panel B
results.
   Overall, Table 5 provides strong evidence that getting a job in investment banking has a strong
causal eﬀect of working in investment banking later among the subset of MBAs that has already
shown an interest in working on Wall Street. The eﬀect for the rest of the class ranges anywhere
from zero to the same as for the pre-MBA investment bankers, depending on one’s confidence in
using Wharton’s placement or the class indicator variables to instrument for taking an initial Wall
Street job.
   While Table 5 makes it clear that initial placement in investment banking is sticky, the eﬀects in
the table are averaged over all career years for the sample. To see how this eﬀect varies over time,
I ran a series of IV regressions similar to those in column 1 of Table 5 with each regression limiting
the sample to person/years a specific number of years after graduation. Figure 4 graphs the IV
coeﬃcient on the “Initially I-Bank” variable for each year. For example, when running the same
regression as in Column 1 of Panel A of Table 5, but limiting the sample to person/year observations
as of the fourth January after a given person receives his MBA, the coeﬃcient is 0.726 and the
95% confidence interval for this coeﬃcient spans from 0.488 to 0.963. Given the nature of the
sample, the sample size gets smaller as the number of years since graduation increases. Therefore,
the estimates get less precise moving to the right on the Figure. However, the figure makes clear
that, for the first decade or more after graduation, those who go from Stanford to Wall Street are
much more likely to work there than those who start in another industry. The coeﬃcients for years




                                                 21
                 1.4



                                       Dashed lines show bounds of 95% confidence
                 1.2                        interval for each year's coefficient




                  1




                 0.8


                                                                                      2SLS Coefficient for "Initially I-bank"
                 0.6                                                                  where sample is limited to those who
                                                                                     are a given number of years post-MBA



                 0.4




                 0.2




                  0
                         4         5            6              7               8                9                10             11
                                                            Years Since Graduation




Figure 4: Year-by-Year IV Estimates of Eﬀect of Initial I-Bank Placement on I-Bank Employment


twelve and higher are quite similar (all are at least 0.4 and most are near one), but noisy.12
    The overall message from Tables 3 and 5, as well as Figure 4, is clear. Stock market returns
while Stanford MBAs are in school have an important eﬀect on whether or not many of them go
from Stanford to a job on Wall Street. If they do go to Wall Street, even for “random” reasons
driven by stock market conditions, they are much more likely to work there at any given point later
in their careers than if they do not go to Wall Street. While people move in and out of investment
banking after they enter the labor force, where they start matters a great deal. It appears that
this eﬀect is stronger for those most likely to be interested in working on Wall Street (that is, those
who worked there before going to Stanford.)


5.2    Interpretation

The key empirical results so far can be summarized as follows. High stock returns while an MBA
is in school have a sizeable eﬀect on the likelihood that the MBA will go to Wall Street upon
graduation. MBAs who start their career on Wall Street are more likely to work there later on.


  12
     Graphs similar to Figure 4, but based on regressions with Wharton placement or class indicators as instruments,
generally have coeﬃcients that are closer to one and precisely estimated.


                                                                22
This relationship does not vary with the state of the market at graduation, so those who go to
Wall Street during bull markets are not less attached to Wall Street than those who go during bear
markets. The relationship is causal, in that those who go to Wall Street right after graduation are
more likely to work there later because they started their careers on Wall Street. The relationship is
particularly strong (or at least particularly precisely estimated) for those who have already shown
an interest in finance by working on Wall Street before pursuing an MBA.
   The combination of these results suggests that the pool of potential investment bankers in
a typical Stanford MBA is relatively homogeneous and that those who go to Wall Street make
important finance-specific investments. That is, the patterns in the data most closely match “Model
2” presented in Section 2. The data are consistent with a labor market where a large number of
Stanford MBAs could be successful investment bankers, Wall Street firms demand more people
when the stock market is doing well, and the wage diﬀerence between investment banking and
other jobs is a compensating diﬀerential that roughly oﬀsets the unpleasant parts of being an
investment banker. This would explain the findings that the relationship between initially working
on Wall Street and working there later is not dependent on the state of the stock market when
MBAs graduate and that MBAs who go to Wall Street during bull markets are no less interested
or successful in finance-related MBA classes than those who go during bear markets. That is, I
found no evidence that the lucrative oﬀers during bull markets attract those who are less able or
less interested in investment banking to start their careers on Wall Street.
   Given the causal relationship between initial Wall Street jobs and long-term Wall Street jobs,
the patterns in the data also indicate that Stanford MBAs build up significant “task-specific human
capital” (as in Gibbons and Waldman (2006)) while in school and very quickly after leaving school.
That is, people who go to school during bull markets invest in finance classes at Stanford and
in valuable on-the-job training shortly after graduation. This increases the wage diﬀerential they
enjoy in banking relative to other fields and may also lower some of the disutility of investment
banking work. This model is supported by the informal analysis of classes discussed in Section 4.
It appears that students who were at Stanford during bull markets built finance-specific human
capital that got them started in finance careers. The long-term career results in Section 5 suggest
that they continued building finance-related human capital upon starting work on Wall Street.
   The fact that first jobs are so closely related to macroeconomic conditions appears, at first
inspection, to also be consistent with a simple signaling story (“Model 1” in Section 2.) In that
model, there are two types of people (bankers and non-bankers) that are interested in starting
their careers in investment banking — one because they are good at the work and one because they
like the money. Bear markets separate the two types during the job application process while bull


                                                 23
markets force investment banks to sort between the two types after hiring them. This model would
imply that stickiness in banking should be stronger for new MBAs hired in lean times, rather than
in good times. In an extreme form where there are only two types of MBAs, there would be no
causal eﬀect of first jobs in banking on later employment in that sector. It also implies that those
MBAs who go to Wall Street when times are good should be less interested in finance, which might
show up by their taking fewer finance classes at Stanford. Given that there is a causal link between
first jobs on Wall Street and later jobs there, that stickiness in banking is not related to conditions
when MBAs are in school, and that the larger group that goes to Wall Street during bull markets
takes more finance classes, this model is not consistent with the data.
   The findings are also not consistent with a hybrid model (“Model 3” in Section 2) where
investment banks value finance-specific investments but also focus on MBAs who are most suited
to work on Wall Street. As I discussed above, such a model would lead to a causal link between
initial Wall Street jobs and later Wall Street employment. However, it would also lead to the
average Wall Street hire during bull markets being less interested and attached to banking than the
average bear market hire. This is simply not consistent with the findings. So, while there is surely
some heterogeneity in a typical Stanford MBA class in how well they fit in investment banking,
there appears to be a suﬃcient supply of those who are able and interested in the field to meet the
banks’ demand without compromising significantly in terms of “fit.”
   It appears that a diﬀerent form of sorting and hybrid model may explain the patterns in the
data. The data are consistent with the following slightly more specific version of “Model 2.”
Suppose there are two types of MBAs — those who have an interest in finance and those who
do not. The finance-disposed group is largely indiﬀerent between finance and other opportunities
when starting their careers. Given suﬃciently strong beliefs about Wall Street conditions, they
will start their careers in finance and they will make finance-specific investments while at Stanford
and shortly thereafter. This group of homogeneous MBAs includes those who worked in finance
before getting MBAs and some unobservable subset of the rest of the class. This variant of the
model with homogeneous workers that make finance-specific investments is consistent with all the
findings above, including the fact that all results are somewhat stronger for those who worked in
finance before getting MBAs.




                                                  24
6     Measuring The Financial Impact

6.1   What Would They Do if Not Investment Banking?

Stock market conditions at graduation lead to careers on Wall Street. But, in order to estimate the
financial ramifications of this eﬀect, I need to make assumptions about what these people would
have done if they had not gone to work on Wall Street. I address that issue in this section by
looking at the eﬀect of initial placement in investment banking on the probability of working in
other industries in the longer term. To do this, I change equation (2) to


                                       Tit = G(θt , Xit , Ψi , Fi0 )                              (3)

where Tit is an indicator for whether the person works in some other industry in year t. By the
same logic as in the last section, I cannot use OLS or a standard logit to estimate (3) because
unobserved ability and taste factors (Ψ) are likely to be correlated with whether the person first
goes to Wall Street and whether or not he works in another industry later on. I therefore use the
same instruments as in the last section.
    Table 6 displays results where T is an indicator for being an entrepreneur (that is, working at
a firm that he founded) or working in the management consulting industry. I should note that the
results here need to be interpreted cautiously because these are the two outcome variables where
I found a relationship with initially being an investment banker. I found no such relationship for
working in high technology or working for a large manufacturing firm. One interpretation of this is
that the “additional” investment bankers were more likely to become entrepreneurs or consultants
than to work in these other areas. But another possibility is that, by looking at a bunch of possible
outcomes, some are likely to appear to have a significant relationship with initial investment banking
placement. While I therefore prefer to cautiously interpret the evidence here as only suggestive,
choosing between these interpretations will be important when analyzing the eﬀects of initial job
on income in the next section.
    Columns 1 and 2 show that there is some evidence that initial jobs on Wall Street lead GSB grad-
uates to start fewer businesses. The coeﬃcients are strongly negative for both sets of instruments,
but only significantly so with the class indicators. If the class indicators are valid instruments, it
suggests that starting in investment banking lowers the probability of being an entrepreneur by
about 22%. The consulting estimates (columns 3 and 4) are somewhat more consistent across the
two specifications and the estimates are of a similar magnitude to the entrepreneur estimates. Over-
all, Table 6 provides suggestive evidence that the Wall Street careers generated by stock returns
while students attend Stanford come at the expense of careers as consultants and as entrepreneurs.

                                                    25
                  Dependent Variable        Founder      Founder      Consultant      Consultant
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)
                  Initially I-Bank           -0.6313      -0.2150       -0.3162         -0.2641
                                            (0.6047)     (0.0970)      (0.4961)        (0.1163)
                  Instruments                Macro         Class         Macro            Class

Table 6: Industry of Longer-Term Job. All columns are results of two-stage least squares linear
probability regressions. Observations are based on a person’s job as of the end of January at
least two and a half years after graduation from Stanford GSB. “Initially I-Bank” equals one if the
person was working in investment banking (including money management or venture capital) in the
January after graduation. “Founder” equals one if the person founded the company where he/she
works at the time of the observation. “Consult” equals one if the person works for a management
consulting firm. “Macro” instruments for “Initially I-Bank”, which are all measured as of time of
MBA graduation, are 1-year and 2-year S&P return, and the national unemployment rate, while
“class” instruments is a set of graduating year indicator variables. Each regression includes 49,920
observations from 3,313 diﬀerent people. Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for any
correlation within a graduating class.


6.2      How Much Wealth is Transferred by Initial Conditions?

I now turn to the question of how much money is involved in the random movement of MBAs in and
out of investment banking careers. As mentioned above, the data are not perfect for this purpose.
Because people only report beginning and ending salary for each job, I cannot directly estimate the
eﬀects on an individual of starting on Wall Street by fitting wage regression equivalents of equation
(2). However, because respondents provided income information as of the date of the survey, I
can use this cross-section to estimate wage profiles in investment banking and other fields over the
course of MBA careers. I then discount these profiles over various career lengths to estimate the
lifetime labor income gained by those who become investment bankers.
       I first break the sample into four sectors — investment bankers, consultants, entrepreneurs (those
who founded a non-investment-banking business at which they work), and other. I also divide the
sample into groups based on the number of years since graduation at the time of the survey. Com-
bining these divisions, I create sector/years-since-graduation cells and calculate the average wage in
each cell. Each sector’s average wages for years one through fifteen after graduation are displayed in
Figure 5.13 Two clear patterns emerge. First, investment bankers earn a substantial premium to the
other groups throughout the first fifteen years after graduation. Second, management consultants


  13
     The average wage in each cell is estimated imprecisely because of the small numbers of people in some categories.
To smooth out some of this imprecision, the graph actually plots, for each cell, the average salary for that cell, the
cell from the same sector with one more year since graduation, and the cell from the same sector with one fewer year
since graduation. For the first year, I average the cell and the second year cell.



                                                         26
                                                 1400




                                                 1200




                                                 1000
           Log Wage (new "other" graduate = 0)




                                                 800
                                                                                                                                       Other
                                                                                                                                       Inv-Bank
                                                                                                                                       Consultant
                                                                                                                                       Entrepreneur
                                                 600




                                                 400




                                                 200




                                                   0
                                                        1   2   3   4   5   6      7      8      9       10   11   12   13   14   15
                                                                                Years Since Graduation




                                                                Figure 5: Career Wage Profiles by Type of Job


earn a premium over others, but not as much as investment bankers.
   The income diﬀerence that I want to calculate, however, is not the simple diﬀerence between
an investment banker at a given point in his career and someone at a similar point in a career in
another field. I want to estimate the eﬀect of starting in investment banking. Therefore, I calculate
the expected income in career year t for a person who starts his career in investment banking as


                                                                E(wF0 t ) = Pr(Ft |F0 )wF t + (1 − Pr(Ft |F0 ))wGt                                    (4)

where wF t and wGt are expected income in career year t in investment banking and an alternative
job, respectively, and Pr(Ft |F0 ) is the probability the person will be in investment banking in year
t, conditional on starting in investment banking. Pr(Ft |F0 ) for a given t is the yearly coeﬃcient
from estimating equation (2), as displayed in Figure 4.
   To summarize the underlying logic, I generate expected year-by-year income levels for MBAs
who become management consultants, entrepreneurs, or any other non-investment-banker based on
the cross-section of wages as of the time of the survey. I generate expected year-by-year income levels
for MBAs that start as investment bankers by taking the weighted average of the investment banker
income and income in the other jobs. The weights for this calculation are based on the estimated


                                                                                              27
                                                   (1)       (2)          (3)
                 Alternative Job                  Other    Consult   Entrepreneur
                 Wage Diﬀerence Estimates:
                   Year 1 Wage Diﬀ. ($000)      $97.5    $71.2      $114.9
                   Year 1 Wage Diﬀ. (%)       115.4% 64.3%          170.1%
                   Year 7 Wage Diﬀ. ($000)     $504.0   $308.1      $321.6
                   Year 7 Wage Diﬀ. (%)       331.6% 88.6%           96.2%
                   Year 15 Wage Diﬀ. ($000) $937.2      $578.4     $1,014.5
                   Year 15 Wage Diﬀ. (%)      327.4% 89.7%          485.6%
                 Lifetime Income Diﬀerence Estimates (Discount Rate = 5%):
                   10 Year Diﬀerence ($000)    $2,095   $1,176      $1,774
                   10 Year Diﬀerence (%)      169.1% 54.5%          113.8%
                   20 Year Diﬀerence ($000)    $4,895   $2,508      $4,195
                   20 Year Diﬀerence (%)      196.0% 51.3%          131.1%
                 Lifetime Income Diﬀerence Estimates (Discount Rate = 10%):
                   10 Year Diﬀerence ($000)    $1,704   $1,000      $1,471
                   10 Year Diﬀerence (%)      174.5% 59.5%          121.6%
                   20 Year Diﬀerence ($000)    $3,177   $1,689      $2,754
                   20 Year Diﬀerence (%)      194.8% 54.1%          134.2%

Table 7: Income Diﬀerences Between Investment Bankers and Others. All calculations are based
on salary averages for sector and years since graduation from the cross-section of 2,598 survey
respondents. Investment banker wage estimates are adjusted for the likelihood that they will still
be investment bankers at each year after graduation. See text for details.


causal eﬀect of still being an investment banker in year t if the person went into investment banking
right after getting his MBA at Stanford.
   Based on this process for estimating experience/wage profiles in each of the four types of jobs,
Table 7 presents estimates of the pay diﬀerences between investment banking and other jobs at
various points in a person’s career. It also shows the cumulative present value of the income
diﬀerence between investment banking and other jobs over the first ten and twenty years after
graduation, assuming either a 5% or 10% discount rate on future income. While the wage diﬀerence
between fields and over a career profile will surely change over time, these estimates are what a
new graduate might expect in 1996 looking forward.
   The first few rows of Table 7 show the individual year expected wage diﬀerences between some-
one who starts as an investment banker and someone who works continuously in one of the other
areas. These estimates vary from a 64% diﬀerence between investment bankers and consultants
right after graduation to cases where the investment banker can expect to earn three to six times
what people in the other groups can expect. For example, members of the “other” category earn an
average of $286K after fifteen years while someone who starts as an investment banker can expect
to earn $1.2 million at that point. At this same point, investment bankers can expect to earn almost

                                                 28
double the $645K earned by management consultants.
   Discounting these figures over a ten or twenty year career leads to substantial absolute income
diﬀerences for investment bankers relative to other fields. The smallest estimate of the investment
banker premium is about 50% (for an investment banker who otherwise would have been a consul-
tant and considers a twenty-year horizon.) The diﬀerence between investment bankers and others
is at least 150% and can reach several million dollars in present value. Relative to entrepreneurs,
the diﬀerences are up to $5 million in present value over twenty years. These estimates suggest that
substantial amounts of wealth, both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of lifetime earnings, can
be moved from or to a given MBA by uncontrollable macroeconomic factors while people attend
business school.
   As a final calculation, I consider how much total discounted lifetime income one whole class of
MBAs can expect to earn relative to another based solely on stock return diﬀerences while they
attend school. A one standard deviation change in the two-year return of the S&P 500 is associated
with two percent more of the class entering investment banking. A typical Stanford class has 350
students, so two percent is seven extra students going to Wall Street. Given the estimates in
Table 7, this suggests stock returns during school lead one class to have between $12 million and
$35 million more discounted lifetime earnings than the other class in the first twenty years after
graduation. Consider the more stark example of the classes of 1986 and 1987 (which graduated
before the crash of 1987) compared to the classes of 1988 and 1989. Year fixed-eﬀect logits similar
to the ones displayed in Table 3 suggest the pre-crash group had a 7.3% higher probability of
working on Wall Street immediately after graduation. This means that about fifty more members
of the two pre-crash classes started on Wall Street than the post-crash classes which means these
classes earned an extra $85 million to $250 million over the first twenty years after graduation.
   One concern that naturally arises from this back-of-the-envelope approach to estimating lifetime
eﬀects is whether the underlying assumptions and numbers are valid. The fact that the income
measure is “salary” rather than total wealth created in a year is of particular concern. However, if
anything, I would expect this to mean that the income premium for investment bankers in Table 7
is biased downward because so much investment banking income comes through bonuses. The one
exception to this might be the comparison with entrepreneurs who are often earning substantial
wealth through building equity that they would not report as salary. Another potential problem is
that the income measure is categorical rather than exact. However, this concern is largely alleviated
by the fact that the averages I calculate are consistent with the information provided by the career
oﬃce based on their exit surveys.
   While the estimates in the last section are no doubt measured with some (perhaps considerable)


                                                 29
error, they provide substantial evidence that Wall Street conditions at graduation aﬀect many
MBAs’ jobs and income for a long time after graduation. In combination with the earlier results,
they suggest that the compensating diﬀerential to induce an MBA to become an investment banker
is quite large.


7    Conclusions

Stock price movements can create and destroy a lot of wealth among investors. In this paper, I
have shown that they can also create or destroy a lot of future labor market income for people
earning MBAs at Stanford. Bull markets encourage new graduates to start their career on Wall
Street. Initially working on Wall Street has a strong causal eﬀect on the likelihood of working
there later in an MBA’s career. Because investment bankers earn a substantial premium relative
to other MBA jobs, any eﬀect on initial job placement has a substantial and long-term eﬀect on
many MBAs’ income. The results suggest that the large premium for working on Wall Street is
a compensating diﬀerential that makes many new MBAs nearly indiﬀerent between jobs on Wall
Street and elsewhere and that bull markets lead MBA students and recent graduates to develop
significant finance-specific human capital. Further research is required to be more precise about
what causes this career stickiness and better data would help more accurately measure the eﬀect
on career labor income.
    The results also suggest that risk averse MBA students, especially those interested in Wall
Street careers, may want to take actions to insure themselves against the random wealth eﬀects
imposed by stock returns while they study. These students should short the stock market upon
entering school so that their portfolios hedge their expected labor income.




                                                30
References
Akerlof, George A., “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 1970, 109, 701—733.

Angrist, Joshua D., “Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models With Dummy Endogenous Re-
    gressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 2001,
    19, 2—28.

Baker, George, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom, “The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evi-
    dence from Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109, 881—919.

Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo, “The Eﬀect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of Wages Over
    the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99, 665—688.

Benartzi, Shlomo, “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(K) Accounts to Company Stock,”
    Journal of Finance, 2001, 56, 1747—1764.

Brown, Keith C., W. V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, “Of Tournaments and Temptations: An
    Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Finance, 1996, 51, 85—110.

Brown, Virginia P., “An M.B.A. Runs the Gauntlet,” New York Times, 1988, p. BW22. June 12.

Chen, Hsuan-Chi and Jay R. Ritter, “The Seven Percent Solution,” Journal of Finance, 1995, 55,
    1105—1131.

Chevalier, Judith A. and Glenn Ellison, “Risk-Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to Incentives,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 110, 1167—1200.

Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 1999, 114, 389—432.

Devereaux, Paul, “The Benefits of Obtaining a High-Paying Job,” 2004. UCLA.

Gibbons, Robert and Michael Waldman, “Enriching a Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics Inside
    Firms,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2006, 24, 59—107.

Gompers, Paul and Joshua Lerner, “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S. Venture Capital Partern-
    ship,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1999, 51, 3—44.

Hvide, Hans K., “Firm Size and the Quality of Entrepreneurs,” 2005. Norwegian School of Economics
    and Business.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87,
    972—990.

Kahn, Lisa B., “The Long-Term Market Consequences of Graduation College in a Bad Economy,” 2005.
    Harvard University.

Lazear, Edward P., “Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, 23, 649—680.

                                                    31
Lin, Hsiou-Wei and Maureen F. McNichols, “Underwriting Relationships, AnalystsŠ Earnings Fore-
    casts and Investment Recommendations,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1998, 25, 101—127.

McCall, Brian P., “Occupational Matching: A Test of Sorts,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98,
    45—69.

Michaely, Roni and Kent L. Womack, “Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter Analyst
    Recommendations,” Review of Financial Studies, 1999, 12, 653—686.

Miller, Robert A., “Job Matching and Occupational Choice,” Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92,
    1086—1120.

Neal, Derek, “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,” Journal of Labor
    Economics, 1995, 13, 653—677.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz, “Permanent and Transitory Eﬀects from
    Graduating in a Recession,” 2005. University of Toronto.

Oyer, Paul, “The Macro-Foundations of Microeconomics: Initial Labor Market Conditions and Long-Term
    Outcomes for Economists,” 2005. Stanford Graduate School of Business.

Parent, Daniel, “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the National Longitudinal
    Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18,
    306—323.

Reder, Melvin W., “An Analysis of a Small, Closely Observed Labor Market: Starting Salaries for
    University of Chicago M.B.A.s,” Journal of Business, 1978, 51, 263—297.

Spence, Michael, “Job market signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1973, 87, 355—374.

Stewart, James, “Taking the Dare,” The New Yorker, 1993, pp. 34—39. July 26.

Tracy, Joseph and Joel Waldfogel, “The Best Business Schools: A Market-Based Approach,” Journal
    of Business, 1997, 70, 1—31.

Waldman, Michael, “Job Assignments, Signaling, and Eﬃciency,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1984,
    15, 255—267.




                                                  32
