                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          A BOUND ON RISK AVERSION USING LABOR SUPPLY ELASTICITIES

                                               Raj Chetty

                                         Working Paper 12067
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12067


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley and NBER, 549 Evans Hall #3880, Berkeley
CA 94709 USA (email: chetty@econ.berkeley.edu). This paper is based on the second chapter of my Ph.D.
thesis at Harvard. I thank George Akerlof, John Campbell, David Card, Gary Chamberlain, David Cutler,
Martin Feldstein, John Friedman, Ed Glaeser, Caroline Hoxby, Louis Kaplow, Larry Katz, Miles Kimball,
Greg Mankiw, Richard Rogerson, anonymous referees, and numerous seminar participants for very helpful
comments and discussions. Financial support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship,
the National Bureau of Economic Research, and Harvard University is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Raj Chetty. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Bound on Risk Aversion Using Labor Supply Elasticities
Raj Chetty
NBER Working Paper No. 12066
February 2006
JEL No. D80, J20, J60

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper shows that existing evidence on labor supply behavior places an upper bound on risk

aversion in the expected utility model. I derive a formula for the coefficient of relative risk aversion

(g) in terms of (1) the ratio of the income elasticity of labor supply to the wage elasticity and (2) the

degree of complementarity between consumption and labor. I bound the degree of complementarity

using data on consumption choices when labor supply varies randomly across states. Using labor

supply elasticity estimates from thirty-three studies, I find a mean estimate of g = 1. I then show that

generating g > 2 would require that wage increases cause sharper reductions in labor supply than

estimated in any of the studies.

Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
UC- Berkeley
521 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
chetty@econ.berkeley.edu
   Expected utility is the canonical theory of choice under uncertainty in economics. In the
expected utility model, risk aversion arises solely from the curvature of the utility function,
typically measured by the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion (γ). This paper shows that
evidence on the eﬀects of wage changes on labor supply imposes a tight upper bound on
the curvature of utility over wealth (γ < 2). Hence, the standard expected utility model
cannot generate high levels of risk aversion without contradicting established facts about
labor supply.
   Labor supply behavior and risk aversion are tightly linked in the expected utility model
because both are determined by the curvature of utility over consumption.          To see the
connection, consider the eﬀect of a wage increase on labor supply in a static model where an
agent maximizes utility over consumption and leisure. If the marginal utility of consumption
diminishes quickly, the individual becomes sated with goods as wages rise. A highly risk
averse individual will therefore choose to consume more leisure (by reducing labor supply)
as wages rise. More generally, a higher curvature of utility over consumption implies a lower
uncompensated wage elasticity of labor supply.
   The bound on risk aversion is obtained by combining this logic with empirical evidence
on the wage elasticity. A well established finding of the labor supply literature is that wage
increases do not cause sharp reductions in labor supply.      This lower bound on the wage
elasticity of labor supply places an upper bound on the curvature of utility over consumption
and hence on risk aversion. The fact that individuals do not choose to reduce labor supply
sharply when wages rise implies that their marginal utility of consumption does not diminish
quickly, unless consumption and labor are very complementary.
   If complementarity between consumption and labor is suﬃciently strong, even highly
risk averse individuals may choose not to reduce labor supply when wages rise because
increased consumption makes work less painful. Therefore, bounding γ using labor supply
elasticities requires that we first bound the degree of complementarity between consumption
and labor. Such a bound can be obtained from evidence on consumption choices when agents


                                              1
face uncertainty about labor supply. Intuitively, the extent to which an agent chooses to
correlate consumption with labor across states where labor supply varies exogenously (e.g.,
because of job loss or disability) reveals the degree of complementarity.      Combining the
bound on complementarity with estimates of labor supply elasticities yields a bound on γ
that does not rely on any assumptions beyond those inherent in expected utility theory.
   I formalize the preceding logic in a dynamic lifecycle model with arbitrary non-separable
utility over consumption and leisure. I derive a formula for γ in terms of the ratio of the
income elasticity of labor supply to the substitution elasticity of labor supply along with the
cardinal complementarity parameter. I bound the complementarity parameter using a set
of estimates of the consumption drop associated with job loss and other exogenous shocks to
labor supply. I then estimate γ using labor supply elasticity estimates from various types of
microeconomic studies — e.g., structural lifecycle methods, natural experiments, and earned
income responses — as well as macroeconomic observations such as the downward trend in
labor supply over the past century. Using thirty-three sets of estimates of wage and income
elasticities, the mean implied value of γ is 0.71, with a range of 0.15 to 1.78 in the additive
utility case. At the upper bound for complementarity, the mean value of γ rises modestly,
to 0.97.
   I clarify why all the labor supply studies imply a low level of γ despite disagreement about
the magnitudes of the elasticities using a calibration argument. I show that generating γ > 2
with a plausible level of complementarity requires an uncompensated wage elasticity of labor
supply more negative than that estimated in any of the thirty-three studies.
   The bound on risk aversion derived here contrasts with the much higher estimates of risk
aversion obtained in studies of asset and insurance markets (e.g., Rajnish Mehra and Edward
Prescott 1985, Narayana Kocherlakota 1996, Robert Barsky et. al. 1997, Alma Cohen and
Liran Einav 2005, Justin Sydnor 2005). This paper therefore provides new evidence that
the conventional expected utility model falls short of explaining choices under uncertainty
in many domains. Importantly, the calibration argument here restricts risk preferences over


                                              2
all risks, and not just the small gambles or low probability events that are the basis of many
existing critiques (Chris Starmer 2000).
    The paper proceeds as follows.               Section I gives graphical intuition for the bounding
argument, and derives a formula for risk aversion in terms of labor supply elasticities and
complementarity between consumption and labor. Section II implements the formula using
existing estimates of these parameters.               Section III discusses how this paper is related to
other recent calibration arguments for risk aversion and intertemporal substitution. Section
IV concludes.



I    Theory
Basic Setup. Consider a T period life-cycle model.                   Denote consumption in each period
by ct and labor supply by lt . Let U(c1 , ..., cT , l1 , ..., lT ) denote utility over the consumption
and labor streams. Let pt denote the price of consumption in period t. Assume that U is
smooth and that Uct > 0, Ult < 0, uct ct < 0, ult lt < 0. Let wθt denote the wage in period t
and y unearned income (wealth) at time 0. In Thomas MaCurdy’s (1981) terminology, a
change in θt is a transitory wage change, while changes in w are permanent wage changes,
i.e. shifts in the entire profile of wages over a lifetime.
    The agent chooses a path of consumption and labor by solving


                              max U (c1 , ..., cT , l1 , ..., lT )
                              ct ,lt

                              s.t. p1 c1 + ... + pT cT = y + w(θ1 l1 + ... + θT lT )


It is convenient to rewrite this problem as a two-stage maximization:


                       max u(c, l) s.t. c = y + wl                                                   (1)
                        c,l

                               where u(c, l) = max U(c1 , ..., cT , l1 , ..., lT )
                                                          ct ,lt




                                                           3
                                                s.t. p1 c1 + ... + pT cT = c

                                                θ1 l1 + ... + θT lT = l


   In (1), c and l represent aggregates that capture total consumption and labor supply over
the lifecycle. The function u(c, l) is indirect utility over these two composite commodities.
Our goal is to derive a bound for the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion of the indirect utility
function u(c, l), defined as follows:

                                             ∂uc (c, l) c      ucc (c, l)
                       γ(c, l) ≡ −εuc ,c =                  =−            c                    (2)
                                               ∂c uc (c, l)    uc (c, l)

Note that γ is the curvature of utility over wealth — the parameter that determines risk
preferences over immediately-resolved wealth gambles in an expected utility model — when
total labor supply l is fixed.    When l is variable, the curvature of utility over wealth is
strictly lower than γ (see appendix A for a proof). Intuitively, if the agent can adjust labor
supply, he has more flexibility to adjust to wealth shocks, and is less risk averse (Zvi Bodie
et. al. 1992). A bound on γ therefore bounds risk aversion when l is endogenous as well.
   Bounding Risk Aversion: Graphical Example. The main result follows from the compar-
ative statics implied by the agent’s first order condition for l. At an interior optimum, the
marginal benefit of working an extra hour equals the marginal cost:


                                 wuc (y + wl, l) = −ul (y + wl, l)                             (3)


   Figure 1 illustrates the calibration argument using this first order condition.         It plots
the marginal consumption utility of working an extra hour, wuc (y + wl, l) and the marginal
disutility of working that hour, −ul (y + wl, l).        The initial level of labor supply, l0 , is
determined by the intersection of these two curves at the initial wage w0 . For simplicity,
the figure is drawn for a case where the agent has no unearned income (y = 0).
   Suppose first that the agent has additive utility over c and l (ucl = 0).         Consider the


                                                  4
eﬀect of raising w by 1 percent on l. This change has two eﬀects on the wuc curve, which
correspond to a substitution and income eﬀect on labor supply.        The substitution eﬀect
is that the number multiplying uc rises by 1 percent, shifting the wuc curve upward by 1
percent. The 1 percent increase in w also increases consumption (wl) at any given level of
l by 1 percent. A 1 percent increase in consumption lowers uc by εuc ,c = γ, so the 1 percent
wage increase shifts the wuc curve downward by γ percent via the income eﬀect. The total
shift in the wuc curve is thus (1−γ) percent. This expression shows that higher γ makes the
wage elasticity of labor supply more negative by magnifying the income eﬀect. Intuitively,
when γ is high, the marginal benefit of consumption falls quickly as the wage rises. This
strengthens the incentive to consume more leisure (by reducing l) when w rises.
   Since changes in w do not aﬀect the −ul curve when ucl = 0, it follows that


                                    ∂l/∂w > 0 ⇔ γ < 1


when y = 0.     This result is the simplest version of the bound on risk aversion imposed
by labor supply behavior. The remainder of the paper generalizes this bound to allow for
positive unearned income (y > 0), a potentially negative wage elasticity of labor supply, and
complementarity between c and l. These factors loosen the bound on γ slightly (to γ < 2),
but the basic logic of the calibration argument is the same: If upward shifts in the wage
profile do not cause sharp reductions in lifetime labor supply, γ must be small.
   Complementarity between c and l causes shifts in the −ul curve in Figure 1 as w rises. If
ucl > 0, the −ul curve shifts outward when w rises and l rises more than it would if ucl = 0.
Consequently, the value of γ estimated from labor supply elasticities under the assumption
that ucl = 0 understates the true γ if ucl > 0. This issue is addressed below using empirical
evidence from studies of consumption smoothing to place bounds on the magnitude of ucl .
Given these bounds, the range of possible shifts in the −ul curve is narrow, as illustrated by
the shaded region in Figure 1. The bound on γ is thus loosened modestly when plausible



                                              5
levels of complementarity are permitted.
       An Estimator for γ. To generalize the example in Figure 1, I derive a formula for γ in
terms of labor supply elasticities. Implicitly diﬀerentiate (3) to obtain:

                                      ∂l        wucc + ucl
                                         = − 2                                                         (4)
                                     ∂y     w ucc + ull + 2wucl
                                     ∂l      uc + wlucc + lucl
                                         = − 2
                                     ∂w     w ucc + ull + 2wucl
                                                                               c
Using the Slutsky decomposition for compensated labor supply ( ∂l
                                                               ∂w
                                                                  )

                                             ∂lc   ∂l    ∂l
                                                 =    −l                                               (5)
                                             ∂w    ∂w    ∂y

it follows that the ratio of the income eﬀect to the substitution eﬀect is given by

                                          ∂l/∂y    wucc + ucl
                                            c
                                                 =                                                     (6)
                                          ∂l /∂w      uc

             ∂l y                                                           ∂lc w
Let εl,y =   ∂y l
                    denote the income elasticity of labor supply, εcl,w =   ∂w l
                                                                                    the compensated wage
                                            ucl
elasticity of labor supply, and εuc ,l =    uc
                                                l   the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption
with respect to labor. Some algebraic rearrangement gives

                                y + wl ∂l/∂y         wl εl,y                y
              γ(y + wl) = −                  = −(1 +   )      (y, w) + (1 +   )εu ,l .                 (7)
                                  w ∂lc /∂w          y εlc ,w               wl c

       This equation shows that γ is determined by the ratio of the income elasticity of labor
supply to the substitution elasticity of labor supply, with an adjustment for complementarity
between c and l.1 This is because the income eﬀect is proportional to ucc (how much the
marginal consumption utility from working falls when y is raised) while the substitution

   Note that (7) remains well defined when y = 0. In that case, the first term in (7) equals − ∂lw
   1
                                                                                                ∂y /εl ,w .
                                                                                                      c

The ∂lw
     ∂y term is the propensity to earn out of unearned income (in dollars rather than a percentage, which
would be undefined).



                                                        6
eﬀect is proportional to uc (how much the marginal consumption utility from working rises
when w is raised).    For example, when utility is linear in c, there are no income eﬀects
in labor supply, and γ = 0.      Note that the formula in for γ in (7) does not rely on any
functional form assumptions; hence, the bounds derived below apply to any utility function.
   Cardinality and Complementarity. It may be surprising that a unique value for γ can be
identified from labor-leisure choices. Since non-linear monotonic transformations of u(c, l)
do not aﬀect the choice of l, are there not infinitely many values of γ that could be associated
with a given set of labor supply data?     The reason that γ is identified in (7) is that any
non-linear transformation of u would change the value of εuc ,l .     For example, non-linear
transformations of an additive u (with ucl = 0) destroy additivity. Labor supply data are
thus suﬃcient to identify γ conditional on the value εuc ,l , which pins down the cardinal
normalization of u.
   Since the cardinal complementarity parameter εuc ,l is unknown, it must be estimated
from choices under uncertainty.     A natural method of estimating εuc ,l is to examine the
consumption choices of individuals who face exogenous variation in labor supply across states,
e.g. due to a shock such as job displacement.      Intuitively, if agents choose to consume a
lot more in states where labor supply is high, c and l must be highly complementary; if in
contrast labor supply fluctuations are not correlated with consumption changes, c and l must
not be very complementary.
   To obtain an estimate of εuc ,l based on this logic, consider a setting with two states where
agents work for l1 hours in state 1 (which occurs with probability p) and l2 hours in state 2
(probability 1 − p). Assume that preferences are state-independent, i.e. the utility function
in the two states is the same.     Let ws denote the wage in state s.       Suppose the agent
can trade consumption at an actuarially fair rate between the two states using an insurance
policy. We will see below that if perfect insurance of this form is unavailable, the exercise
below provides an upper bound for εuc ,l and thereby an upper bound for γ.
   Conditional on (l1 , l2 ), the agent chooses a consumption allocation (c1 , c2 ) to maximize


                                               7
expected utility:


                                     max
                                      1 2
                                          pu(c1 , l1 ) + (1 − p)u(c2 , l2 )
                                     c ,c

                            s.t.     pc + (1 − p)c2 = pw1 l1 + (1 − p)w2 l2
                                        1




At the optimal (c1 , c2 ), marginal utilities are equated across the states:


                                            uc (c1 , l1 ) = uc (c2 , l2 )


The remainder of this section exploits this condition to link the εuc ,l parameter of interest to
a magnitude that can be empirically estimated. Let ∆c = c2 − c1 and ∆l = l2 − l1 denote
the change in consumption and labor across the two states. A first-order Taylor expansion
of uc around c1 gives:


                    uc (c2 , l2 ) = uc (c1 , l1 ) + ucc (c1 , l1 )∆c + ucl (c1 , l1 )∆l + R


where R, the remainder, must satisfy lim∆l→0 R = 0. Therefore, in the optimal allocation,


                                    −ucc ∆c = ucl ∆l + R
                                        ∆c          ∆l        R
                                   =⇒ γ 1 = εuc ,l 1 +
                                         c           l    uc (c1 , l1 )
                                                       ∆c ∆l
                                    =⇒ εuc ,l = lim γ 1 / 1                                            (8)
                                                ∆l→0   c l

                                                             ∆c ∆l
Equation (8) shows that εuc ,l is proportional to            c
                                                               /l ,     the percentage drop in consumption
associated with a 1 percent diﬀerence in labor supply across states. This expression reflects
the intuition described above: If the consumption change across states where labor supply
diﬀers is small, εuc ,l must be small. The curvature of utility (γ) is also relevant because it
determines the cost of consumption fluctuations in the expected utility model. The limit
∆l → 0 is necessary because εuc ,l can be identified at a given point (c1 , l1 ) without functional

                                                         8
form assumptions only by observing the eﬀect of small variations in l on c.
       Importantly, in the more realistic case where insurance markets are incomplete, con-
sumption will fall beyond the optimal amount when labor supply is low.                 Hence, imper-
fections in insurance markets will make the observed consumption drop overstate the true
complementarity-related consumption drop and consequently overstate the true values of
εuc ,l and γ.
       Using (8) and (7), we can solve for γ to obtain an estimator for risk aversion in terms of
magnitudes that can be empirically estimated:

                                       wl −εl,y           y       ∆c ∆l
                            γ = (1 +     )      /(1 − (1 + )[ lim   / ])                           (9)
                                       y εlc ,w           wl ∆l→0 c l

       Extensive Margin. The best established eﬀects of wage changes are on the participation
margin, perhaps because fixed costs of participation and institutional restrictions limit hours
choices (see e.g. Joseph Altonji and Christina Paxson 1991).                Estimates of participation
elasticities can also be used to infer γ. Let θ denote the fraction of agents who work, εθ,y
                                                                                                   ∆c
the income elasticity of participation, and εθ,w the wage elasticity of participation. Let          c

denote the diﬀerence in consumption when working and not working chosen by the agent in
an experiment involving uncertain labor supply analogous to the complementarity exercise
described above. Under a constant-γ approximation of u(c, l), a formula similar to (9) is
obtained for γ:2

                                                            εθ,y w
                                                  log[1 −   εθ,w y
                                                                   ]
                                          γ=              ∆c           w                         (10)
                                               log[(1 −    c
                                                             )(1   + y )]

   2
       Details are given in Appendix C.




                                                      9
II       Empirical Implementation

II.A       Estimates of Complementarity
                                               ∆c ∆l
Equation (9) shows that an upper bound on      c
                                                 /l    is required to obtain an upper bound on γ.
A bound on complementarity would ideally be derived from the consumption choices of agents
who face small, permanent exogenous shocks to labor supply.3 The most obvious empirical
analogs to this experiment are estimates of the consumption change associated with shocks
such as job loss or disability.    John Cochrane (1991) and Jonathan Gruber (1997, 1998)
find that job loss causes a consumption drop of less than 10 percent. In subsequent work,
Martin Browning and Thomas Crossley (2001) and Hans Bloemen and Elena Stancanelli
(2005) show that consumption does not fall at all for individuals with positive liquid wealth
prior to job loss.    In addition, these studies find that higher unemployment benefits are
associated with smaller consumption drops, and that with full insurance, there would be no
drop at all. These results imply that most of the observed 10 percent consumption drop is
due to imperfect insurance markets rather than complementarity between consumption and
labor.
                                                                                 ∆c ∆l
      There are two concerns in connecting the 10 percent bound to the actual    c
                                                                                   /l    parameter
of interest. First, the studies of job loss examine large fluctuations in l and therefore may
                                           ∆c ∆l
not provide a good estimate of lim∆l→0      c
                                              /l   if complementarity is much greater for small
fluctuations in l than large ones. This concern is unlikely to be a serious problem in practice.
Studies that examine smaller fluctuations in hours than full unemployment (e.g., Browning
                                  ∆c ∆l
et. al. 1985) find estimates of   c
                                    /l    that are of the same magnitude as those reported by
studies of larger fluctuations in l. Moreover, most of the changes in labor supply resulting
from changes in wages and unearned income tend to be large and discrete as well (e.g., from
20 to 40 hours).     The range of ∆l over which complementarity is estimated is therefore

  3
   The shocks must be “exogenous” in the sense that they are involuntary changes in labor supply, as
opposed to preference shocks that endogenously induce labor supply changes.



                                                10
similar to the range over which the labor supply elasticities themselves are estimated. As
equation (10) for the extensive margin case shows, if only discrete changes in labor supply
are feasible, it is preferable to have estimates of the consumption drop when l fluctuates over
a similar set of discrete values.4
         The second concern, which is deeper, is that studies of job loss examine temporary
fluctuations in labor (variation in lt for a given period t) and not permanent fluctuations
                                                                                       ∆ct ∆lt
(variation in l). In the notation of the model, these studies estimate                 ct
                                                                                          / lt   for a single
                                                ∆c ∆l
period t rather than the desired value          c
                                                  /l       that reflects changes in lifetime aggregates.
                                                                                                       ∆c ∆l
When utility is time non-separable, these two values need not be equal. The ratio of                   c
                                                                                                         /l
     ∆ct ∆lt
to   ct
        / lt    is determined by the degree of cross-period complementarity in consumption.5
Intuitively, if consumption is complementary across periods (as in habit formation models),
agents will be more reluctant to cut consumption in response to transitory fluctuations in
labor than permanent ones. Durability of consumption and adjustment costs could further
attenuate the short-run response.
         To gauge the diﬀerence between short-run and long-run complementarity, I use evidence
on consumption responses to long-term labor supply changes induced by disability or retire-
ment.        Cochrane (1991) finds that long-term disabilities cause a 11 percent drop in food
consumption in the year that the shock occurs. Melvin Stephens (2001) shows that in the
five years after disability occurs, consumption does not trend downward significantly, and is
at most 10 percent lower than the pre-disability level. These results suggest that long-run
complementarity ( ∆c
                  c
                     / ∆l
                       l
                          ) is not much greater than short-run ( ∆c
                                                                  ct
                                                                     t ∆lt
                                                                      / lt ) complementarity. If
it were, there would be either a large immediate drop in consumption or a sharp downward
trend in consumption in the years after disability.

     4
      Relatedly, the estimates of γ based on participation elasticities — which require estimates of ∆cc from
fluctuations in labor force participation — yield very similar estimates of γ (see Table 1). This suggests that
discreteness is unlikely to be an important source of bias here.
    5
      See Appendix D for a formal derivation relating the two parameters. Karen Dynan (2001) finds no
complementarity in consumption across periods in microdata, but studies using macro data find evidence of
habit.



                                                      11
       In related work, Paul Gertler and Gruber (2002) find that long-term health shocks leading
to job loss are associated with less than a 20 percent reduction in non-health consumption
(which includes durables) in Indonesia. Gertler and Gruber test whether incomplete insur-
ance or complementarity between c and l is responsible for this drop in several ways. For
instance, they show that the consumption drop is small in families where the person expe-
riencing the shock is not the sole earner (because other household members help to smooth
consumption). They conclude from this and other evidence that the complementarity-related
portion of the 20 percent drop is close to zero.
       One concern with the disability-based evidence is that the assumption of state-independent
preferences may not hold for health shocks.6 Studies of retirement provide additional evi-
dence on complementarity that helps mitigate such concerns. Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst
(2005) use detailed data on expenditures to show that expenditure drops at retirement by
less than 15 percent.7      Douglas Bernheim et. al. (2001) show that there is no downward
trend in expenditures in the years after retirement. These findings are also consistent with
                  ∆c ∆l                               ∆ct ∆lt
the claim that    c
                    /l    is not much larger than      ct
                                                          / lt .
                                                                                          ∆ct ∆lt
       In summary, evidence on the eﬀect of job loss on consumption implies               ct
                                                                                             / lt   < 0.1.
An examination of the diﬀerences between this estimate and the long-run complementarity
                                                 ∆c ∆l
parameter of interest suggests a bound of        c
                                                   /l    < 0.15.


II.B        Labor Supply Elasticities

This section describes a set of elasticity estimates from studies of labor supply and reports
the γ implied by each study. There is a controversial debate about which empirical methods
yield the most reliable estimates of labor supply elasticities. I show that irrespective of the

   6
     For example, Cochrane (1991, p974) notes that “sick people might lose their appetites” and therefore
consume less. Insofar as health shocks reduce the taste for non-health consumption, the consumption drops
associated with disability overstate the true level of complementarity between c and l.
   7
     In Aguiar and Hurst’s time input model, the bound derived in this paper is a bound on the curvature of
utility over expenditure, holding labor supply fixed. This remains an upper bound on curvature of utility
over wealth, following the derivation in Appendix A.


                                                    12
method used to estimate the elasticities, the implied value of γ is always low.
       Labor supply studies can be broadly classified into four categories: (1) The “static”
approach estimates reduced-form labor supply responses to events such as tax changes, cross-
sectional diﬀerences, or lottery winnings. Richard Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) show that
these static estimates can be interpreted as labor supply responses to the permanent changes
in wages and unearned income of interest when an appropriate set of controls for age and
cohort are included. (2) The “life cycle” or “structural” literature, pioneered by MaCurdy
(1981), explicitly models dynamic labor supply and consumption choices and backs out
estimates of labor supply responses to permanent shifts in wage profiles and unearned income
from life cycle variation in wages in a panel dataset.                     These estimates correspond more
directly to the permanent wage-elasticities (e.g., εcl,w ) of interest, but identification of these
models is often diﬃcult because of the lack of exogenous shifts in wage profiles. Recent studies
that combine the benefits of exogenous variation used in the static studies with the structural
lifecycle approach give perhaps the most credible microeconomic estimates of long-run wage
elasticities (Blundell et. al. 1998). (3) A more recent “earned income” literature, starting
with Martin Feldstein (1995, 1999), examines the eﬀect of tax reforms on total earned income
as a means of capturing other margins of labor supply beyond hours (e.g., eﬀort or job-related
training). Estimates from this literature can be used to estimate γ by replacing the elasticity
          εl,y                         εLI,y
ratio    εlc ,w
                  used in (7) with   εLI c ,1−τ
                                                ,   where LI is labor income and 1−τ the net-of-tax rate. (4)
Finally, long-run macroeconomic trends and cross-country comparisons can be used to make
inferences about long-run labor supply elasticities, potentially overcoming the institutional
rigidities and some of the omitted variable biases that may aﬀect the microeconomic studies.8
       Table 1 presents a set of income and substitution elasticities from studies using each of
these methods. The first two sets of estimates (hours and participation elasticities) are from
studies that use the traditional static and lifecycle approaches. The third section shows es-

   8
     The elasticities from the micro-level studies should yield consistent estimates of γ even if there are
frictions which prevent agents from reoptimizing fully in the short-run. These frictions presumably attenuate
both εl,y and εcl,w , leaving the ratio of the two elasticities unaﬀected.


                                                              13
timates from studies of earned income responses, and the fourth shows the macroeconomic
evidence. The macro estimates are constructed using a lower bound on the uncompensated
wage elasticity based on the secular downward trend in hours over the past century (doc-
umented e.g. by Casey Mulligan 2002) combined with estimates of substitution elasticities
from other studies (see Appendix B for details).
      To obtain a broad sense of the values of γ consistent with labor supply evidence, the table
includes elasticity estimates for a wide range of groups, such as prime age males, married
women, retired individuals, and low income families. Estimates of γ are computed at the
                                                                              y
mean values of y, w, and l in each study. Note that the mean values of        wl
                                                                                   vary widely across
the studies. For example, married women’s unearned income equals at least their husband’s
income, which is generally larger than their own earned income.
      Column (6) of Table 1 reports estimates of γ for the additive utility case. The overall
(unweighted) mean estimate of γ across the 33 sets of elasticity estimates is γ = 0.71.
Only 3 studies imply a value of γ above 1.25 when ucl = 0.9 The macroeconomic evidence
suggests slightly higher values of risk aversion than the microeconomic studies because the
downward trend in labor supply over time implies a significantly larger income eﬀect than
substitution eﬀect.      The estimates from Blundell et. al.’s (1998) study, which perhaps
addresses the central identification concerns in estimating labor supply elasticities most
cleanly, yield γ = 0.93.      Column (7) of Table 1 reports estimates of γ that account for
                                                   ∆c ∆l
complementarity consistent with the bound of        c
                                                      /l   = 0.15. This adjustment increases the
average estimate of γ to 0.97.

  9
    John Pencavel (1986), Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), and Gruber and Emmanuel Saez (2002) summarize
more than sixty other microeconomic studies that span various methodologies, nearly all of which imply
γ < 1.25 as well.




                                                 14
II.C        A Calibration Argument

The similarity of the estimates of γ across the labor supply studies despite their diﬀerences in
methodology, definitions of labor supply, and sample composition may be surprising. This
section provides a calibration argument that explains the consensus on γ. Intuitively, the
consensus emerges from the uniform finding that εl,w is not very negative, which implies that
the income elasticity cannot be large relative to the substitution elasticity. This places an
upper bound on γ because it depends on the ratio of these two elasticities.
       To formalize this argument, consider first the common benchmark of an upward-sloping
labor supply curve (Prescott (1986), Robert Hall and John Taylor (1991)).10                          Using the
Slutsky equation and (9), it follows that

                                                                    y
                                         εl,w ≥ 0 ⇐⇒ γ < 1 +
                                                                    wl

                                                     y
with additive utility.        In the aggregate,      wl
                                                          equals the ratio of capital income to labor
                      1
income, which is      2
                          in the U.S. Hence, with additive utility, εl,w ≥ 0 implies γ ≤ 1.5 for
                                                                                            y        1
a representative agent.        The skewed distribution of wealth implies that               wl
                                                                                                 <   2
                                                                                                         for most
households, implying that the bound on γ is tighter for many households.                         Note that if
y = 0, γ < 1, consistent with Figure 1.
       Table 2 generalizes this calibration result by showing the implied value of γ for several
other cases, including cases where εl,w < 0 and cases with complementarity. Each column
considers a diﬀerent value for the ratio of the income eﬀect of a 1 percent wage increase to the
substitution eﬀect, defined as I/εcl,w = − lw ε /εcl,w .11 Each row represents a diﬀerent value
                                            y l,y

of the degree of complementarity.            The table reports the implied γ in each cell assuming

  10
     In a recent survey of 134 labor and public economists at 40 leading research institutions, Victor Fuchs,
Alan Krueger, and James Poterba (1998) found that the vast majority of these experts believe that the best
estimate of the uncompensated wage elasticity is weakly positive.
  11
     The Slutsky decomposition for a wage increase is εl,w = εlc ,w + lw
                                                                       y εl,y , where the first term on the right
hand side is the substitution eﬀect and the second is the income eﬀect. Hence I = − lw      y εl,y corresponds to
the (absolute value of) the income eﬀect of a wage increase.


                                                       15
y        1
wl
     =   2
             (see Appendix B for details). For instance, the benchmark case of εl,w = 0 implies
I/εcl,w = 1 (income and substitution eﬀects cancel exactly). With no complementarity this
yields γ = 1.5, consistent with the derivation above.
     The calibrations show that γ does not rise much if the labor supply curve is downward
sloping to the extent suggested by the macroeconomic evidence in part D of Table 1. The
macro evidence, which yields the most negative estimates of εl,w of all the studies, implies
                      4
I/εcl,w less than     3
                          (see Appendix B). At this value, γ rises to 2.    The calibrations also
show that γ is not very sensitive to the degree of complementarity. With I/εcl,w = 1 and
                                                 ∆c ∆l
the upper bound complementarity value of         c
                                                   /l    = 0.15, γ rises to 1.94. The bottom line
is that generating γ significantly greater than 2 would require complementarity and labor
supply patterns that contradict evidence to date sharply.



III          Discussion
A few recent papers have also conducted “internal consistency checks” of standard models of
consumption behavior. Most relevant is Susanto Basu and Miles Kimball [BK] (2002), who
build on Robert King et. al. (1988). BK show that reconciling low estimates of the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution (EIS) with εl,w ≥ 0 requires either strong complementarity
between consumption and labor or time non-separable utility. To see how our results are
related, consider the case where utility is additive over c and l. Here, the BK result is that
time separability is inconsistent with εl,w > 0 and low EIS. In contrast, this paper shows that
state separability (expected utility theory) is inconsistent with εl,w > 0 and high γ. The
two results thus address two aspects of preferences — intertemporal substitution and risk
aversion — that are empirically and intuitively distinct (Hall (1988), Philippe Weil (1990),
Larry Epstein and Stanley Zin (1991)). While the BK result leaves γ unidentified, the bound
in this paper leaves the EIS unrestricted because U(·) is permitted to be an arbitrary time




                                                  16
non-separable function.12 Similarly, while habit formation (which drops time separability)
can resolve the BK bound on the EIS, it does not relax the bound on risk aversion.
       Matthew Rabin (1999) and Louis Kaplow (2005) also give calibration results for risk
preferences in an expected utility model. Rabin shows that expected utility cannot generate
a reasonably high level of moderate-stakes risk aversion without creating unreasonably high
large-stakes risk aversion.       Kaplow shows that estimates of the income elasticity of the
value of a statistical life bound γ because the rich would pay much more to save their lives
if the marginal utility of non-health consumption fell quickly with wealth. Each of these
calibration arguments illuminates the restrictions inherent in expected utility theory in a
diﬀerent way.



IV         Conclusion
A large literature on labor supply has found that the uncompensated wage elasticity of labor
supply is not very negative. This observation places a bound on the rate at which the
marginal utility of consumption diminishes, and thus bounds risk aversion in an expected
utility model.     The central estimate of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion implied by
labor supply studies is 1 (log utility) and an upper bound is 2, accounting for substantial
complementarity between consumption and labor.                  The intuition for this tight bound is
simple: If the marginal utility of wealth diminishes rapidly, why don’t people choose to work
much less when their wages rise?
       This result implies that diminishing marginal utility of wealth plays a secondary role
in generating the high levels of risk aversion estimated in many studies of choice under
uncertainty. An additional, quantitatively powerful source of risk aversion must be identified

  12
    Another way to see this point is to consider Kreps-Porteus utility. When the only risk at issue is an
immediately resolved one, the Kreps-Porteus specification is a special case of the general time non-separable
class of utility functions analyzed above. Consequently, the arguments above bound risk aversion over
immediately-resolved wealth gambles for a Kreps-Porteus utility, but do not pin down the EIS.



                                                     17
to explain observed behavior in these cases.13 Testing alternative models of risk preferences
under the constraints on curvature imposed by labor supply behavior would be an interesting
direction for further research. More generally, examining how one domain of behavior (such
as labor supply) disciplines the conclusions drawn in another domain (such as choice under
uncertainty) could be a useful method of developing unified, internally consistent theories of
economic behavior.

  13
    Recent examples of theories that introduce additional sources of risk aversion beyond diminishing mar-
ginal utility include Botond Koszegi and Rabin’s (2005) model of reference-dependent risk preferences and
Raj Chetty’s (2004) model of consumption commitments and local risk aversion.




                                                   18
   References
    Altonji, Joseph G. and Paxson, Christina H. “Labor Supply, Hours Constraints,
and Job Mobility.” Journal of Human Resources, 1992, 27(2), pp. 256-278.
    Aguiar, Mark and Hurst, Erik. “Consumption vs. Expenditure.” Journal of Political
Economy, 2005, 113(5), pp. 919-948.
    Auten, Gerald and Carroll, Robert. “The Eﬀect of Income Taxes on Household
Behavior.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81, pp. 681-693.
    Barsky, Robert B.; Juster, F. Thomas; Kimball, Miles S. and Shapiro, Matthew
D. “Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112, pp. 537-580.
    Bernheim, B. Douglas; Skinner, Johnathan and Weinberg, Steven. “What
Accounts for the Variation in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American
Economic Review, 2001, 91(4), pp. 832-857.
    Basu, Susanto and Kimball, Miles. “Long-Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption.” University of Michigan mimeo, 2002.
    Blau, Francine and Kahn, Lawrence. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
Married Women: 1980-2000.” NBER Working Paper 11230, 2005.
    Bloemen, Hans and Stancanelli, Elena. “Financial Wealth, Consumption Smooth-
ing and Income Shocks Arising from Job Loss,” Economica, 2005, 72(3), pp. 431-452.
    Blundell, Richard; Duncan, Alan and Meghir, Costas. “Estimating Labor Supply
Responses Using Tax Reforms.” Econometrica, 1998, 66(7), pp. 827-862.
    Blundell, Richard and MaCurdy, Thomas. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics.
Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999.
    Bodie, Zvi; Merton, Robert and Samuelson, William. “Labor Supply Flexibility
and Portfolio Choice in a Life Cycle Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
1992, 16, pp. 427-450.
    Browning, Martin and Crossley, Timothy. “Unemployment Insurance Benefit Lev-
els and Consumption Changes.” Journal of Public Economics, 2001, 80, pp. 1-23.
    Browning, Martin; Deaton, Angus and Irish, Margaret. “A Profitable Approach
to Labor Supply and Commodity Demands Over the Life Cycle.” Econometrica, 1985, 53,
pp. 503-44.
    Browning, Martin; Hansen, Lars Peter and Heckman, James. “Micro Data and
General Equilibrium Models.” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999.
    Chetty, Raj. “Consumption Commitments, Unemployment Durations, and Local Risk
Aversion.” NBER Working Paper 10211, 2004.
    Cochrane, John H. “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy, 1991, 99, pp. 957-76.


                                         19
   Cohen, Alma and Einav, Liran. “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible
Choice.” NBER Working Paper 11461, 2005.
   Davis, Steven and Henrekson, Magnus. “Tax Eﬀects on Work Activity, Indus-
try Mix and Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich-Country Comparisons.” NBER
Working Paper 10509, 2004.
   Dynan, Karen. “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel
Data.” American Economic Review, 2000, 90(6), pp. 391-406.
   Eissa, Nada and Hoynes, Hillary. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor
Supply of Married Couples.” NBER Working Paper 6856, 1998.
   Epstein, Larry and Zin, Stanley. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political
Economy, 1991, 99, pp. 263-286.
   Feldstein, Martin. “The Eﬀect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel
Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103, pp. 551-572.
   Feldstein, Martin. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81, pp. 674-680.
   Friedberg, Leoria. “The Labor Supply Eﬀects of the Social Security Earnings Test.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2000, 82, pp. 48-63.
   Fuchs, Victor; Krueger, Alan B. and Poterba, James M. “Economists’ Views
about Parameters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature, 1998, 36, pp. 1387-1425.
   Gertler, Paul and Gruber, Jonathan. “Insuring Consumption Against Illness.”
American Economic Review, 2002, 3, pp. 51-70.
   Gruber, Jonathan. “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insur-
ance.” American Economic Review, 1997, 87, pp. 192-205.
   Gruber, Jonathan. “Unemployment Insurance, Consumption Smoothing, and Private
Insurance: Evidence from the PSID and CEX.” Research in Employment Policy, 1998, 1,
pp. 3-31.
   Gruber, Jonathan and Saez, Emmanuel. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evi-
dence and Implications.” Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 84(1), pp 1-32.
   Hall, Robert. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 1988, 96, pp. 339-357.
   Hall, Robert E., and Taylor, John B. Macroeconomics: Theory, Performance, and
Policy. 3rd ed. New York: Norton, 1991.
   Imbens, Guido; Rubin, Donald B. and Sacerdote, Bruce I. “Estimating the
Eﬀect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from
a Survey of Lottery Players.” American Economic Review, 2001, 91, pp. 778-794.
   Kaplow, Louis. “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk
Aversion.” The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2005, 31(1), pp. 23-34.
   King, Robert; Plosser, Charles and Rebelo, Sergio. “Production, Growth and


                                          20
Business Cycles I. The Basic Neoclassical Model.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1988,
21, pp. 309-341.
    Kocherlakota, Narayana. “The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 1996, 24, pp. 42-71.
    Koszegi, Botond and Rabin, Matthew. “Reference-Dependent Risk Attitudes.”
UC-Berkeley mimeo, 2005.
    MaCurdy, Thomas. “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting.”
The Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89, pp. 1059-1085.
    MaCurdy, Thomas; Green, David and Paarsch, Harry. “Assessing Empirical
Approaches for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply.” Journal of Human Resources, 1990,
25, pp. 415-90.
    Mehra, Rajnish and Prescott, Edward C. “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.” Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics, 1985, 15, pp. 145-161.
    Mulligan, Casey. “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions.” NBER Working Paper
8774, 2002.
    Pencavel, John. “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey.” in Ashenfelter, Orley and Richard
Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.
    Prescott, Edward. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1986, 10(3), pp. 9-22.
    Prescott, Edward. “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2004, 28(1).
    Rabin, Matthew. “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theo-
rem.” Econometrica, 2000, 68, pp. 1281-1292.
    Starmer, Chris. “Developments in Non-Expected Utility Theory: The Hunt for a
Descriptive Theory of Choice Under Risk.” Journal of Economic Literature, 2000, 38, pp.
332-382.
    Stephens, Melvin. “The Long-Run Consumption Eﬀects of Earnings Shocks.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2001, 83(1), pp. 28-36.
    Sydnor, Justin. “Sweating the Small Stuﬀ: The Demand for Low Deductibles in
Homeowners Insurance.” UC-Berkeley mimeo, 2005.
    Weil, Philippe. “Non-Expected Utility in Macroeconomics.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1990, 29—42.




                                          21
   Appendix A: Curvature of utility over wealth
   Define indirect utility over wealth when l is endogenous as

                                  v(y) = u(y + wl(y), l(y))

Since the envelope condition requires

                                    vy (y) = uc (c(y), l(y))

it follows that
                                                ∂c       ∂l
                                    vyy = ucc      + ucl
                                                ∂y       ∂y
   Recall the expression for ∂l/∂y in (4):

                                     ∂l
                                        = K(wucc + ucl )                                              (11)
                                     ∂y
                     1                                             ∂lc               uc
where K = − w2 ucc +2wu cl +ull
                                . Equation (5) implies that        ∂y
                                                                         = − w2 ucc +2wucl +ull
                                                                                                .   Utility
                       ∂lc
maximization requires ∂w > 0, implying that K > 0.
   Recognizing that ∂c/∂y = 1 + w∂l/∂y, it follows that

                                                     ∂l       ∂l
                                vyy = ucc + ucc w       + ucl
                                                     ∂y       ∂y

Now plug in using (11) for ∂l/∂y in the preceding expression to obtain

                           vyy = ucc + K[w2 u2cc + wucc ucl + u2cl ]
                               = ucc + K[wucc + ucl ]2

It follows that vyy > ucc which implies
                          −vyy    −ucc    −ucc y  y      y
                   γy =        y<      y=     c =γ =γ        <γ
                           vy      vy      uc c   c   y + wl

This proves that γ y < γ, i.e. that the curvature of utility over wealth is lower when l is
endogenous.




                                                22
   Appendix B: Construction of Tables 1 and 2
                                                                                y
    Notes on Table 1: In part A of Table 1, the first two rows assume wl           = 12 because
MaCurdy (1981) does not report the mean ratio of unearned to earned income in his sample
and the Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) elasticity estimates are an average across several
                                                  y
diﬀerent studies, some of which do not report wl    . All other rows in part A use the mean
reported values of y and wl in conjunction with the elasticity estimates reported in that
study. In part B, I use the CRRA approximation used to derive equation (10) to estimate γ
with the reported extensive-margin elasticities. In part C, I use the Imbens. et. al. income
elasticity estimate in conjunction with the compensated wage elasticity estimates from the
                     y
other studies with wl   = 12 . The compensated wage elasticity estimates in the earned income
literature are the elasticity of earned income with respect to the net of tax rate.
    In part D, for the Blau and Kahn (2005) study, I take the average of the three sets
of substitution elasticities reported for three diﬀerent periods. The income elasticity is
defined as the elasticity of women’s hours with respect to husband’s wages and computed in
corresponding fashion. I estimate γ using the mean value of y and wl reported by Blau and
Kahn for their sample.
    For the remaining two studies in part D, I first estimate the uncompensated wage elastic-
ity εl,w from Mulligan (2002), who reports a 25 percent drop in aggregate hours over the 20th
century while real hourly wages rose by roughly a factor of 8. This implies εl,w ≈ −0.035.
To account for the possibility that labor supply might be less arduous than it was 100 years
ago (e.g. individuals get more breaks today), I double this value to obtain εl,w = −.07.
Note that placing a lower bound on εl,w leads to an upper bound on γ given an estimate
of εcl,w . Estimates of the compensated wage elasticity are obtained from other studies that
compare trends or levels across countries with varying tax and transfer regimes (Prescott
2004, Davis and Henrekson 2004). These tax responses can be interpreted as compensated
wage elasticities of aggregate labor supply since non-transfer government expenditure can be
viewed as unearned income in the aggregate. Income elasticities are then computed for each
                                                                              y
study using the Slutsky equation under the assumption εl,w = −0.07 with wl        = 12 . Finally,
                                                                                     y
I compute γ using the resulting compensated wage and income elasticities with wl        = 12 .
    The overall mean estimates of γ are unweighted means of the values reported in each
study. In computing the mean, the Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) values are given a weight
of 20 since this line represents an average of twenty diﬀerent studies.

    Notes on Table 2: The formula used for the calibrations reported in Table 2 is derived
as follows. Rewrite the Slutsky equation given in (5) in terms of elasticities:

                                                        lw
                                      εlc ,w = εl,w −      εl,y
                                                         y

Let I ≡ − lw ε = − ∂wl
           y l,y    y
                       denote the income eﬀect of a wage increase. Then we can write γ


                                               23
in terms of I as:
                                    y I              y ∆c ∆l
                         γ = (1 +     ) c /(1 − (1 +     / ))                       (12)
                                    wl εl,w          wl c l
                                                                      y
The values reported in the table are computed using this formula with wl = 12 .
     To derive the bound of εcI < 43 implied by the macro trend evidence described in the
                             l,w
text, note that εl,w = −0.07 is a lower bound on the uncompensated wage elasticity for
reasons described above. Given this parameter, it is necessary to place a lower bound on
εcl,w to obtain an upper bound on εcI and γ. Most studies find εcl,w above 0.2, with the
                                    l,w
macroeconomic evidence suggesting larger values. With εl,w = −0.07 and εcl,w = 0.2, the
Slutsky equation implies that εcI ≈ 43 .
                              l,w




                                           24
       Appendix C: Extensive Margin
   Suppose that the agent makes a binary decision to work and supply 1 unit of labor or
not to work at all. Let y denote unearned income and w the additional income earned by
working. Returning temporarily to additive utility over consumption and leisure, redefine
u(c) as the utility from consumption. Let ψ denote disutility of supplying 1 unit of labor.
The agent chooses labor supply by solving

                                            max u(y + wl) − ψl
                                            l∈{0,1}


He works if his disutility of labor is less than the utility of an additional w units of consump-
tion, i.e. if

                                         b
                                     ψ < ψ(y, w) ≡ u(y + w) − u(y)

   Suppose there is heterogeneity in disutility of labor in the economy given by a smooth
density f (ψ). Then the fraction of workers who participate in the labor force is
                                                      Z ψ
                                                        b(y,w)
                                          θ(y, w) =              f (ψ)dψ                                   (13)
                                                       0

It follows that
                                         ∂θ/∂y   uc (y) − uc (y + w)
                                     −         =                                                           (14)
                                         ∂θ/∂w        uc (y + w)
This expression shows that the percent change in marginal utility of wealth from y to y + w
is equal to the ratio of the income and wage eﬀects on labor supply. In the intensive labor
supply model, we could compute γ(c) at any level c without making any functional form
assumptions because we could observe how marginal utility changes for small changes in
income. With extensive labor supply decisions, we observe only the change in marginal
utility between y and y + w. Consequently, we need to make a functional form assumption
for u(c) to translate the change in marginal utilities into a coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion.
I assume CRRA utility.14 Then
                                                  c1−γ
                                         u(c) =
                                                 1−γ
       Under this assumption, (14) implies

                                          ∂θ/∂y   y −γ − (y + w)−γ
                                      −         =
                                          ∂θ/∂w       (y + w)−γ
  14
    If γ(c) actually varies with c, this method yields the best constant-γ fit of the data, which can be loosely
interpreted as the average γ(c) in the region c ∈ [y, y + w].



                                                       25
Solving for γ yields
                                                      εθ,y w
                                            log[1 −   εθ,w y
                                                             ]
                                       γ=               w
                                             log[1 + y ]
Finally, a model of exogenous extensive-margin labor supply shocks analogous to that in the
intensive margin case can be used to derive an estimator for γ when utility is not additive:
                                                      εθ,y w
                                            log[1 −   εθ,w y
                                                             ]
                                   γ=              ∆c            w                     (15)
                                        log[(1 −    c
                                                      )(1   + y )]
        ∆c
where   c
             denotes the consumption drop associated with job loss.




                                               26
                                                                                                                 ∆ct ∆lt         ∆c ∆l
   Appendix D: Short-Run vs. Long-Run Complementarity:                                                           ct
                                                                                                                    / lt   and   c
                                                                                                                                   /l

    This appendix establishes a connection between the consumption drop observed from a
transitory labor supply shock and the corresponding drop that would result from a permanent
labor supply shock. When the short-run drop understates the size of the long-run drop, I
show that the ratio of these two values can be bounded by a parameter that measures the
strength of cross-period complementarities in utility.
    Let ∆ct /ct
                | , denote the consumption change in period t for a permanent labor supply
        ∆lt /lt LR
shock that raises labor supply proportionally in all periods by ∆lt /lt = ∆l/l. Let ∆c    t /ct
                                                                                                |
                                                                                        ∆lt /lt SR
denote the response of consumption in period t to a transitory labor supply fluctuation that
shifts lt alone. The analysis below requires the following assumption.
    Assumption A1. Within-period complementarity across consumption and labor is
stronger than cross-period complementarities: |Uct lt | > |Uct lt+1 |.
    This condition is intuitive: it requires that a transitory shock to lt generates smaller ∆cs
for s 6= t than a permanent shock to l that changes lt ∀t.
    I begin by considering the eﬀect of transitory variation labor supply on consumption.
Assume without loss of generality that the agent faces uncertainty in l1 , while all subsequent
ln are known with certainty. Denote the two states of the world with superscripts a and b
and assume l1a > l1b . An agent maximizing utility over his lifecycle chooses his consumption
allocation across the two states to satisfy:

                  Uc1 (ca1 , ca2 , ..., can , l1a , l2 , ..., ln ) = Uc1 (cb1 , cb2 , ..., cbn , l1b , l2 , ..., ln )

   Take a Taylor expansion to simplify the right hand side of this expression:
                                                                          X                         X
                Ucb1 = Uca1 + Uc1 c1 ∆c1 + Uc1 l1 ∆l1 +                        Uc1 cn ∆cn +               Uc1 ln ∆ln
                                                                         n>1                        n>1

Here and subsequently we drop the remainder from this expression, which is appropriate if
we ultimately take the limit as ∆l → 0 as in the text. Since ∆ln = 0 ∀n > 1, the optimality
condition simplifies (taking the limit as ∆l1 → 0) to:

                                              ∆c1                X          ∆cn
                                   −Uc1 c1        |SR = Uc1 l1 +     Uc1 cn
                                              ∆l1                n>1        ∆l1
            U
Let γ c1 = − Uc1c c1 c1 , the curvature of utility over period 1 consumption. Algebraic rearrang-
                 1
ment of the preceding condition gives

                                   ∆c1 /c1                  X            ∆cn /cn
                            γ c1           |SR = εUc1 ,l1 +     εUct ,cn         |SR                                              (16)
                                   ∆l1 /l1                  n>1          ∆l1 /l1
                                                                                                                                   ∆lt
   Now consider permanent variation in in l, resulting in a constant proportional change                                           lt


                                                                 27
for all t. A corresponding optimality condition for the consumption vector is:

                      Uc1 (ca1 , ca2 , ..., can , l1a , l2a , ..., lna ) = Uc1 (cb1 , cb2 , ..., cbn , l1b , l2b , ..., lnb )

Taking a Taylor expansion of RHS as above and simplifying gives the approximate require-
ment:
                                ∆c1                X          ∆cn       X          ∆ln
                     −Uc1 c1        |LR = Uc1 l1 +     Uc1 cn     |LR +     Uc1 ln     |LR
                                ∆l1                n>1        ∆l1       n>1        ∆l1

which implies

                    ∆c1 /c1                  X             ∆cn /cn       X            ∆ln /ln |LR
             γ c1           |LR = εUc1 ,l1 +     εUc1 , cn         |LR +     εUc1 ,ln                                           (17)
                    ∆l1 /l1                  n>1           ∆l1 /l1       n>1           ∆l1 /l1

   Comparing (16) and (17), it follows that

 ∆c1 /c1       ∆c1 /c1       X εUc ,cn ∆cn /cn       ∆cn /cn         X εUc ,ln ∆ln /ln |LR
                                   1                                       1
         |LR =         |SR +          (        |LR −         |SR ) +                       (18)
  ∆l/l         ∆l1 /l1       n>1 γ c1   ∆l/l         ∆l  /l
                                                       1 1           n>1 γ c1    ∆l/l

    Since we are interested in placing bounds on complementarity, I focus on the case where
ct and lt are complements, i.e. ∆c      1 /c1
                                              |
                                      ∆l1 /l1 SR
                                                 > 0. Equation (18) indicates that the short
run consumption drop understates the long-run drop if the last two terms on the right
hand side are positive. Under the assumption that cross-period complementarity is weaker
than within-period complementarity, it follows that ∆c             n /cn
                                                                         |
                                                                 ∆l1 /l1 SR
                                                                            < ∆c∆l/l
                                                                                 n /cn
                                                                                       |LR . Therefore,
complementarity of consumption and labor across periods (εUc1 ,cn > 0 and εUc1 ,ln > 0) will
lead to ∆c∆l/l
           1 /c1
                 |LR > ∆c1 /c1
                               | . Since this is the case of interest in deriving a bound on risk
                       ∆l1 /l1 SR
aversion, I focus on it below.
    Note that                                   P
                                     ∆c/c         ct ( ∆c
                                                       ct
                                                          t ∆l
                                                           / l |LR )
                                              =        P
                                      ∆l/l                 ct
equals a consumption-weighted average of the consumption change (across all periods) asso-
ciated with the long-run labor supply shock ∆l/l. Hence, ∆c/c ∆l/l
                                                                   ≤ maxt ∆c
                                                                          ct
                                                                             t ∆l
                                                                              / l |LR , i.e. the
total consumption drop is lower than the largest drop in a given period. Without loss of
generality, assume that the period with the largest drop is t = 1. Let

                                                         ∆ct /ct       ∆c1 /c1
                                                δt =             |LR −         |LR
                                                         ∆l/l           ∆l/l

denote the deviation of the consumption change in period t from the period 1 change.




                                                                       28
Rewrite (18) as

          ∆c1 /c1          X εUc ,cn     ∆c1 /c1       X εUc ,cn       ∆cn /cn
                                 1                            1
                  |LR (1 −           ) =         |SR +           (δn −         |SR )
           ∆l/l            n>1 γ c1      ∆l1 /l1       n>1 γ c1        ∆l1 /l1
                                           X εUc ,ln ∆ln /ln |LR
                                                   1
                                         +
                                           n>1   γ c1
                                                        ∆l/l

When consumption is complementarity across periods, it can be shown that ∆c     n /cn
                                                                                      | > 0.
                                                                              ∆l1 /l1 SR
Intuitively, the agent will choose higher consumption at all times in the high transitory-
labor state to maintain similar consumption streams across periods in the two states. Since
δ t ≤ 0∀t by construction, it follows that


             ∆c/c      X εUc ,cn     ∆c1 /c1        X εUc ,ln ∆ln /ln |LR
                             1                              1
                  (1 −           ) ≤         |SR +
             ∆l/l      n>1 γ c1      ∆l  /l
                                        1 1         n>1   γ c1     ∆l/l
                                          ∆ct /ct         X εUc ,ln ∆ln /ln |LR
                                                                 1
                                   ≤ max[         |SR ] +
                                      t   ∆lt /lt         n>1  γ c1
                                                                        ∆l/l

where maxt [ ∆ct /ct
                     | ] is the largest observed short-run consumption drop over the agent’s
             ∆lt /lt SR
lifecycle. Since ∆ln /ln |LR equals ∆l/l by construction in all periods, rearrangement gives

                  ∆c/c   1       ∆ct /ct
                       ≤    max[         |SR ]
                  ∆l/l   µ t ∆lt /lt
                                     P                   P
                         γ c1 ∆c/c − n>1 εUc1 ,cn ∆c/c − n>1 εUc1 ,ln ∆l/l
                     µ =                                                                   (19)
                                               γ c1 ∆c/c

Equation (19) shows that the ratio of ∆c    c
                                              / ∆l
                                                l
                                                   to ∆c
                                                      ct
                                                         t ∆lt
                                                          / lt is determined by µ, the degree of
cross-period complementarity in consumption. The denominator of µ represents the eﬀect of
raising period 1 consumption by a percentage ∆c/c (and leaving all other consumption and
labor levels fixed) on Uc1 (the marginal utility of consumption in period 1). The numerator
of µ is the eﬀect on Uc1 of increasing c in all periods by the same fixed percentage ∆c/c while
increasing labor supply in all periods n > 1 by a fixed percentage ∆l/l. Hence, µ represents
how much changing cn and ln in all other periods besides period 1 dampens the change in
Uc1 relative to a change in only c1 . Note that if there are no cross-period complementarities
in U, µ = 1.




                                              29
                                                                  TABLE 1
                                      Labor Supply Elasticities and Implied Coefficients of Relative Risk Aversion

                                                                                                Income       Compensated           γ            γ
               Study                          Sample                      Identification        Elasticity   Wage Elasticity    Additive    ∆c/c=0.15
                (1)                             (2)                            (3)                 (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)
A. Hours

MaCurdy (1981)                     Married Men                    Panel                          -0.020              0.130        0.46        0.60
Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)        Men                            Various                        -0.120              0.567        0.63        0.82
MaCurdy, Green, Paarsch (1990)     Married Men                    Cross Section                  -0.010              0.035        1.47        1.81
Eissa and Hoynes (1998)            Married Men, Inc < 30K         EITC Expansions                -0.030              0.192        0.88        1.08
                                   Married Women, Inc < 30K       EITC Expansions                -0.040              0.088        0.64        1.34
Friedberg (2000)                   Older Men (63-71)              Soc. Sec. Earnings Test        -0.297              0.545        0.93        1.46
Blundell, Duncan, Meghir (1998)    Women, UK                      Tax Reforms                    -0.185              0.301        0.93        1.66
Average                                                                                                                           0.69        0.94

B. Participation

Eissa and Hoynes (1998)            Married Men, Inc < 30K         EITC Expansions                -0.008              0.033        0.44        0.48
                                   Married Women, Inc < 30K       EITC Expansions                -0.038              0.288        0.15        0.30
Average                                                                                                                           0.29        0.39
C. Earned Income

Imbens, Rubin, Sacerdote (2001)    Lottery Players in MA          Lottery Winnings               -0.110
Feldstein (1995)                   Married, Inc > 30K             TRA 1986                                           1.040        0.32        0.41
Auten and Carroll (1997)           Single and Married, Inc>15K    TRA 1986                                           0.660        0.50        0.65
Average                                                                                                                           0.41        0.53
D. Macroeconomic/Trend Evidence
Blau and Kahn (2005)               Women                          Cohort Trends                  -0.278              0.646        0.60        1.29
Davis and Henrekson (2004)         Europe/US aggregate stats      Cross-Section of countries     -0.251              0.432        1.74        2.25
Prescott (2004)                    Europe/US aggregate stats      Cross-Country time series      -0.222              0.375        1.78        2.30
Average                                                                                                                           1.37        1.95
Overall Average                                                                                                                   0.71        0.97
NOTES -- All risk aversion estimates are computed at sample means of y and wl unless noted otherwise. In Part A, the Blundell and MaCurdy
estimates are an unweighted average of the 20 elasticities reported in that study and assumes y/wl=1/2. In Part B, calculations of γ assume
CRRA utility. In Part C, compensated wage elasticity column reports the elasticity of earned income with respect to the net-of-tax rate.
For these studies, the Imbens et. al. estimate of the income elasticity is used to compute g. In Part D, income elasticities for the Davis and
Henrekson and Prescott studies are computed from estimates in Mulligan (2002). See Appendix B for further details on the construction of this table.
                                     TABLE 2
         Labor Supply, Complementarity, and Risk Aversion: Calibration Results

                                      Labor Supply Elasticity Ratio: Ι/εcl,w
                               0.33       0.66      1.00        1.33           1.66
                       0.00    0.50       0.99      1.50        2.00           2.49
 Complementarity       0.05    0.54       1.07      1.62        2.16           2.69
   (∆c/c )/(∆l/l )     0.10    0.58       1.16      1.76        2.35           2.93
                       0.15    0.64       1.28      1.94        2.57           3.21
                       0.20    0.71       1.41      2.14        2.85           3.56


NOTES -- This table shows the implied value of γ for various income/substitution elasticity
ratios and consumption-labor complementarity levels. Values of γ are computed using
equation (12) with y/wl=1/2. See Appendix B for additional details.
       uc ,ul
                                 Case A: γ < 1        -ul(w0l,l)
                w0uc(w0l,l)                                        -ul range with
                                   w1uc(w1l,l)
                                                                   complementarity




                 w1uc(w1l,l)
                 Case B: γ > 1




                                     lB     l0   lA                  l

                                    FIGURE 1
         Risk Aversion and the Uncompensated Wage Elasticity of Labor Supply


    NOTE—This figure illustrates the labor supply decision of an agent who has no unearned
income (y = 0) at two wage levels (initial wage w0 and new wage w1 > w0 ). The downward-
sloping lines show the marginal consumption utility of working for an extra hour and the
upward sloping lines show the marginal disutility of working that hour. The optimal level
of labor supply is determined by the intersection of these curves. The eﬀect of the wage
increase on labor supply is shown for two cases under the assumption that ucl = 0: (A)
γ < 1, where the increase in w raises labor supply from l0 to lA ; and (B) γ > 1, where the
same increase in w reduces labor supply from l0 to lB . If ucl 6= 0, changes in w shift the
marginal disutility of labor curve as shown in the shaded region, loosening the bound on γ.
