NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTING FOR RACIAL DIFFERENCES
IN THE MENTAL ABILITY OF YOUNG CHILDREN
Roland G. Fryer
Steven D. Levitt
Working Paper 12066
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12066
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

We would like to thank Lawrence Katz, Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers for
helpful discussions on this topic. Katherine Barghaus, Sheldon Bond, Walter Lamberson and Ethan Lieber
provided truly outstanding research assistance. Financial support for this study was provided by the National
Science Foundation, the Milton Fund at Harvard University, the Sherman Shapiro Research Fund, and the
Alphonse Fletcher Sr. Fellowship. Mailing addresses: Roland Fryer, Littauer Building, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138; Steven Levitt, Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th Street,
Chicago, IL 60637. e-mail: rfryer@fas.harvard.edu; slevitt@uchicago.edu. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Roland G. Fryer and Steven D. Levitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Testing for Racial Differences in the Mental Ability of Young Children
Roland G. Fryer and Steven D. Levitt
NBER Working Paper No. 12066
February 2006
JEL No. J15, I20
ABSTRACT
On tests of intelligence, Blacks systematically score worse than Whites, whereas Asians frequently
outperform Whites. Some have argued that genetic differences across races account for the gap.
Using a newly available nationally representative data set that includes a test of mental function for
children aged eight to twelve months, we find only minor racial differences in test outcomes (0.06
standard deviation units in the raw data) between Blacks and Whites that disappear with the
inclusion of a limited set of controls. The only statistically significant racial difference is that Asian
children score slightly worse than those of other races. To the extent that there are any geneticallydriven racial differences in intelligence, these gaps must either emerge after the age of one, or
operate along dimensions not captured by this early test of mental cognition.
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center, M-7
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu
Steven D. Levitt
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
slevitt@uchicago.edu

Blacks in the United States have consistently scored worse than Whites on tests of
IQ and academic achievement (Shuey, 1958; Jensen, 1973, 1998; McGurk et al., 1982;
Hernstein and Murray, 1994). Among teenagers and adults, the Black-White test score
gap is typically one standard deviation in magnitude. Large racial gaps in test scores
have been found in children as young as two years old (Scott and Sinclair, 1997), and the
one standard deviation racial gap observed later in life is present by age three (Rushton
and Jensen, 2005). Even after accounting for a host of demographic and socio-economic
factors such as parental income, education, occupation, home environment, birth weight,
region, and urbanicity, a substantial Black-White test score gap generally remains.1
Asians, on the other hand, tend to have systematically higher mean test scores than those
of other races (Campbell et al., 1966; Burkett et al., 1995; Rushton, 1995; Fryer and
Levitt, 2004; Brooks-Gunn and Markman 2005).
Some scholars have argued that the combination of high heritability of
intelligence (typically above .7, see, for instance, Neisser, 1996) and persistent racial
gaps in test scores is evidence of genetic differences across races (Jensen, 1973, 1998;
Rushton and Jensen, 2005). As Nisbett (1998) and Phillips et al. (1998) argue, however,
the fact that Blacks, Whites, and Asians grow up in systematically different environments
makes it difficult to draw strong causal genetically based conclusions.

1

See, for instance, (Campbell et al., 1966; Baughman and Dahlstrom, 1968 Scarr, 1981; Kaufman and
Kaufman, 1983; Naglieri, 1986; Bracken, Insko and Sabers, 1987; Humphreys, 1988; Krohn and Lamp,
1989; Brooks-Gunn, 1993a; Brooks-Gunn, Duncan and Kelbanov, 1994, 1996; Phillips et al., 1998;
Phillips, 2000; Coley, 2002). A notable exception to this pattern emerges in the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study Kindergarten (ECLS-K) sample of children who entered kindergarten in 1998. This
nationally representative sample differs from prior data in that the raw Black-White test score gap at the
time children enter kindergarten is substantially smaller than in most prior studies (0.64 standard deviations
in math, and 0.41 standard deviations in reading), and that the inclusion of a small number of demographic
and socio-economic controls erases the gap (Fryer and Levitt, 2004). Although through the first four years
of school, the Black-White test score gap grows substantially, and by the end of third grade these controls
no longer account for the differences in test scores across races (Fryer and Levitt, forthcoming).

2

Data on mental function in the first year of life represents a potentially important
piece of evidence to inform this debate.2 To the extent that environmental factors play a
smaller role at early ages (or alternatively, researchers are better able to measure and
control for the environmental factors affecting infants), the presence of an early racial gap
in test scores would bolster the argument in favor of a genetic basis for racial differences.
On the other hand, an absence of racial differences in mental abilities among children age
9-12 months substantially complicates (but does not rule out) a genetic basis for a racial
IQ gap. To the extent that some aspects of adult intelligence only emerge at later stages
of development, or that these aspects go unmeasured in the early test of mental function,
the genetics story cannot be definitively rejected with these data.
Because of data limitations, prior research has not been able to directly address
this question (Rushton and Jensen, 2005). Studies measuring cognitive abilities of young
children have been small-scale, rare, and based on convenience samples that are not
drawn with the goal of being nationally representative. For instance, many of the samples
involve a limited number of babies born in a particular hospital or metropolitan area
(Gravem, Ireton and Thwing, 1970; Wilson 1983), preterm infants (Rose and Wallace,
1985), those with birth weights less than 1,500 grams (Dezoete, MacArthur and Tuck,
2003), or children with rare medical conditions (McGarth et al., 2004). The Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) is the first large, nationally
representative sample with measures of mental functioning (a shortened version of the
Bayley Scale of Infant Development (BSID)) for children aged one and under.
2

The usefulness of early tests of mental function depends critically on the assumption that these tests are
strongly related to future test scores. Measures of cognitive ability at one year of age (similar to those used
in this study) have been found to be strong predictors of test scores later in life by some researchers
(Bradley, Caldwell and Elardo, 1975; Wilson, 1983; DiLalla et al., 1990; McGarth, 2004), although other
studies report a weaker relationship (Honzik, 1983; Rose and Wallace, 1985; Kopp and McCall, 1990;
Anderson, Sommerfelt and Sonnander, 1998). This evidence is discussed in greater detail later in the
paper.

3

Analyzing these data, we find extremely small racial differences in mental
functioning of children aged eight to twelve months. With controls only for the child’s
age and gender, the mean White infant outscores the mean Black infant by .064 standard
deviation units – only a tiny fraction of the one standard deviation racial gap observed at
older ages. The raw scores for Blacks are indistinguishable from Hispanics and Asians,
who also slightly under perform Whites. Adding controls for socio-economic status,
home environment, and prenatal circumstances further compresses the observed racial
differences. With these covariates, we cannot reject equality in test scores across any of
the racial/ethnic groups examined, except Asians. In our sample Asian babies do slightly,
but statistically significantly, worse than babies of other races.
When we calibrate these results to a simple model in which test scores are
affected by both genes and environment, the characterization that best matches the
observed data is one in which there are small mean racial differences in intelligence,
environmental factors become increasingly important determinants of test scores as
children age, and there are large mean racial differences (roughly 1.5 standard deviations)
in environment.
These findings pose a substantial challenge to the simplest, most direct, and most
often articulated genetic stories regarding racial differences in mental function. They do
not, however, preclude systematic genetic differences across races as an explanation for
later observed test score gaps if, for instance, racial gaps are concentrated in higher-order
thinking which only emerges later in life. The late emergence of racial differences in test
scores is also consistent with the existence of a gene-environment interaction such as
argued by Dickens and Flynn (2001). In their model, a positive feedback loop exists

4

between genes and environment, which over time serves to magnify small initial
differences when genetics and environmental circumstances are positively correlated.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the data.
Section III presents the basic empirical estimates. Section IV assesses the sensitivity of
the findings to alternative specifications. Section V develops a simple model of genes and
environment and explores the extent to which particular characterizations of the model
are able to reproduce the observed patterns in the data. Section VI concludes.

II. The Data
The data we analyze, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey Birth Cohort
(ECLS-B), is a nationally representative sample of over 10,000 children born in 2001.
The first wave of data collection was performed when most of the children were between
eight and twelve months of age.3 The data set includes an extensive array of information
from parent surveys, interviewer observation of parent-child interactions, and mental and
motor proficiency tests. Further details on the study design and data collection methods
are available at the ECLS website (http://nces.ed.gov/ecls).
To measure mental proficiency, the ECLS-B uses an abbreviated version of the
BSID known as the Bayley Short Form–Research Edition (BSF-R), which was designed
to measure the development of children eight to eleven months of age in five broad areas:
exploring objects (e.g., reaching for and holding objects), exploring objects with a
purpose (e.g., trying to determine what makes the ringing sound in a bell), babbling, early
problem solving (e.g., when a toy is out of reach, using another object as a tool to retrieve
the toy), and communicating with words. A child’s score is reported as a proficiency
3

These children will eventually be resurveyed four times between the present and first grade. At the
present time, only the first wave of data is available.

5

level, ranging from 0 to 1 on each of the five sections. These five proficiency scores
have also been combined into an overall measure of cognitive ability using standard scale
units. Most of our analysis focuses on this overall metric. The test is administered by a
trained interviewer and takes twenty-five to thirty-five minutes to complete.
Because this particular test instrument is newly designed for ECLS-B, there is no
direct evidence regarding the correlation between performance on this exact test and
outcomes later in life. There is, however, a substantial literature of longitudinal studies
relating BSID test scores of children aged eight to twelve months to tests of intelligence
later in life. Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the correlations observed in
this prior literature, weighting the estimates of the various papers by the number of
subjects included in each study.4 The horizontal axis is the age in years that the
subsequent tests were administered and the vertical axis contains the average correlation
between the BSID score and another measure of intelligence. The figure shows that the
average correlation between BSID and future IQ scores starts very high and decreases as
children age, stabilizing with an average correlation around 0.3 at approximately five
years of age. For purposes of comparison, when older children are given achievement
scores three years apart, the correlation between scores is on the order of 0.6 (Cruse et al.,
1996).5
A correlation of .3 between the BSID and future measures of IQ means that the
BSID score explains only nine percent of the variation in future test scores for a
particular individual. Even though one can explain relatively little of the within-person
variation over time in test scores, one would still expect to observe large differences in
4

Appendix Table 1 list the full set of papers and reported correlations on which Figure 1 is based.
Other infant tests, such as the Cattell Infant Intelligence Scale, Gesell Development Schedules, or BrunetLezine Development Scales, have a substantially lower correlation with later achievement than does the
BSID (Escalona and Moriarty, 1961; Karlberg et al., 1968; Birns and Golden, 1972).
5

6

mean test scores by race on the BSID given the prior evidence. Yeates, et al. (1983), for
instance, report a correlation between maternal IQ (assessed using the Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale at the time of interview) and the BSID of twelve month old children as
.36. For purposes of comparison, the correlation between maternal IQ (using the same
metric) and the well-known Stanford-Binet at three years old is .39. Given the observed
one standard deviation in maternal IQ between Whites and Blacks, a correlation of .36
between child’s BSID and mother’s IQ would imply expected mean differences between
White and Black one-year olds of .36 standard deviations.6
The ECLS-B sample includes observations on 10,688 children. For 556 of these
individuals, no mental ability test was performed. These subjects are dropped from the
analysis. This is the only exclusion we make from the sample.7 Throughout the analysis,
the results we report are weighted to be nationally representative using sampling weights
included in the data set.8
Table 1 provides summary statistics by major racial/ethnic group in ECLS-B.
The mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive racial/ethnic categories we report are:
non-Hispanic Whites (which we simply deem “White”), non-Hispanic Blacks (“Black”),
Hispanics, Asians/Pacific Islander (“Asian”), and other race (which combines children
characterized as Native American, mixed race, or other race). The top panel of the table
reports means and standard deviations by race on the overall measure of mental ability.
For ease of interpretation of the regressions, the overall test score has been normalized to
6

Indeed, given the results cited in Rushton and Jensen (2005) regarding one standard deviation racial gaps
in IQ tests administered at age 3 and the stability in Black-White differences over time, one might expect to
observe racial differences in the BSID of one standard deviation.
7
In cases where there are missing values for another of the covariates, we set these missing observations
equal to zero and add an indicator variable to the specification equal to one if the observation is missing
and equal to zero otherwise.
8
A comparison of the ECLS-B sample characteristics with known national samples such as the US Census
and the Center for Disease Control’s Vital Statistics confirms that the sample characteristics closely match
the national averages.

7

have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one for the sample as a whole. Whites
score .018 standard deviations better than the sample mean on the overall mental
measure.
The next panel of the table presents basic demographic characteristics, which are
generally similar across groups. Age at testing is approximately equal across races. As
would be expected, Blacks are over represented in the South and underrepresented in the
West. Asians and Hispanics are seen in greatest numbers in the West. The fraction of
girls and boys are similar across all racial groups.
The third panel has variables capturing the home environment, including socioeconomic status (SES) quintiles, number of siblings, family structure, mother’s age, and
an interviewer rating of the effectiveness of the “parent as a teacher” based on
observation of parent-child interactions in a structured problem-solving environment.9
The socio-economic status measure is constructed by ECLS and includes parental
income, occupation, and education. Whites and Asians are concentrated in the higher
ranges of the SES distribution; Blacks, Hispanics, and the “other race” category have
below average SES. Roughly 90 percent of White and Asian infants are living in
households with two biological parents compared to only 41 percent among Blacks. On
average, children in our sample have approximately one sibling; Asian children have
slightly fewer and Black kids slightly more. White and Asian mothers tend to be older.
White parents fare better than the other racial groups on the interviewer evaluation of
“parent as teacher” effectiveness.
9

The “parent as a teacher evaluation” is based on the Nursing Child Assessment Teaching Scale (NCATS).
The NCATS scale is composed of 73 binary (yes/no) items that are scored by trained observers. The
NCATS coding system has two main scales: the parent scale, which has 50 items, and the child scale with
23 items. The parent scale of the NCATS focuses on the caregiver’s use of a “teaching loop,” which
consists of four components: (1) getting the child’s attention, and setting up the expectations for what is
about to be done; (2) instruction giving; (3) letting the child respond to teaching; and (4) feedback, on the
child’s attempts to do the task (Nord, 2004). The total parent score can range from 0 to 50 (Yes=1, No=0).

8

The final panel of Table 1 presents statistics on the prenatal circumstances of the
children. Extremely low birth weight (<1,500 grams) and premature birth are most
common among Blacks and least frequent for Whites and Asians. Twins and higher
order births are much more frequent among Whites, due primarily to the greater use of
infertility techniques such as in vitro fertilization (Hamilton and McManus, 2004).
Figure 2 plots the density of BSID test scores by race. The test score distributions
for infants of different races are essentially indistinguishable visually. Note that this is in
stark contrast to the distribution of other measures of intelligence for older children in
prior studies. Figure 2 makes the main point of the analysis. In the regression analysis
that follows, we control for a wide range of other factors, but the basic conclusion
suggested by Figure 2 is unchanged.

III. Racial Differences in the Mental Ability of Young Children
Our empirical approach involves weighted least squares estimation of equations
taking the general form:

β r Ri + ΓX i +ε i

MENTAL TESTi =
R

(1)

where i indexes individuals and r corresponds to the racial group to which an individual
belongs. MENTAL TEST reflects either the overall test score, or one of the underlying
components of the test – depending on our particular specification. The vector X captures
a wide range of possible control variables, and is an error term. Also included in all
specifications are interviewer-fixed effects, which adjust for any mean differences in
scoring of the test across interviewers.10

10

Each of the 13 regions was staffed by one field supervisor and between 14 and 19 interviewers, for a total
of 256 field staff (243 interviewers), who conducted an average of 42 child assessments each. The number

9

The basic results for the coefficients on the race variables are presented in Table
2. The omitted race category is “Whites,” so the other race coefficients are relative to
that omitted group. Each column reflects a different regression. The first column
includes only interviewer-fixed effects. As in the raw data, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians,
and “Other” races slightly under perform Whites. Only for Blacks can one reject the null
of no difference at the .05 level.
As one moves from left to right in Table 2, the set of covariates is progressively
expanded. The coefficients on the other covariates are not shown in the table, but full
estimation results can be found in Appendix Table 2. Column (2) adds controls for age at
which the test is administered and the gender of the child. Because the age the test is
taken is such an important determinant of test performance, we adopt an extremely
flexible, non-parametric functional form for age (including age in days linearly, age in
days squared, all the way up to a quintic in age). The R-squared in the regression jumps
substantially with the inclusion of the age and gender controls (from .14 in the first
column to .68 in the second column); which is mainly due to the age controls. A child
taking the test at age eleven months is predicted to perform .66 standard deviations better
than the same child when tested at age nine months, according to our estimates. Girls
outscore boys by .06 standard deviations on average, a difference that persists throughout
all our specifications. Including these controls improves the performance of Whites
versus other races because Whites are slightly younger on average when tested.
Column (3) adds indicators for the family’s SES quintile. The SES variable (not
shown in the main table) enters with the expected sign, i.e. higher SES children score
higher on the test, but the magnitude of the effects are small (a top quintile SES child
of interviews per interviewer range from 1 to 156. Almost all interviewers assessed children from different
races (James et al., 2004).

10

outscores a bottom quintile child by .08 standard deviations). Inclusion of the SES
variable shrinks the coefficient on Black and “other race.”
Adding a range of other controls for a child’s home environment (family
structure, mother’s age, number of siblings, and region dummies) shrinks the gap
between Whites and each of the other races. The only race coefficient that remains
statistically significant is the underperformance by Asians of roughly .06 standard
deviations. Adding a control for the interviewer assessment of “parent as teacher” in
column (5) further shrinks all of the race coefficients.
The final column adds controls for a range of prenatal condition variables (birth
weight, premature birth, and multiple births). The coefficient on Black becomes very
close to zero; the other race variables are not greatly affected. All the point estimates are
substantively small: the largest gap, between Asians and Whites, is only .048 standard
deviation units. After Whites, the group performing best is Blacks, although one cannot
reject equality between Blacks and any of the other groups.

IV. Sensitivity Analysis and Extensions of the Basic Analysis
Although on average we observe only minor differences across races in mental
test performance, important differences in sub-groups of the population remain a
possibility. Table 3 presents a wide range of estimates to test the sensitivity of our basic
results. Each row of the table presents the race coefficients from a separate regression.
In each case, the specification uses the full set of controls included in the final column of
the preceding table.
The top row of the table simply reproduces the baseline estimates from column
(6) of Table 2. The next row presents unweighted estimates. The subsequent rows
11

segment the table by gender, SES quintile, family structure, region, urbanicity, and birth
weight. Of the 104 coefficients presented, twelve are statistically significant at the .05
level; almost all of these correspond to underperformance by Asians.
Evidence exists that there are racial differences in early motor skills, with Blacks
outperforming other races and Asians lagging (Malina, 1988; Colombo, 1993; Toy et al.
2000). In our data, both Blacks and Asians outperform Whites on the test of motor skills.
If the early life test of mental abilities depends on both sensorimotor and intellectual
skills, precocity in the former might mask a deficiency in the latter among Blacks.
Therefore, we report results controlling for an individual’s performance on the test of
motor skills. The black coefficient increases from -.002 to -.034 with the inclusion of
motor skills, though the absolute magnitude of the difference continues to be extremely
small. All other racial groups remain essentially unchanged.
The final sensitivity test we report corresponds to the age at which the test of
mental function is administered. In prior studies, the correlation between BSID tests and
later IQ scores were higher when the BSID was administered to older infants (Bayley,
1955). Thus, if true, racial differences in intelligence are being masked by limitations of
the BSID to ascertain these differences for children at young ages, then we would expect
the racial differences in our sample to be smaller among the youngest children sampled
and larger among the older children sampled. The final rows of Table 3 provides no
evidence of this for Blacks, although for the “other race” category, the gaps are steadily
rising versus Whites with age.

A. Investigating the individual components underlying the composite mental test score

12

The overall test score is made up of five underlying components: exploration,
exploration with purpose, babbling, problem solving, and word use. Table 4 presents
regression estimates on each of these parts of the test. Each column corresponds to a
different component of the test. The mean level of proficiency and standard deviation in
that mean are reported at the bottom of each column. Note that we have not transformed
the proficiency scores on the sub-tests to have mean zero and standard deviation one, so
the estimates in this table are not directly comparable to those of the two preceding
tables. Because there is so little variation on some of the sub-tests, transforming each of
the tests to have the same standard deviation across children will artificially inflate test
score differences on the sections with little variation (i.e., explores objects and uses
words). Only the race coefficients are shown in the tables. The specifications include the
full set of controls, mirroring column (6) of Table 2. Nineteen of the twenty race
coefficients are negative, implying that in virtually all of the cases the omitted group
(Whites) shows greater proficiency. The magnitudes of the estimates, however, are quite
small: less than one-half a percentage point difference in proficiency in almost all cases.
In only one instance (less babbling done by Asians infants) is the gap between another
group and Whites statistically significant at the .05 level. The only positive estimate in
the table is associated with greater (but not statistically significantly different) babbling
by Blacks. Thus, there is little in the underlying test components to alter the conclusions
suggested by the composite measure of mental function.

V. Interpreting the results through the lens of a simple model of genes and environment
A number of stylized facts emerge from the analysis and literature reviewed in the
previous sections. In this section, we build a highly stylized model of the factors
13

underlying test scores. We then calibrate the model using research-generated parameter
estimates to determine how successful competing theories are in reconciling the facts
described above.

A. The model
We model test scores as determined by four factors: intelligence (denoted I),
environment (E), and an error term composed of two parts, a person-age specific error
component (θ) which is constant for an individual taking repeated versions of the test at a
given age, and a random noise term (ε) which varies with each administration of the test.
Both error terms are assumed to be mean zero. The person-age specific error term
captures the fact that different skills are tested at different ages (e.g., at early ages,
babbling is one of the measures, at later ages, how quickly one can complete a maze). An
individual may excel at the particular skills emphasized when testing is done at one age,
in which case the internal validity of the test will be high, but the predictive value for
future test scores (when other skills are emphasized) may be much lower. Formally, we
model the test score S as generated by:
(1)

S it* = α t I it + β t Eit + ε it + θ it

where i indexes individuals and t corresponds to the age at which the test is taken. Our
primary focus is on two periods t, which we denote e (age 8-12 months) and l for “later”
in life (roughly age 5 and beyond).
The test scores, measure of intelligence, and environmental factors are all scaled
in arbitrary units. Without loss of generality, we normalize the variables I and E to have
mean zero and variance equal to one. For simplicity, we will assume in the formal
modeling that there is a zero covariance between I, E, and the two error terms. We will
14

also assume that cov(θie θil)=0, cov(εie εil)=0, and cov(θit εit)=0 for all t. For simplicity,
we assume that environment and intelligence are uncorrelated, only briefly discussing at
the end of the section the implications for the model of allowing for feedback effects
between intelligence and environment. We do allow for correlations between intelligence
at early and late points in life, and likewise environment may be correlated over time for
an individual.

The coefficients on intelligence and environment are allowed to vary

depending on the age at which the test is taken.
Intelligence and environment are not directly observable. Rather, we see only a
test score. The test score is also measured in arbitrary units. We transform this test
score, which already has mean zero given the assumptions above, to have variance equal
to one across the population by dividing through by the standard deviation of the test,
calling the resulting variable S it :
(2)

Sit =

α t I it + βt Eit + θit + ε it
(α t2 + β t2 + λt2 + σ t2 )1/ 2

where λt2 and σ 2 denote the variances of θ it and ε it respectively.
Given our assumptions above, the internal reliability of the test as measured by
the correlation in test scores when the same person takes the test twice at the same age is

α t2 + βt2 + λt2
(3) corr ( Sit , S ) = 2
α t + βt2 + λt2 + σ t2
'
it

The correlation between an individual’s test scores early in life and when later
tested is given by
(4)

corr ( Sie , Sil ) =

α eα l cov( I e , I l ) + β e β l cov( Ee , El )
.
(α + β e2 + λe2 + σ e2 )1/ 2 (α l2 + β l2 + λl2 + σ l2 )1/2
2
e

15

Because the variance of each of the test scores is normalized to one, the correlation
between the test scores is also the covariance between the test scores.
Assuming that the same equations determine Black and White test scores and that
the tests are not racially biased (in the sense that θ and ε are mean zero for all races), the
mean racial test score gap at a point at a given age is represented by
(5)

SW ,t − S B ,t =

α t ( IW ,t − I B ,t ) + βt ( EW ,t − EB ,t )
(α t2 + β t2 + λt2 + σ t2 )1/ 2

where W and B correspond to White and Black, respectively, and a bar over a variable
represents the sample mean.

B. Reconciling the empirical estimates of the parameters with the model
The model presented above, in its most general form, imposes few restrictions on
the processes generating the data. For instance, an individual’s intelligence and
environment are allowed to change over time, as is the contribution of each of those
factors in determining the test score. In what follows, we consider the extent to which
more restrictive versions of the model that correspond to plausible theories of nature vs.
nurture are able to reproduce observed patterns in the data.
Table 5 presents the values that we use as stylized facts in calibrating the model.
The first two rows of the table correspond to the internal reliability of the test.
Andreassen and Fletcher (2005) report an internal reliability of .80 for the BSID test at an
early age. Later intelligence tests have been found to have internal reliability of .94
(White et al., 2004). Another parameter of interest is the correlation between test scores
early and later in life, as captured by equation (4). Based on Figure 2, we assign a value
of .30 to that correlation. Also relevant to pinning down our model is the correlation

16

between test scores when the same individual takes the test later in life, but separated by
several years. We assume a correlation of .60 in that case (Cruse et al., 1996). The
estimated Black-White test score gap at young ages is taken as .06 based on our findings,
compared to a gap of 1.0 at later ages based on prior research (Rushton and Jensen,
2005). The measured correlation between test scores early and late in life and parental
test scores is also useful to the analysis. Based on prior research, we take these two
correlations as .36 and .39 respectively.
The primary puzzle raised by our results is the following: how does one generate
small racial gaps on the BSID test scores administered at ages 8-12 months and large
racial gaps in tests of mental ability later in life, despite the fact that these two test scores
are reasonably highly correlated with one another ( =.3), and both test scores are
similarly correlated with parental test scores ( >.35)?

Model 1: Intelligence and environment are constant over time
The simplest version of the model is one in which an individual’s intelligence and
environment stay fixed over time, and the relationship between the test score and these
two factors is the same both early and later in life. Mathematically, in such a model, Iie=
Iil, Eie= Eil, e= l, and

e=

l,.

To solve the model, it is also convenient to assume that

λe2 = λl2 . Given these restrictions and noting the observed correlation in the data,
equation (4) above simplifies to
(4’)

corr ( Sie , Sil ) =

α2 + β2
= .30
(α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 + σ e2 )1/ 2 (α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 + σ l2 )1/2

Rearranging equation (3) and imposing the observed levels of internal reliability for the
tests administered early and late in life yields

17

(3’) α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 + σ e2 =

α 2 + β 2 + λ2

(3’’) α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 + σ l2 =

.80

α 2 + β 2 + λ2
.94

Substituting (3’) and (3’’) into the denominator of equation (4’) eliminates σ e2 and σ l2
from (4), yielding
(6)

α2 + β2
(α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 )

= .345 .

In order for this simplest model to reconcile the high internal reliability of the
tests with the much lower correlations for an individual across ages, almost two-thirds of
the variance in test scores at a point in time is being driven by the person-age specific
error term, rather than by intelligence or environment. Since the impact of intelligence
and environment are held fixed, the only thing that varies over time is the person-age
specific error term. The necessary variance in the person-age specific error term required
to fit the data would appear to be far too large to be realistic. Furthermore, in this
simplest of models, the racial test score gap observed early and late in life should be
similar, which is not the case. Consequently, the data are inconsistent with a simple
characterization in which both the level of an individual’s intelligence and environment
remain fixed over time and the importance of those factors in determining test scores.

Model 2: Intelligence has not yet emerged early in life
An alternative model is one in which an individual’s intelligence has not yet fully
developed at age 1, but otherwise the restrictions in the simple model are maintained. In
the most extreme conceptualization of this view, one would assume that Iie=0 for all
18

individuals. Such a model can generate a small racial test score gap early in life and a
one-standard deviation gap later in life if I W ,l > I B ,l . This model still implies a large
variance on the person-age specific shock. Most importantly, the model cannot explain
how one observes a similar degree of correlation between parental test scores and their
children’s test scores both early and later in life. Given the high degree of heritability in
intelligence, one would expect that if early test scores do not reflect intelligence, then
they should correlate much less strongly with parental test scores than later tests.11

Model 3: Intelligence remains fixed; environment grows in importance over time
One simple parameterization of the model that can generate results that are more
consistent with the observed correlations is one in which (1) intelligence remains fixed
for an individual over time, (2) the early and late test scores are equally influenced by
intelligence, and (3) the importance of environmental factors grows with age.12 A
mathematical characterization of these assumptions implies Iie= Iil,
l>0.

e=

l,

e=0,

and

As in the earlier model, for convenience we will impose λe2 = λl2 , although this

assumption could be relaxed. Under these assumptions equation (4) becomes

α2
(4’’) corr ( Sie , Sil ) = 2
= .30 .
(α + λ 2 + σ e2 )1/ 2 (α 2 + β l2 + λ 2 + σ l2 )1/2
Solving for σ e2 and σ l2 using the internal validity of the tests leads to
11

One possible line of argument in favor of such a model would be that early in life parents exert an
enormous influence on the child’s environment, and that there is a strong correlation between the parent’s
early environment and the child’s. Arguing against this conjecture is the relatively weak impact of
observable dimensions of environmental factors like SES in our test score regressions. Furthermore, since
the internal reliability of the early test score is lower, a similar correlation between parental test scores and
a child’s test scores early and later in life actually implies an even stronger correlation between parental and
child early in life, if we are able to measure the child early and late in life.
12
Alternatively, one can allow for the environmental impact to be similar early and late in life, with Black
and White environments being similar on average early in life, but with Blacks experiencing much worse
environments later in life.

19

(7)

corr ( Sie , Sil ) =

α2
1.153* (α 2 + λ 2 )1/ 2 (α 2 + β 2 + λ 2 )1/ 2

= .30 .

The racial test score gaps early and late in life are respectively
(8)

SW ,e − S B ,e =

α ( IW − I B )
= .06 , and
1.118*(α 2 + λ 2 )1/ 2

(9)

SW ,l − S B ,l =

α ( IW ,t − I B ,t ) + βl ( EW − EB )
= 1.0
1.031*(α t2 + β l2 + λ 2 )1/ 2

To close the model, we make the additional assumption that all of the variation in
test scores when children take the test later in life but three years apart (such test scores
are correlated .60) is due to the error terms, rather than changes in intelligence or
environment. This assumption will tend to exaggerate the magnitude of λ 2 . That final
assumption yields a final equation

α 2 + βl2
(10) corr ( Sil , Sil +3 ) =
= .60 ,
1.064*(α 2 + βl2 + λ 2 )
where we have already solved out for the ε term in equation (10) using the internal
reliability of the test later in life.
Equations (7)-(10) contain five unknowns ( α , βl , λ , and the mean racial gaps in I
and E). Without loss of generality, we can restrict α=1, with β and λ now scaled relative
to α,13 leaving four equations and four unknowns. Tedious algebraic manipulation yields
a solution to this set of equations such that

α * = 1, β * = 1.145, (λ 2 )* = 1.144, ( I w − I B )* = .102, and ( Ew − EB )* = 1.624 .
This model is able to generate the observed racial test score gaps both early and
late in life, and it does so with a smaller, more realistic variance on the person-age
13

This can be seen by multiplying both the numerator and denominator of the left-hand sides of equations
(7)-(9) by 1/α.

20

specific error term.14 This model can also reproduce the high levels of internal reliability
of the tests, fit the .30 correlation between early and later test scores, and plausibly
generate similar correlations between parent and child test scores early and later in life.15
In this model, a one-standard deviation change in environment has roughly the
same impact on test scores as does a one-standard deviation change in intelligence. The
required mean difference in environment between Blacks and Whites is slightly more
than 1.5 standard deviations. This magnitude of environmental difference, while large,
does not seem implausible. Using estimates from Fryer and Levitt (2004), there is a .75
standard deviation difference between Blacks and Whites in socioeconomic status, .83
standard deviations in the number of children’s books in the home, 1.30 standard
deviation difference in female-headed households, 1.51 standard deviation difference in
whether or not one feels safe in their neighborhood, a 1.5 standard deviation difference in
the percentage of kids in their school who participate in the free lunch program, and a
1.31 difference in the amount of loitering reported around the school by non-students.16
Adding to this the possible role of difficult to measure factors such as racial
discrimination or behavioral differences discouraging achievement (e.g. Austen-Smith
and Fryer, 2005), makes a 1.5 standard deviation difference in environment between
Blacks and Whites quite conceivable.

14

Whereas in the earlier model the person-age specific error term had to represent more than two-thirds of
the overall variance in test scores, in this model, about one-third of the variance comes from this source.
15
Early in life, all of the variation in test scores is driven by intelligence, which is highly heritable,
generating a parent-child correlation. Later in life, the intelligence channel continues to operate, but there
is an additional effect operating through environment. If the cross-generation correlation in environment
was as strong as that in intelligence, then one would expect to observe a higher correlation between later
test scores and parental test scores than is the case for early tests. In practice, however, the crossgeneration correlation in environment is much weaker than that for intelligence. Consequently, one could
plausibly generate similar correlations between a parent’s test score and a child’s test score early and late in
life in this model.
16
All estimates are derived by taking the difference in the mean of a variable between Blacks and Whites
and dividing by the standard deviation for Whites. The socioeconomic composite measure contains parental
income, education, and occupation.

21

More complicated models
In practice, it is likely that the true model generating the data incorporates
elements of both of the last two models discussed: allowing for intelligence to be only
partially formed at the time of the early test, and letting the importance of environment
grow with age. Such a model would allow us to fit the basic facts of the data, but with
smaller estimate on the coefficient on environmental differences. Allowing for geneenvironment interactions as in Dickens and Flynn (2001), which introduces a multiplier
effect with age, would further move the model in that direction.

VI. Discussion
The debate over racial differences in intelligence is among the most divisive in
the social sciences. Utilizing a newly available, nationally representative data set with
measures of mental function among children before their first birthday, we find little
evidence of systematic racial differences. Some substantively small, but statistically
significant differences are present in the raw data. Including controls for age, socioeconomic status, home environment and prenatal environment largely erase these small
differences. A simple calibration exercise suggests that many of the basic facts in the
data can be generated from a model in which there are small mean differences in
intelligence across races, but large environmental differences across races that become
increasingly important as children age.
Comparing the magnitude of differences observed in these data to prior studies of
children, teens, and adults puts into perspective how small the observed differences are in
this analysis of infants. Phillips et al. (1998), which investigates test outcomes among
22

kindergarteners in the early cohorts of the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth (NLSY), finds some of the smallest published racial gaps. They report a raw
Black-White gap of over one standard deviation, which shrinks to one-third of a standard
deviation with the inclusion of myriad controls. Those gaps are an order of magnitude
larger than what we find among infants.17
Although damaging to the hypothesis that genetic differences are at the root of
racial gaps in intelligence, the results of our analysis do not preclude a possible role for a
genetic contribution to racial differences in intelligence for a number of reasons. First,
one could reasonably argue that the control variables we include in the regression
analysis are themselves partly genetically determined. By controlling for factors such as
socio-economic status and birth weight (which systematically differ across races), we
may indirectly be parsing out important channels through which genetics are operating.
The fact that the raw differences in test performance across races are so small, however,
makes this argument largely moot.
A second possible argument one can make against our findings is that the
particular form of the BSID used in ECLS has not been proven to correlate with future
measures of intelligence. The relationship between other forms of the BSID and later test
scores calls this argument into question. Nonetheless, the answer to this inquiry cannot
be definitively determined in this data set at the present time. In principle, however,
retesting the subjects as they age provides a means of resolving this question.
A third argument in defense of the genetic story is that the BSID test is racially
biased in favor of Blacks. This is an issue worthy of further testing, although the fact that

17

As noted earlier, one possible explanation for the growing racial gap with age is a genetics-environment
interaction as proposed by Dickens and Flynn (2001).

23

small racial differences are observed across the four different skills that comprise the test
is circumstantial evidence against this claim.
A final argument in defense of the genetic story would be one in which the racial
differences are concentrated in higher order thinking (or general intelligence, “g”, see
Jensen, 1998) which may not yet have emerged among one year olds. Unlike the
argument in the preceding paragraph, it is not clear that such a hypothesis is easily tested
even with the passage of time.

24

References
Andreassen, C. and P. Fletcher. Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort.
Psychometric Analysis. Volume 1 of the ECLS-B Methodology Report for the 9
Month Data Collection. US Department of Education. 2005. Washington, DC.
National Center of Education Statistics.
Acheson, Shawn and Molfese, Victoria J. “Infant and Preschool Mental and Verbal
Abilities: How Are Infant Scores Related to Preschool Scores?” International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 1997, 20(4), pp. 595-607.
Andersson, Helle W.; Sommerfelt, Kristian and Sonnander, Karin. “Gender and its
contribution to the prediction of cognitive abilities at 5 years.” Scandinavian
Journal of Psychology, 1998, 39, pp. 267–74.
Austan-Smith, David, and Roland Fryer “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White.’
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), pp. 551-583.
Barnard, Kathryn E.; Bee, Helen L.; Clark, Barbara; Eyres, Sandra J.; Gray, Carol
A.; Hammond, Mary A.; Snyder, Charlene and Spietz, Anita L. “Prediction of
IQ and Language Skill from Perinatal Status, Child Performance, Family
Characteristics and Mother-Infant Interaction.” Child Development, 1982, 53(5),
pp. 1134-56.
Baughman, Earl and Dahlstrom, Grant W. Negro and White Children: A
Psychological Study in the Rural South. New York: Academic Press, 1968.
Bayley, Nancy. “On the Growth of Intelligence.” American Psychologist, 1955, 10,
pp.805-18.
Bethel, James; Green, James L.; Kalton, Graham and Nord, Christine. Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort (ECLS–B), Sampling. Volume 2 of
the ECLS-B Methodology Report for the 9-Month Data Collection, 2001–02.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, NCES, 2004.
Birns, Beverly and Golden, Mark. “Prediction of intellectual performance at 3 years
from infant tests and personality measures.” Merrill Palmer Quarterly, 1972, 18,
pp. 53-58.
Bracken, Bruce A.; Insko W. and Sabers, D. “Performance of Black and White
Children on the Bracken Basic Concept Scale.” Psychology in Schools, 1987,
24(1), pp. 22–27.
Bradley, Robert; Caldwell, Bettye M. and Elardo Richard. “The Relation of Infants’
Home Environment to Mental Test Performance from Six to Thirty-six Months: A
Longitudinal Analysis.” Child Development, 1975, 46(1), pp. 71-76.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne; Duncan, Greg J.; Klebanov, Pamela K. and Sealand, Naomi.
“Do Neighborhoods Influence Child and Adolescent Development?” American
Journal of Sociology, 1993a, 99(2), pp. 353–95.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne; Duncan, Greg J. and Klebanov, Pamela K. “Economic
Deprivation and Early-Childhood Development.” Child Development, 1994, 65
(2), pp. 296–318.
__________. “Ethnic Differences in Children’s Intelligence Test Scores: Role of
Economic Deprivation, Home Environment and Maternal Characteristics.” Child
Development, 1996, 67(2), pp. 396–408.
Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne and Markman, Lisa B. “The Contribution of Parenting to
Ethnic and Racial Gaps in School Readiness.” The Future of Children, 2005,
15(1), pp. 139-68.

25

Burkett, John; McMillen, Marilyn; Owings, Jeffery and Pinkerton, Daniel B.
“Statistics in Brief: Making the Cut: Who Meets Highly Selective College
Entrance Criteria?” Washington, DC: National Education Longitudinal Study
(NELS),1995.
Butler, Bruce V.; Goffeney, Barbara and Henderson, Norman B. “Negro-White,
Male-Female Eight-month Developmental Scores Compared with Seven-Year
WISC and Bender Test Scores.” Child Development, 1971, 42, pp. 595-604.
Campbell, Frances A.; Nicholson, Janet E. and Ramey, Craig T. “The Predictive
Power of the Bayley Scale of Infant Development and the Stanford-Binet
Intelligence Test in a Relatively Constant Environment.” Child Development,
1973, 44, pp. 790-95.
Campbell, Ernest Q.; Coleman, James S.; Hobson, Carol J.; McPartland, James;
Mood, Alexander M.; Weinfeld, Frederic D. and York, Robert L. Equality of
Educational Opportunity. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office
(GOP), 1966.
Chan Toy, Colleen; Deitz, Jean; Engel, Joyce M. and Wendel, Susan. “Performance
of 6-Month-Old Asian American Infants on the Movement Assessment of Infants:
A Descriptive Study.” Physical & Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics: A
Quarterly Journal of Developmental Therapy, 19(3/4), pp.5-23, 2000.
Coley, Richard J. An Uneven Start: Indicators of Inequality in School Readiness. Policy
Information Report. Educational Testing Service. Princeton, NJ: Educational
Testing Service (ETS), 2002.
Colombo, John. Infant Cognition: Predicting Later Intellectual Functioning.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications Inc., 1993.
Cruse, Carol L.; Dumont, Ron; Price, Linda and Whelley, Peter. “The Relationship
between the Differential Ability Scales (DAS) and the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children--Third Edition (WISC-III) for Students with Learning
Disabilities.” Psychology in the Schools, 1996, 33(3), pp. 203-09.
Dezoete, Anne J.; MacArthur, B.A. and Tuck, B. “Prediction of Bayley and StanfordBinet Scores with a group of very low birthweight children.” Child Care, Health
& Development, 2003, 29(5), pp. 367-72.
Dickens, William T.; Flynn, James. “Heritability Estimates Versus Large
Environmental Effects: The IQ Paradox Resolved.” Psychological Review, 2001,
108(2): 346-369.
DiLalla, Lisabeth F.; Cypher, Lisa H.; Fagan, Joseph F.; Fulker, David W.; Haith,
Marshall M.; Thompson, L.A.; Plomin, Robert and Phillips, Kay. “Infant
Predictors of Preschool and Adult IQ: A Study of Infant Twins and Their
Parents.” Developmental Psychology, 1990, 26(5), pp. 759-69.
DiLalla, Lisabeth F.; Lovelace, Laneel and Molfese, Victoria J. “Perinatal, Home
Environment and Infant Measures as Successful Predictors of Preschool cognitive
and Verbal Abilities.” International Journal of Behavioral Development, 1996,
19(1), pp. 101-19.
Enright, Mary K.; Jaskir, John and Lewis, Michael. “The Development of Mental
Abilities in Infancy.” Intelligence, 1986, 10, pp. 331-54.
Escalona, Sibylle K. and Moriarty, Alice. “Prediction of school age intelligence from
infant tests.” Child Development, 1961, 32(3), pp. 597-605.
Feldman, Judith F.; McCarton, Cecelia; Rose, Susan A. and Wallace, Ina.F.

26

“Information Processing at 1 Year: Relation to Birth Status and Developmental
Outcome During the First 5 Years.” Developmental Psychology, 1991, 27(5), pp.
723-37.
Fryer, Roland and Levitt, Steven. "Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap in
the First Two Years of School." Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004 86, pp.
447-64.
__________. “The Black-White Test Score Gap Through Third Grade.” American Law
and Economic Review (forthcoming).
Gannon, D.R. “Relationships between 8-Mo. Performance on the Bayley Scale of Infant
Development and 48-Mo. Intelligence and Concept Formation Scores.”
Psychological Reports, 1968, 23, pp. 1199-205.
Gravem, Howard; Ireton, Harold and Thwing, Edward. “Infant Mental Development
and Neurological Status, Family Socioeconomic Status and Intelligence at Age
Four.” Child development, 1970, 41(4), pp. 937-45.
Hamilton, Barton H. and McManus, Brian P. “Competition, Insurance, and Quality in
the Market for Advanced Infertility Treatment.” Mimeograph. St. Louis, MO:
Washington University, John M. Olin School of Business, 2004.
Hernstein, Richard J. and Murray, Charles. The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press, 1994.
Honzik, Marjorie P. “Measuring mental abilities in infancy: The value and limitations,”
in M. Lewis, ed., Origins of Intelligence. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Plenum, 1983,
pp. 67-105.
Humphreys, Lloyd G. “Trends in Levels of Academic Achievement of Blacks and Other
Minorities.” Intelligence, 1988, 12(3), pp. 231–60.
Jensen, Arthur R. Educability and Group Differences. New York: Free Press, 1973.
__________. The G Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1998.
Karlberg, P.; Klackenberg, G.; Engström, L.; Klackenberg-Larsson, L.;
Lichtenstein, H.; Stensson, J. and Svennberg, I. “The development of children
in a Swedish urbancommunity: A prospective, longitudinal study: parts l-VI.”
Acta Paediatrica Scandinavica Supplement, 1968, 187.
Kaufman, Alan S., and Kaufman, Nadeen L. K-ABC: Kaufman Assessment Battery for
Children. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Services, 1983.
Kopp, Claire B. and McCall, Robert B. “Predicting later mental performance for
normal, at-risk, and handicapped infants,” in Paul B. Baltes and Orville G. Brim,
Jr., eds., Life-span development and behavior. Vol 4. New York: Academic Press,
1990, pp. 31-61.
Krohn, Emily J. and Lamp, Robert E. “Current Validity of the Stanford-Binet Fourth
Edition and K-ABC for Head Start Children.” Journal of Psychology, 1989,
27(1), pp. 59–67.
Malina, Robert M. “Racial/ethnic variation in the motor development and performance
of American children.” Canadian Journal of Sport Sciences, 13(2), pp.136-43,
1988.
McGrath, Ellen; Bellinger, David C.; Newburger, Jane W.; Wypij, David and
Rappaport, Leonard A. “Prediction of IQ and achievement at age 8 years from
neurodevelopmental status at age 1 year in children with D-transposition of the
great arteries.” Pediatrics, 2004, 114 (5), pp. 572-76.
McGurk, Frank C. J.; Osborne, Robert T.; Osborne, Travis R.; and Shuey, Audrey
27

M., eds. The Testing of Negro Intelligence. Vol. 2. Athens, GA: The Foundation
for Human Understanding, 1982.
Myrianthopoulos, Ntinos C.; Naylor, Alfred F. and Willerman, Lee. “Intellectual
Development of Children from Interracial Matings: Performance in Infancy and at
4 Years.” Behavior Genetics, 1974, 4(1), pp. 83-90.
Naglieri, Jack A. “WISC-R and K-ABC Comparison for Matched Samples of Black and
White Children.” Journal of Social Psychology, 1986, 24(1), pp. 81–88.
Neisser, Ulric; Boodoo, Gwyneth; Bouchard, Thomas J.; Boykin, A. Wade; Brody,
Nathan; Ceci, Stephen J.; Halpern, Diane F.; Loehlin, John C.; Perloff,
Robert, Sternberg, Robert J. et al. “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns.”
American Psychologist, 1996, 51, pp. 77-101.
Nisbett, Richard E. “Race, Gentics and IQ,” in Christopher Jencks and Meredith
Phillips, eds., The Black-White test score gap. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institute, 1998, pp. 86-102.
Nord, Christine; Andreassen, Carol; Branden, Laura; Dulaney, Rick; Edwards,
Brad; Elmore, Anne; Flanagan, Kristin Denton; Fletcher, Philip; Green,
Jim; Hilpert, Richard et al. Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Birth Cohort
(ECLS-B), User’s Manual for the ECLS-B Nine-Month Public- Use Data File and
Electronic Code Book. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, NCES,
2004.
Phillips, Meredith; Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne; Crane, Jonathan; Duncan, Greg J. and
Klebanov, Pamela K. “Family Background, Parenting Practices, and the BlackWhite Test Score Gap,” in Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, eds., The
Black-White test score gap. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institute, 1998, pp.
103-45
Phillips, Meredith. “Understanding Ethnic Differences in Academic Achievement:
Empirical Lessons from National Data,” in David W. Grissmer and Michael J.
Ross, eds., Analytic Issues in the Assessment of Student Achievement.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), 2000, pp 103-32.
Rose, Susan A. and Wallace, Ina F. “Visual recognition memory: a predictor of later
cognitive functioning in preterms.” Child Development, 1985, 56 (4), pp. 843-52.
Rushton, Philippe J. “Race and crime: international data for 1989-1990.” Psychological
Reports, 1995, 76(1), pp. 307-12.
Rushton, J. Philippe and Arthur Jensen. “Thirty Years of Research on Race
Differences in Cognitive Ability.” Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 2005,
11(2), pp. 235-94.
Scarr, Sandra. Race, Social Class and Individual Differences in I.Q. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1981.
Scott, R. and Sinclair, D. “Ethnic-related cognitive profiles of black and white preschool children.” Homo- Journal of Comparative Human Biology, 1997, 28,
pp.116-20.
Shuey, Audrey M. The Testing of Negro Intelligence. Lynchburg, VA: J.P. Bell
Company, 1958.
White, Roberta, Richard Cambell, Patricia Janulewicz. Neuropsychological
Assessments in Children from a Longitudinal Perspective for the National
Children’s Study. Battelle Memorial Institute, 2004.
Wilson, Ronald S. “The Louisville Twin Study: Developmental Synchronies in

28

Behavior.” Child Development, 1983, 54(2), pp. 293-316.
Yeates, K. O.; MacPhee, D.; Campbell, F. A. and Ramey, C. T. “Maternal IQ and
home environment as determinants of early childhood intellectual competence:
Developmental analysis.” Developmental Psychology, 1983, 19, pp. 731-9.

29

Figure 1: The Correlation between Bayley Scores and Later IQ
Figure 1
1.00
0.90

Correlation with 8-12 month BSID-MDI

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1

1.5

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Age (years)

Notes: See Appendix Table 1 for a list of sources from which the correlations are based. Each is a (sample size) weighted average of
the correlations found across all relevant studies.

30

Figure 2: The Distribution of Bayley Scores, by Race

31

Table 1: Summary statistics
Variables
Cognitive Development
Mental function composite score

Demographics
age
female
region:
northeast
midwest
south
west

Home environment
SES quintiles:
1st quintile (lowest)
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile (highest)
number of siblings
biological mother and biological father
present
one biological parent present
one biological parent and one nonbiological parent present
other parental configuration
mother's age
parent as teacher score

All Races

White

Black

Hispanic

Asian

Other

0.0002
(0.9996)

0.0182
(0.9426)

-0.0258
(0.8951)

-0.0185
(0.9156)

-0.0513
(0.9551)

0.0065
(1.1528)

10.2677
(1.9362)
0.4892
(0.6835)

10.2379
(1.7914)
0.4848
(0.6401)

10.2920
(1.7777)
0.4855
(0.6232)

10.2983
(1.822)
0.4987
(0.627)

10.3397
(1.8556)
0.4708
(0.6593)

10.3285
(2.4305)
0.5130
(0.8661)

0.1684
(0.5513)
0.2223
(0.5511)
0.3675
(0.6566)
0.2418
(0.5779)

0.1818
(0.5355)
0.2818
(0.558)
0.3601
(0.6132)
0.1763
(0.4788)

0.1575
(0.4856)
0.2092
(0.4997)
0.5569
(0.6237)
0.0765
(0.3479)

0.1470
(0.4609)
0.1076
(0.3649)
0.3147
(0.5854)
0.4307
(0.6199)

0.1974
(0.6072)
0.1583
(0.4284)
0.1876
(0.5275)
0.4567
(0.651)

0.1428
(0.7097)
0.2527
(0.7413)
0.2906
(0.8)
0.3140
(0.7526)

0.2000
(0.5346)
0.1999
(0.5391)
0.1999
(0.5456)
0.2005
(0.5589)
0.1997
(0.5554)
0.9848
(1.4761)

0.0850
(0.3471)
0.1572
(0.4543)
0.2087
(0.5174)
0.2624
(0.569)
0.2868
(0.5849)
0.9568
(1.2918)

0.3424
(0.5894)
0.2408
(0.5325)
0.2091
(0.511)
0.1289
(0.4212)
0.0788
(0.339)
1.1316
(1.543)

0.3789
(0.6086)
0.2633
(0.5529)
0.1817
(0.482)
0.1146
(0.3985)
0.0615
(0.3013)
0.9899
(1.46)

0.1021
(0.4213)
0.1417
(0.5695)
0.1436
(0.4305)
0.1538
(0.4298)
0.4588
(0.6531)
0.7783
(1.2742)

0.1753
(0.6472)
0.2622
(0.7867)
0.2097
(0.6977)
0.2047
(0.6962)
0.1480
(0.5923)
0.9754
(1.8726)

0.7892
(0.5352)
0.1938
(0.5155)

0.8833
(0.4051)
0.0960
(0.3716)

0.4111
(0.6171)
0.5793
(0.6185)

0.7901
(0.5085)
0.1950
(0.4939)

0.9212
(0.4085)
0.0754
(0.4058)

0.7322
(0.7824)
0.2504
(0.7737)

0.0114
(0.1455)
0.0056
(0.1042)
27.2587
(8.3082)
29.6979
(17.4207)

0.0142
(0.1508)
0.0065
(0.0979)
28.3941
(7.6037)
31.2523
(15.4744)

0.0067
(0.1007)
0.0030
(0.0578)
25.1252
(7.5755)
28.4809
(16.1934)

0.0094
(0.1109)
0.0054
(0.1097)
26.0201
(7.334)
27.3848
(16.909)

0.0015
(0.0349)
0.0020
(0.0424)
29.4158
(7.2416)
27.0006
(19.1218)

0.0106
(0.1715)
0.0069
(0.056)
25.8535
(10.6263)
29.9106
(23.2064)

32

Prenatal environment
birthweight:
< 1500
> 1500 & < 2500
> 2500 & < 3500
3500 or more
Percent premature
Days premature (conditional on being
premature)
multiple birth:
singleton
twin
higher order

0.0127
(0.0445)
0.0621
(0.1934)
0.5451
(0.6776)
0.3796
(0.6737)
0.1167
(0.3677)

0.0102
(0.0348)
0.0557
(0.1616)
0.5123
(0.6391)
0.4212
(0.6367)
0.1016
(0.3186)

0.0240
(0.0635)
0.0998
(0.2524)
0.6023
(0.5985)
0.2732
(0.5794)
0.1685
(0.412)

0.0121
(0.0419)
0.0550
(0.1773)
0.5669
(0.6153)
0.3656
(0.608)
0.1169
(0.3492)

0.0072
(0.054)
0.0651
(0.2618)
0.6832
(0.6079)
0.2445
(0.5815)
0.0948
(0.3246)

0.0154
(0.0749)
0.0601
(0.2609)
0.5458
(0.8588)
0.3778
(0.8539)
0.1534
(0.5675)

21.1239
(23.6229)

21.0457
(24.2518)

22.7998
(23.5968)

20.2129
(19.9711)

17.4876
(13.4793)

21.4877
(32.8074)

0.9668
(0.1007)
0.0298
(0.0927)
0.0018
(0.0296)

0.9624
(0.0997)
0.0347
(0.0925)
0.0028
(0.0337)

0.9693
(0.091)
0.0300
(0.0882)
0.0007
(0.0214)

0.9768
(0.0749)
0.0214
(0.0718)
0.0007
(0.0102)

0.9786
(0.1175)
0.0197
(0.1125)
0.0016
(0.0332)

0.9452
(0.1813)
0.0252
(0.113)
0.0005
(0.0118)

NOTES: The entries are means and standard deviations of child-level data for those children in ECLS-B who
do not have missing values for test scores. Test scores are a mental composite score, normalized to have a mean
of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. The category “White” includes only non-Hispanic Whites. Precise
definitions of the variables are provided in the data appendix. The SES measure incorporates information on
parental education, occupational status, and family income. Days premature is conditional on being premature.
The total number of children in the sample who receive a positive weight in the estimation is 10,132. In all
cases, sample weights provided with ECLS are used in the calculations.

33

Table 2: Estimating Group Differences in the Mental Function Composite Score
(1)
black
hispanic
asian
other

Dependent variable: Standardized Mental Function Composite Score
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.063

-0.037

-0.026

-0.022

-0.002

[0.028]*

[0.017]**

[0.018]*

[0.019]

[0.019]

[0.019]

-0.013

-0.046

-0.015

-0.02

-0.011

-0.012

[0.028]

[0.016]**

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

-0.026

-0.068

-0.063

-0.072

-0.056

-0.048

[0.035]

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]*

-0.013

-0.039

-0.024

-0.026

-0.023

-0.016

[0.039]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.024]

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

controls:
age, gender, region
SES
home environment
parents' score
prenatal conditions
Observations
R-squared

(6)

-0.061

yes
10132
0.14

10132
0.68

10132
0.68

10132
0.68

10132
0.68

10132
0.71

Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

NOTES: The dependent variable is the mental composite score, which are normalized to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1 in the full, unweighted sample. Non-Hispanic Whites are the omitted race category, so
all of the race coefficients are gaps relative to that group. The unit of observation is a child. Standard errors are
in parentheses. Estimation is done using weighted least squares, using sample weights provided in the data set.
In addition to the variables included in the table, indicator variables for children with missing values on each
covariate are also included in the regressions. All regressions include interviewer fixed effects.

34

Table 3: Sensitivity Analysis of Group Differences in Mental Function Composite Score

baseline
unweighted
males only
females only
SES quintile 1
SES quintile 2
SES quintile 3
SES quintile 4
SES quintile 5
if both biological parents present
if a biological parent not present
if northwest
if midwest
if south
if west
if urban, inside UA
if urban, outside UC
if rural
if normal birthweight
if moderately low birthweight
if very low birthweight
controlling for motor skills
age < 9 months
9 months <= age < 10 months
10 months <= age < 11 months
11 months <= age < 12 months
age >= 12 months

black
-0.002
[0.019]
0.020
[0.014]
-0.018
[0.028]
0.021
[0.024]
-0.046
[0.049]
-0.045
[0.035]
-0.006
[0.042]
0.028
[0.045]
0.043
[0.051]
0.009
[0.024]
0.000
[0.035]
-0.010
[0.045]
0.113
[0.041]**
-0.053
[0.026]*
0.063
[0.052]
0.011
[0.021]
-0.050
[0.082]
-0.034
[0.057]
-0.008
[0.020]
-0.005
[0.041]
0.071
[0.046]
-0.034
[0.018]
-0.059
[0.038]
-0.005
[0.025]
0.024
[0.034]
0.003
[0.064]
-0.014
[0.072]

hispanic
-0.012
[0.017]
0.000
[0.013]
0.007
[0.023]
-0.012
[0.025]
-0.042
[0.044]
-0.059
[0.036]
0.000
[0.036]
0.022
[0.039]
-0.008
[0.048]
-0.020
[0.019]
0.021
[0.039]
-0.010
[0.046]
0.033
[0.040]
-0.037
[0.027]
-0.005
[0.030]
0.010
[0.019]
-0.072
[0.054]
-0.117
[0.069]
-0.012
[0.018]
-0.030
[0.040]
0.009
[0.054]
-0.005
[0.016]
-0.046
[0.033]
0.000
[0.024]
-0.022
[0.032]
0.014
[0.063]
0.039
[0.063]

asian
-0.048
[0.020]*
-0.061
[0.015]**
-0.024
[0.030]
-0.073
[0.027]**
-0.143
[0.062]*
-0.095
[0.055]
-0.019
[0.047]
-0.108
[0.050]*
-0.017
[0.035]
-0.034
[0.020]
-0.168
[0.075]*
0.018
[0.060]
0.019
[0.048]
-0.070
[0.035]*
-0.076
[0.031]*
-0.037
[0.021]
-0.015
[0.076]
-0.045
[0.224]
-0.047
[0.021]*
-0.079
[0.059]
-0.212
[0.149]
-0.066
[0.018]**
-0.054
[0.038]
-0.019
[0.025]
-0.040
[0.035]
-0.105
[0.070]
-0.038
[0.066]

other
-0.016
[0.024]
0.007
[0.015]
-0.041
[0.039]
0.004
[0.029]
0.001
[0.059]
0.028
[0.066]
-0.060
[0.043]
-0.028
[0.042]
-0.034
[0.045]
0.009
[0.027]
-0.043
[0.049]
-0.090
[0.088]
0.029
[0.044]
-0.031
[0.042]
-0.009
[0.036]
-0.013
[0.026]
-0.030
[0.072]
-0.041
[0.053]
-0.023
[0.026]
-0.043
[0.063]
-0.079
[0.101]
-0.037
[0.023]
0.037
[0.048]
0.002
[0.032]
-0.002
[0.047]
-0.044
[0.120]
-0.071
[0.081]

35

NOTES: Specifications in this table are variations on those reported in column (6) of Table 2. Only the race
coefficients are reported. The top row simply reproduces the baseline results in column (6) of Table 2. The
remaining rows correspond to different weights, socio-economic quintiles and other particular subsets of the
data. For further details of the baseline specification, see the notes to Table 2.

36

Table 4: Estimating Group Differences in the Underlying Components of the Mental Function Composite Score

explores objects
-0.0007
[0.0005]
-0.0006
[0.0004]
-0.0004
[0.0004]
-0.0002
[0.0005]

explores objects
purposefully
-0.0012
[0.0039]
-0.0039
[0.0039]
-0.0054
[0.0044]
-0.0015
[0.0051]

babbles
0.0022
[0.0047]
-0.0021
[0.0043]
-0.0128
[0.0053]*
-0.0031
[0.0064]

early problem
-0.0027
[0.0046]
-0.0013
[0.0041]
-0.0088
[0.0047]
-0.0041
[0.0061]

uses words
-0.0033
[0.0039]
-0.0013
[0.0033]
-0.0048
[0.0030]
-0.0031
[0.0046]

controls:
age, gender, region, mother's age

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

SES

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

home environment

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

parents' score

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

prenatal conditions

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

0.9938
(0.0145)

0.9058
(0.1555)

0.5471
(0.268)

0.0906
(0.2172)

0.0317
(0.1399)

10132
0.21

10132
0.43

10132
0.73

10132
0.64

10132
0.44

black
hispanic
asian
other

mean of dependent variable
sd of dependent variable
Observations
R-squared

NOTES: Entries are unadjusted mean scores on specific components of the mental composite score. They are
proficient probability scores, which are constructed using IRT scores and provide the probability of mastery of
a specific skill set.

37

Table 5: Estimates Used in Calibrating the Model
Measure

Algebraic Representation

Value Used

Source

Internal Reliability of BSID

'
ie

corr ( Sie , S )

0.80

Andreassen and Fletcher (2005)

Internal Reliability of later test
scores

corr ( Sil , Sil')

0.94

White et. al. 2004

Correlation between BSID
and later test scores

corr ( Sie , Sil')

0.30

Figure 2

0.60

Cruse et.al. 1996

Correlation between later IQ
tests when taken three years
apart

corr ( Sil , Sil'+3 )

Black-White test score gap
on BSID

SW ,e − S B,e

0.06

Table 2

Black-White test score gap
on later tests

SW ,l − SB,l

1.00

Rushton and Jensen (2005)

Correlation between parental
IQ and BSID

corr ( Sie , SiP )

0.36

Yeates et al. 1983

Correlation between parental
IQ and child IQ on later tests

corr ( Sil , S P )

0.39

Yeates et al. 1983

38

Author(s)
Gannon, 1968
Butler, Goffeney and
Henderson and, 1971
Ireton, Gravem and Thwig,
1970
Myrianthopoulos, Naylor and
Willerman, 1974
Bayley, 1955
Ramey et al., 1973
Wilson, 1983

Appendix Table 1: Literature on the Relationship Between Bayley Scores and Future IQ
Age of Bayley
(months)
Future IQ Test and Age (years)
8
Stanford-Binet at age 4
8
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children at age 7

N
371
626

8

Stanford-Binet at age 4

0.25

500

8

Stanford-Binet at age 4

0.22

129
45
11
340
340

9 & 12
9 to 12
9 & 12

12

Stanford-Binet at age 3

0.32, 0.30
0.71
0.38
0.29, 0.35,
0.33
0.27, 0.27,
0.27
0.32

12
12

Stanford-Binet at age 4
Stanford-Binet at age 3

0.21
0.12

156
116

12
12
12

Stanford-Binet at age 3
Stanford-Binet at ages 3 and 4
Stanford-Binet at ages 3 and 4

0.32
0.30, 0.22
.17, .14

40
40
94

6
Bradley, Caldwell and
Elardo 1975
Barnard et al.1982
Enright, Jaskir and Lewis,
1986
DiLalla et al., 1990
Rose et al., 1991
DiLalla, Lovelace and
Molfese, 1996

Correlation
0.13
0.19

Mean 16-18 IQ
Stanford-Binet at age 3
Stanford-Binet at age 3
Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence at ages 4, 5, and
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children at ages 7, 8, and 9

Acheson and Molfese, 1997
12
Stanford-Binet at ages 3, 4 and 5
.14, .15, .06
NOTES: To generate relevant literature, Pubmed, EBSCOhost and JSTOR were searched for all years. Keywords used for the search included, “Bayley Scale of
Infant Development,” “BSID, “predictive power,” “correlation,” and “IQ” – which generated a list of roughly 2,000 references. Among these, we selected
according to the following criteria. (1) the test of infant cognition was the Bayley Scale of Infant Development (BSID); (2) The “future” test age was
administered more than 2 years after the infant measure was taken (correlations at 12 and 18 months were obtained from Wilson 1983); (3) the initial BSID had
to be administered between 6 and 12 months of age; (4) the sample had to be “representative” – we omitted studies with subjects afflicted by major health issues
(e.g., heart disease, Down syndrome, mental retardation) or severe complications at birth (i.e. pre-term, mother used drugs or alcohol); and (5) only studies done
in the United States were used. The final compilation contained 14 studies.

39

340
77

89

Appendix Table 2: Estimating Group Differences in the Mental Function Composite Score
(1)
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other

Dependent variable: Standardized Mental Function Composite Score
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

-0.061

-0.063

-0.037

-0.026

-0.022

-0.002

[0.028]*

[0.017]**

[0.018]*

[0.019]

[0.019]

[0.019]

-0.013

-0.046

-0.015

-0.02

-0.011

-0.012

[0.028]

[0.016]**

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

-0.026

-0.068

-0.063

-0.072

-0.056

-0.048

[0.035]

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]**

[0.020]*

-0.013

-0.039

-0.024

-0.026

-0.023

-0.016

[0.039]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.025]

[0.024]

Age

488.089

483.958

498.736

505.248

504.52

[110.641]**

[110.111]**

[109.414]**

[108.913]**

[107.444]**

Age^2
Age^3
Age^4
Age^5
female

-96.648

-95.941

-98.855

-100.032

-100.028

[21.419]**

[21.318]**

[21.180]**

[21.086]**

[20.798]**

9.525

9.465

9.751

9.856

9.867

[2.062]**

[2.053]**

[2.039]**

[2.031]**

[2.002]**

-0.467

-0.464

-0.478

-0.483

-0.484

[0.099]**

[0.098]**

[0.098]**

[0.097]**

[0.096]**

0.009

0.009

0.009

0.009

0.009

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

[0.002]**

0.061

0.061

0.063

0.061

0.069

[0.011]**

[0.011]**

[0.011]**

[0.011]**

[0.011]**

Socioeconomic Status Quintiles:
2
3
4
5 (highest)

0.024

0.021

0.018

0.021

[0.018]

[0.018]

[0.018]

[0.018]

0.076

0.067

0.055

0.052

[0.018]**

[0.019]**

[0.019]**

[0.019]**

0.081

0.073

0.054

0.047

[0.019]**

[0.021]**

[0.021]**

[0.021]*

0.079

0.074

0.048

0.042

[0.020]**

[0.022]**

[0.023]*

[0.022]

Number of Siblings:
1
2
3
4
5
6

-0.066

-0.064

-0.063

[0.013]**

[0.013]**

[0.013]**

-0.079

-0.079

-0.07

[0.017]**

[0.016]**

[0.017]**

-0.135

-0.134

-0.117

[0.025]**

[0.025]**

[0.025]**

-0.14

-0.13

-0.114

[0.044]**

[0.044]**

[0.044]**

-0.102

-0.081

-0.042

[0.059]

[0.059]

[0.057]

-0.122

-0.126

-0.136

[0.077]

[0.075]

[0.073]

Family configuration:
Single biological parent
Biological parent and other parent

-0.019

-0.017

-0.013

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

-0.039

-0.051

-0.039

[0.053]

[0.053]

[0.052]

40

Other parent type
Midwest
South
West
Mother's age
Mother's age^2
Mother's age^3 (*100000)
Mother's age^4 (*100000)
Mother's age^5 (*100000)
Mother's age missing
Parentscore
Parentscore^2
Parentscore^3 (*100000)
Parentscore^4 (*100000)
Parentscore^5 (*100000)
Mparentscore

-0.044

-0.051

0.002

[0.110]

[0.108]

[0.111]

-0.038

-0.035

-0.031

[0.048]

[0.047]

[0.047]

0.043

0.058

0.06

[0.056]

[0.056]

[0.055]

0.016

0.02

0.011

[0.063]

[0.063]

[0.063]

-0.14

-0.118

-0.07

[0.669]

[0.666]

[0.660]

0.012

0.01

0.005

[0.047]

[0.047]

[0.046]

-43.527

-35.908

-13.402

[160.510]

[159.846]

[158.698]

0.744

0.598

0.146

[2.674]

[2.665]

[2.648]

-0.005

-0.004

0

[0.017]

[0.017]

[0.017]

-0.506

-0.41

-0.22

[3.718]

[3.697]

[3.664]

-0.269

-0.3

[1.226]

[1.220]

0.015

0.017

[0.080]

[0.080]

-38.583

-48.659

[256.303]

[256.023]

0.485

0.669

[4.012]

[4.014]

-0.002

-0.004

[0.025]

[0.025]

-1.741

-1.897

[7.321]

[7.253]

Birthweight:
< 1500

-0.355
[0.090]**

>= 1500 & < 25000

-0.051
[0.087]

>= 2500 & < 3500

0.068
[0.086]

>= 3500

0.132
[0.086]

Days Premature:
0

0.103
[0.060]

7

0.032
[0.066]

14

-0.022
[0.069]

41

21

0.075
[0.070]

28

-0.097
[0.078]

35

0.005
[0.076]

42

0.005
[0.087]

49

-0.061
[0.076]

56

0.045
[0.085]

63

-0.059
[0.075]

70

-0.291
[0.083]**

77

-0.365
[0.074]**

Singleton birth

-0.001
[0.060]

Twin birth

-0.077
[0.060]

Triplet or more birth
Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.013
[0.014]
10132
0.14

-982.802
[227.402]**
10132
0.68

-973.364
[226.276]**
10132
0.68

-1,002.51
[224.953]**
10132
0.68

-1,015.15
[224.352]**
10132
0.68

-1,012.18
[221.337]**
10132
0.71

NOTES: See notes to Table 2. The columns in this table report the full regression results of
specifications (1) through (6) in Table 2.

42

