NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIVE OPEN QUESTIONS ABOUT PREDICTION MARKETS
Justin Wolfers
Eric Zitzewitz
Working Paper 12060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12060
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2006

We would to thank Bryan Elliott, Brian Galebach, and David Pennock for help with data, and Robert Hahn,
Marco Ottaviani, Erik Snowberg, and Paul Tetlock for helpful conversations. Wolfers acknowledges the
support of a Geewax, Teriker and Co. Research Fellowship, the Mack Center for Technological Research
and Zull/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Five Open Questions About Prediction Markets
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 12060
February 2006
JEL No. C9, D7, D8, G1, M2
ABSTRACT
Interest in prediction markets has increased in the last decade, driven in part by the hope that these
markets will prove to be valuable tools in forecasting, decision-making and risk management

in

both the public and private sectors. This paper outlines five open questions in the literature, and we
argue that resolving these questions is crucial to determining whether current optimism about
prediction markets will be realized.
Justin Wolfers
Business and Public Policy Department
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1456 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
jwolfers@wharton.upenn.edu
Eric Zitzewitz
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
ericz@stanford.edu

Introduction
Interest in prediction markets has increased in the last decade, among participants,
private-sector market operators, policymakers and academics. For instance, markets on
the 2004 U.S. election were far more numerous and liquid than they were in 2000.
Whereas past media coverage of these markets often treated them as curiosities, coverage
in the 2004 election cycle was far more frequent and more serious than 4 years before.1
Academics are using prediction markets to provide a measure of expectations about an
event’s probability, and then using the co-movement of this measure and financial asset
prices to extract information about the expected effects of political decisions (Slemrod
and Greimel, 1999 and Knight, 2003), in some cases even before the decision is made
(Leigh, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz, 2003). In the last year, this style of analysis has spread
beyond academia, mostly notably in attempts to analyze the consequences of Bush’s reelection. Formal analyses of these markets have tended to conclude that their prices can
be useful indicators of likely future outcomes.
Interest in new applications of prediction markets is focused in three domains:
forecasting, decision making, and risk management.
The success of corporate prediction markets in forecasting printer sales (Chen and
Plott, 2002) and project management (Ortner, 2002) has stimulated interest in their
application to other business problems, and firms such as NewsFutures, Net Exchange
and Incentive Markets have sprung up to meet this demand. Among the applications
being discussed are “decision markets” in which securities are traded that pay off based
on an outcome (e.g., revenue from a product) if and only if a particular decision is made
(e.g., the product is launched). The idea behind these markets is to elicit knowledge from
within an organization that might otherwise be lost somewhere in a poor organizational
form.
Similar ideas have been discussed in the policy realm. DARPA’s Policy Analysis
Market would have launched securities designed to capture the probability of specific
events, along with contingent securities designed to capture the outcome of specific
1

For example, a Factiva search for mentions of “Iowa Electronic Markets” from January 1 to November 1
yielded 27 hits in 2000 and 100 in 2004. Adding the largest private-sector market, Tradesports.com (and
its politics-only subsidiary Intrade) to the search increases the number of 2004 hits to 237.

1

policies. During the 2004 primary season, the Iowa markets ran securities designed to
predict the general election success of the Democratic contenders, while later in the year
Tradesports ran similar contracts designed to capture the effects of geopolitical and
economic events on the election (see Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2004b for details).
Abramowicz (2004) and Hahn and Tetlock (2004) envision using prediction markets to
assist in policy making by extracting expert opinion in a credible and objective manner.
Hanson (2003) goes even further, arguing that policy makers should simply define a
“GDP+” measure of social welfare, and that policy decisions should be based entirely on
market-based predictions of which policies maximize this social welfare measure.
Finally, some envision prediction markets as the first step toward markets where
participants could hedge their exposure to political and economic events. For example,
an employee in a “Bush industry” (e.g., traditional energy) could sell Tradesports’ Bush
reelection contract to an employee in a “Kerry industry” (e.g., alternative energy); both
would be hedging their human-capital exposure to the election. The Tradesports Bush
reelection contract had trade volume of over $15 million during the 1.5 years it traded,
and volume of about $3 million on election day.2 While this is extremely liquid by
prediction market standards, clearly more liquidity would be needed to allow for
meaningful hedging. Hedgestreet.com, a new CTFC-sanctioned derivative market, is
attempting to create markets that individuals could use for such hedging, with a focus
more on economic risks such as mortgage rates and real estate prices than on politics.
Will these great expectations for prediction markets be fulfilled? We argue that it
depends in large part on developing answers to five open questions:
1. How to attract uninformed traders? Counterintuitively, the problem for most
prediction markets is attracting sufficient uninformed order flow. Markets need
uninformed order flow in order to function; with only rational traders trading whose
only trading motivation is expected returns, the No Trade Theorem binds and the
market unravels (Milgrom and Stokey, 1982). Uninformed order flow can have a
variety of motivations (entertainment, overconfidence, hedging), but with the

2

These figures include the trading on a symmetric “Kerry to win” contract.

2

exception of hedging, these motivations are usually non-economic, putting
economists at a comparative disadvantage in predicting which markets will succeed.
2. How to tradeoff interest and contractability? A fundamental problem in
mechanism design is that the outcomes of interest are often impossible to write into
contracts. Running financial markets on policy outcomes in and of itself does nothing
to help with this problem. In fact, using a measure to set payoffs for financial
contracts can turn what would otherwise be a good proxy for a policy outcome into a
problematic one, as illustrated by the recent experience with the manipulation of cash
settlement prices for the S&P and municipal bond futures.
3. How to limit manipulation? In addition to manipulation of the outcomes on which
prediction markets are based, one might worry about manipulation of prediction
market prices themselves, particularly where high-stakes decisions are made based on
the prices.
4. Are markets well calibrated on small probabilities? Many of the proposed uses of
prediction markets will involve the evaluation of small probability events. A range of
behavioral evidence suggests that people are quite poor at distinguish small
probabilities from tiny probabilities, and even when arbitrage is possible, frictions can
cause this miscalibration to carry over into market prices.
5. How to separate correlation from causation? Contingent prediction markets allow
one to estimate the probability of an event contingent on another event occurring.
Thus contingent markets provide insight into the correlation of events. However,
determining whether one event causes the probability of another to change is a
separate and potentially more important question. Many of the proposed uses of
decision markets presuppose that the direction of causality can be readily established.

A Framework
Before discussing these questions, it is useful to introduce a simple model that can
serve as a common framework for thinking about most of these questions. We do this by
taking the basic setup from the familiar Kyle (1985) model and adding transaction costs,

3

which we believe may be an important factor shaping the efficiency of pricing in smallscale prediction markets, and market maker risk-aversion, which allows uninformed order
flow to affect prices.
As in Kyle (1985), we consider three types of agents: perfectly-informed traders,
uniformed (noise or liquidity) traders, and perfectly competitive market makers. Trade is
in a binary prediction market security that pays y=$1 if an event occurs and y=$0
otherwise.
The probability that the event occurs is given by q; this probability is observed by
the market makers. The perfectly-informed traders have inside information and know
whether the event will occur. The uninformed traders have a noisy subjective expectation
of the event probability given by q plus a noise term η. All traders have log utility, and
trade to maximize their subjective expected utility. As such, they take positions:
x=

w
( e − p ) , where w is their wealth, p is the price of the security, e is their
p(1 − p )

subjective expectation that the event occurs, and these parameters yield demand for x
prediction securities.3
In addition, we can allow the uninformed traders to derive a direct utility benefit
from holding a particular position, perhaps for gambling or entertainment reasons. If this
direct benefit has a per-unit certainty-equivalent of g, then the uninformed trader will
trade as if e = q + η + g. Alternatively, if the market price is being used in a decision,
traders may have other (external) reasons to trade in order to affect the price. As such, g
may represent the gains to market manipulators from their effect on the equilibrium price.
Thus, for manipulators, g would be equal to the product of the marginal price impact of
their trading and the outside benefit they receive from moving the price.
This framework also lends itself quite naturally to considering a hedging motive
for trade. Risk-averse traders have a hedging demand when their wealth depends on
whether the event occurs. We can view this as beginning trading with an endowment of
contracts, and optimal hedging simply involves deciding how much of this endowment to
3

To derive the above, solve the traders’ problem: Set x to maximize subjective expected utility
E[U]=e*ln[w + (1-p)x] + (1 – e)*ln(w – px).

4

sell at the market price. In this setup, if the trader’s wealth is H lower if the event
happens, the trader will trade as if e = q + η + g + H*p*(1-p)/w.
So to summarize, traders trade based on the sum of objective probability (q),
expectation errors (η), gambling and manipulation motives (g), and a hedging motive
related to the risk in the endowment of traders (H). These different beliefs and motives
are summarized in the variable e which is drawn from the distribution F(e).
If traders face a per-contract transaction cost, t, they will buy if e – t > p and sell
if e + t < p.
A competitive group of market makers will post bids and offers such that the
marginal utility of an additional trade, if made, is zero. These conditions are:
Pbid = E(y|e + t<Pbid) – tMM – cxMM
Pask = E(y|e - t>Pask) + tMM – cxMM
where c = p (1 – p)/w captures the risk-averse market maker’s desire to shade
prices lower when she built up a large exposure (xMM) in this market.
With no informed traders, the market makers expectations do not change with the
order flow, so Pbid = q – tMM – cxMM and Pask = q + tMM – cxMM. (Note that due to their
desire to limit exposure, market makers will however change prices in response to new
orders.) Traders only buy or sell when their subjectively held beliefs differ from the
market maker’s prices by at least the sum of their own and the market makers transaction
costs (when |e – (q - cxMM )| >= t + tMM). The equilibrium bid-ask midpoint must satisfy:
pmid = q + c[ X buy ( pmid + t + tMM ) + X sell ( pmid − t − tMM )]
1

X buy ( p) = ∫ x(e − p) ⋅ dF (e)
p

,

p

X sell ( p) = ∫ x(e − p ) ⋅ dF (e)
0

where Xbuy and Xsell are total demand from buyers and sellers, respectively.
Transaction costs cause trading to be done entirely by the traders with the most
noisy observations of the event probability or, alternatively, with the greatest external
motivations (gambling, hedging, or manipulation) for holding the securities. The market

5

maker’s observation of the objective probability does help hold market prices close to
their efficient levels (q), but market maker risk aversion, combined with a asymmetry in
the distribution of e – q, can cause prices to deviate from objective probabilities. (For
more on this issue, see Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2005).
Adding perfectly-informed traders has two effects. The perfectly-informed
traders buy when y=1 and sell when y=0, affecting market maker inventory in a way that
pushes the final bid-ask midpoint toward y. At the same time, these traders force the
market maker to add an adverse-selection component to the bid-ask spread, which causes
the uninformed traders to be further restricted to those with extreme values of e.4 Too
much informed trade can cause markets to unravel, and this is especially likely when high
transaction costs are already limiting uninformed trade.5
The discussion above suggests that low transaction costs are essential to liquid,
active, and informative prediction markets. Adding a fixed pool of perfectly informed
traders leads these insiders to effectively levy a tax on the trading of market-makers and
traders, and greater expected volume can lower the contribution toward this fixed cost
required from each trade. High and low liquidity equilibria may be simultaneously
possible. This brings us to our first open question: Will prediction markets attract
necessary uninformed trade?

4

Suppose that λ traders are informed, each informed trader buys one contract, and 1 – λ traders are
uninformed. Then the market makers’ bids and asks must satisfy

λq + (1 − λ ) X buy ( Pask + t ) q
+ t − cx MM and
λq + (1 − λ ) X buy ( Pask + t ) MM
− (1 − λ ) X sell ( Pbid − t ) q
Pbid =
− t − cx MM , where the first term in each expression is the
λ (1 − q) − (1 − λ ) X sell ( Pbid − t )] MM

Pask =

expectation of y conditional on receiving a buy or sell order. With λ = 0, this first term is always equal q
(the marketmaker’s unbiased prior), but as λ increases, Pask increases and Pbid decreases, leading to wider
spreads and less uninformed trading.
5
In the expressions in footnote 4, it is easy to show that Pask is increasing and Pbid decreasing in t and tMM.
It is likewise straightforward to show that when λ > 0, then for distributions of e that have min(e) > 0 and
max(e) < 1, there will be a level of t that leads to market unraveling, i.e. to Pask = 1 and Pbid = 0 being the
only values that satisfy the expressions in footnote 4.

6

Attracting Uninformed Traders

An important implication of the model sketched above is that the success of the
prediction market in generating trade depends critically on attracting uninformed traders.6
Prediction markets are too small for meaningful hedging, and are likely to remain so for
some time, so the primary motivations for uninformed order flow are likely to be
entertainment and overconfidence. Economists may be at a comparative disadvantage in
analyzing these motivations, but we can look at what has worked.
Risk love or the “thrill of a gamble” provide obvious motives for uninformed
traders, and both Tradesports and Betfair have successfully attracted many sports bettors
to their markets. Tradesports runs a variety of non-sports markets, but the contracts that
attract significant volume on Tradesports are typically those with popular currency (the
Presidential election, the fate of Saddam Hussein and Martha Stewart, outcomes on
American Idol and the Apprentice) suggesting primarily an entertainment motive for
trading. Beyond sports bettors, Tradesports has been quite successful at marketing its
platform to those employed in financial markets, a pool of risk-acceptant traders.
At the same time, contracts on more “serious” topics (economic numbers,
financial market outcomes, contingent political contracts) attract volume that compares
favorably with volumes on the successful Iowa vote share markets. These traders may
have been attracted more by the substantial free media Tradesports has received, and
uninformed trading in these contracts may more of a combination entertainment and
overconfidence motives. As the wonkishness of the contract rises, however, volume and
liquidity falls rapidly. The few Tradesports markets of the sort planned by the DARPA
Policy Analysis Market (e.g., will there be a Palestinean state by 2005?) have not been
very successful.
The legal environment has forced onshore prediction markets to make
compromises that have limited their attractiveness. The Iowa Electronic Markets agreed
to limit positions to $500 in order to receive a “no action” notice from the Commodity

6

The term “uninformed” overstates the requirement, which is that the market must attract traders whose
estimate of the true probability is less precise than the market-maker’s, or whose hedging demand causes
them to trade even when their beliefs coincide with the market-maker.

7

Futures Trading Commision (CFTC).7 This compromise limits the scope and depth of
their markets, and also possibly their efficiency. For example, the “Will Bush win the
popular vote?” contracts on Tradesports and Iowa often trade at levels different enough
to imply arbitrage opportunities, albeit opportunities to win only small amounts, given the
position limits on the Iowa exchange.8
Other markets made other compromises. Platforms such as Newsfutures, the
Hollywood Stock Exchange, and the Foresight Exchange operate using play money,
albeit play money that can sometimes be converted into prizes. Many economists may be
skeptical that play money markets solve the cheap talk problem that prediction markets
are meant to solve, and indeed play-money and real-money market prices can and do
diverge. That said, a comparison of Newsfutures and Tradesports prices for securities
predicting NFL victories for the 2003 season found that while the two markets often
yielded different predictions, they were approximately equally well calibrated (ServanSchreiber, Wolfers, Pennock and Galebach, 2004).
The consulting firms running corporate prediction markets have taken the same
approach as experimental economists on campuses: they have subsidized participation,
allowing everyone to leave a winner, albeit to varying degrees. The Policy Analysis
Market was also supposed to have involved a subsidy for participation. If the
information to be generated by the market is important enough to justify the subsidy and
a willing financier can be enlisted, then this approach can work. It is important, however,
that subsidies are not designed in such a way that they can be gamed, as one could
imagine with per-trade subsidies or with some schemes for subsidization via a moneylosing market maker.
Finally, two markets that we are aware of, Economic Derivatives and Hedgestreet,
have obtained permission to operate as futures exchanges by the CFTC. Both have
avoided political contracts and focused on economic events, probably to avoid being
considered betting venues as opposed to financial markets. Hedgestreet has only recently

7

The Iowa markets are run as a research project by academics at the Tippie College of Business at the
University of Iowa. They are described in Forsythe, Nelson, Neumann, and Wright (1992).
8
For example, this contract averaged 52 on Iowa during the month of August 2004 and about 46 on
Tradesports.

8

started up, but Economic Derivatives, a joint venture by Deutsche Bank and Goldman
Sachs that runs markets in economic numbers, has been operating since 2002. Its traders
are all institutional, and its markets have attracted volumes of hundreds of millions of
dollars. Traders reportedly trade for hedging reasons. In addition, a combination of
overconfidence and career concerns motivations may provide a motivation for trading –
no self-respecting economic analyst would want to admit that they only know as much as
their average colleague.
Career concerns may conceivably provide a participation motivation in some of
the business and policy applications that are being considered. If the decision to trade is
motivated by career concerns, however, the trading itself may reflect objectives other
than maximizing trading profits. For instance, while rank-order tournaments can
replicate first-best incentives in many career models, in the trading context they may lead
to “doubling up,” or related high-variance strategies.
To summarize, three routes to attracting order flow have been successful thus far:
offering sports betting, subsidization, and, possibly, exploiting career concerns. Each has
their drawbacks, however.

Balancing Interest and Contractability

Observable indicators of contractability have thus far had little explanatory power
for a prediction market’s success. Contracts on the Iowa Market have multi-page
prospectuses clearly outlining how the market will settle under a number of
contingencies, whereas contract “prospectuses” on Tradesports are often limited to the
single sentence below the contract name on the trading screen. In some cases, this
sentence is supplemented by a short memo announcing the contract, but even then issues
that have material effect on event probabilities are only subsequently clarified in response
to questions. For example, Tradesports offered a contract on whether Yasser Arafat
would depart the Palestinean state by the end of 2005. When he became ill in late 2004,
there was mild controversy on forum.tradesports.com about whether seeking medical
treatment in Paris or dying was considered departing Palestine. Tradesports tightened the
contract definition to include the latter but not the former.
9

Tradesports traders have thus far been willing to trust the exchange to make a
good faith determination, and this trust is helped by the fact that Tradesports does not
itself hold positions in any of its contracts and that it has a clear need to maintain a
reputation for fairness among its traders. But as the sums traded become more
substantial, traders may begin to worry more about these issues. As the example of the
Arafat Security illustrates, in some cases there is no definition that captures the event of
interest perfectly.9
This issue is likely to become even more salient once contracts start trading on
policy outcomes. Many policy outcomes are notoriously difficult to reduce to a simple
set of measures. To take one of the less problematic examples, suppose one runs a
prediction market on the crime rate in Baghdad. One presumably cares about the total
crime rate, but a contract is more likely to be written on the reported crime rate. The
reported crime rate may have historically been a reasonable proxy for the actual crime
rate, but this relationship may not hold up for several reasons. Reported crimes may be
an inverted U-shaped function of true crimes – at some point, the reported rate may
decline as the true rate rises. Furthermore, if individuals can influence the reported crime
rate and these individuals have incentives to do so, either arising from, or independent of
the prediction market, the two rates can diverge.
These issues may also arise in business contexts. One might view a tracking
stock as analogous to a prediction market security on the future stream of a business
unit’s profits. Tracking stocks have been greeted with some skepticism given the
incentive of the parent company to influence the business unit’s reported profits through
devices such as transfer pricing.

9

Another example of a Tradesports contract whose definition was later clarified is the “Will Bush win the
electoral votes of Maine?” contract. One might have supposed this meant all 4 electoral votes, but the
exchange determined after the contract had been trading for several months that 3 out of 4 would suffice.
In the same vein, Leigh, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2003) we commented on the judgment that would have
been required to settle the “Will Saddam Hussein be out of office” contract had a contract been expiring on
April 9, 10, or 11; the active trading on this contract suggests that many traders were comfortable with this
possible ambiguity.

10

Managing Manipulation

Just as thinking about the contractability of the outcomes of interest raises
questions about outcome manipulation, the prospect of basing decisions on prediction
markets raises questions about the potential for price manipulation.
In some of the applications that have been proposed for prediction markets, one
might expect these outside interests to be the dominant determinant of traders’ positions.
For example, if a market were run among industry participants on which technological
standard the industry should adopt, one could imagine that trading would be driven
primarily by an interest in influencing the outcome. With no firm-level position limits,
one could imagine such a market turning into an auction; with position limits, it could
turn into voting. Either mechanism may be a satisfactory way of choosing a standard
(ignoring potential anti-trust concerns), but arguably simply running an auction would be
more transparent than (and thus preferable to) running a prediction market that
approximated an auction.
Manipulation can be made more expensive by allowing free entry into these
markets and by providing a means for entrants to invest in becoming informed (Hanson
and Oprea, 2004). Known attempts to manipulate public prediction markets have largely
failed. Pat Buchanan’s supporters reportedly attempted to bid up his price on the Iowa
markets, and in the 2004 election cycle, several large sales of the Tradesports Bush
reelection contract temporarily pushed down its price, on September 14 from 63 to 49,
and on October 16 from 53 to 10. In these cases, however, the price impact of these
trades was reversed within 24 hours. Strumpf (2004) ran an explicit experiment of
randomly placing $500 trades on the Iowa markets, and likewise found that the price
impact was only temporary.
While free entry can offset the effects of manipulators, it may be undesirable in
corporate contexts where the firm wishes to appropriate returns to the information
aggregated in the market. Beyond secrecy concerns, acquiring the information to become
an informed trader may be costly enough that free entry does not offset the trading
activity of manipulators.

11

Ensuring Calibration on Small Probabilities

An exception to the generally good predictive track record of betting and
prediction markets is their performance on low-probability events. The best-documented
example is the favorite-longshot bias in horse racing (Thaler and Ziemba, 1988).
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate this point, based on data from a large sample of North American
horse races and from the Iowa markets, respectively. Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2004a)
discuss a similar mispricing from S&P 500 index contracts on Tradesports. In both
examples, market prices overestimate the probability of unlikely events. In horseracing,
the overestimation is greatest for events priced below 5 percent, on Iowa, it is present for
events priced between 0.2 and 0.3.
Figure 1. Favorite-Longshot Bias in Horse Racing

Favorite-Longshot Bias: Rate of Return at Different Odds
$0.8

Price of a contract returning $1 if horse wins (Log odds scale)
$0.7 $0.6$0.5$0.4 $0.3 $0.2
$0.1 $0.05
$0.02 $0.01

Rate of Return per Dollar Bet (%)
95% confidence interval shaded

Break
Even
-20

-40

-60

1/5

Evens

2/1

5/1 10/1 20/1
Odds (Log Scale)

50/1 100/1 200/1

Source: Trackmaster, Inc. Sample is all horse races in the United States, 1992-2002. n=5,067,832 starts in 611,807 races.

12

Figure 2
Iowa Electronic Markets: prices and expiry payouts
1.2

Average expiry payout

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

-0.2

Price

Graph plots the average expiry price of a winner-take-all contract on the Iowa market, conditional on its
current price. Data is divided by current price into groups that are 2.5 percentage points wide. Error bars
are 95 percent confidence intervals of the estimate of the mean expiry price, calculated from standard
errors that are adjusted for sampling the same contract type multiple times. Consecutive groups, however,
contain many of the same contracts and thus group means are not indpendent of each other.

A range of experiments by psychologists suggest that the inability to distinguish
small from tiny probabilities is not specific to prediction markets, but rather a result of
behavioral biases.
A complementary view also suggests that specific types of trading behavior may
lead to an overestimation of small probabilities. Manski (2004) considered a setting in
which prediction market traders set their bet sizes to maintain a constant downside risk.
If this is the case, they demand 24 times as many contracts when going long at $0.04 than
when shorting the same contract, and, even absent transaction costs, a market price of
$0.04 will reflect the beliefs of traders at the 96th percentile of the beliefs distribution.10
Thus, if errors in subjective probability assessments are symmetric, markets may
overestimate low probabilities. Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2005) analyze a broader class of
models and find these biases to be generally quite small.

10

Whether traders use such a budgeting rule is of course an empirical question that remains to be
answered.

13

The framework discussed earlier provided a candidate reason why these biases
can persist in equilibrium. The intuition for the result is that when transaction costs are
positive, prices near zero or one are set by those with extreme opinions. To give a
concrete example, suppose the objective probability for an event is 3 percent, and the
market-maker’s transaction cost (tMM), is 1 percent. In the absence of informed trading or
a net market maker position, a market maker will be willing to buy at $0.02 and sell at
$0.04 percent. If traders also face a transaction cost, (t) of $0.01, then they will buy if
their subjective probability is greater than 5 percent and sell if it is less than 1 percent.
The former involves an overestimate by a factor of 1.67, the latter an underestimate by a
factor of 3. Given these magnitudes, overestimates may be more common than
underestimates, leading a risk-averse market maker to set a bid-ask midpoint greater than
the objective probability.

Separating Correlation and Causation

Decision market securities are designed to allow one to estimate how expectations
of policy outcomes vary with the policy chosen. For example, the Iowa markets ran
contracts that paid one penny for each percentage point of the two-party vote share won
by the Democrats, conditional on the trader also correctly picking the winner of the
Democratic nomination race. The ratio of the price of this contract to the price of a
contract that pays $1 if the candidate is nominated yields an estimate of the expected vote
share of each candidate, conditional on the candidate being nominated. In Wolfers and
Zitzewitz (2004a), we reported that the expected vote shares on January 29, 2004 were
55% for John Edwards, 50% for John Kerry, and 46% for Howard Dean – if the relevant
candidate were to win the nomination.

14

Table 1: Contingent Markets: 2004 Presidential Election
Contracts pay according to Vote Share, conditional on the Democratic nominee
Contract pays
conditional on
specific
Democratic
Candidate
John Kerry
John Edwards
Howard Dean
Wesley Clark
Other Democrats

Democratic
Candidate Vote
Share
(Contract price, $)
A
$0.344
$0.082
$0.040
$0.021
$0.015

Republican
Vote Share against
this Candidate
(Contract price, $)
B
$0.342
$0.066
$0.047
$0.025
$0.017

Implied Prob.
this Candidate
wins
Nomination
C=A+B
68.6%
14.8%
8.7%
4.6%
3.2%

Expected
Share of
Popular Vote
if Nominated
D=A/C
50.1%
55.4%
46.0%
45.7%
46.9%

Notes: Columns A and B show the prices of contracts that pay a penny for each percentage of the two-party
popular vote won by Democrats or Republicans respectively, conditional on picking the winner of the
Democratic nomination. (Contracts pay $0 if the selected candidate does not win the Democratic
nomination.)
Source: Closing prices January 29, 2004, Iowa electronic markets.

It is tempting to draw a causal interpretation from these results: that nominating
John Edwards would have produced the highest Democratic vote share. Indeed, as the
name “decision markets” implies, this is the inference that we are intended to draw, and
in many circumstances, the most likely source of a correlation will be causal. (Berg and
Rietz, 2003, provide a related account of markets on the 1996 Republican nomination.)
But alternative explanations exist. For example, on January 29th, Edwards was
behind in the delegate count, and only rated a 15% probability of winning the
nomination. A come-from-behind victory would arguably have required a very good
campaigning performance by Edwards or a shift in public sympathies towards his “Two
Americas” message, either of which would have boded well for his general election
performance. The decision market tells us that in the state of the world in which Edwards
wins the nomination, he will also probably do well in the general election. This is not the
same as saying that he will do well if, based on the decision market, Democrats nominate
Edwards.11
A related example of the difficulties of separating correlation from causation
comes from the analyses in the financial press of the correlation of President Bush’s

11

Hanson (1999 and 2004) mentions this issue as well, referring to it as “decision selection bias.”

15

reelection chances with the performance of the stock market.12 Figure 3, from Snowberg,
Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2005), shows the close relationship between the level of the
stock market and the Tradesports contract tied to Bush’s re-election. Regressing the
(log) level of S&P on the level of Bush price yields a coefficient of 0.204, which led
several commentators to infer that Bush’s reelection would raise the S&P by 20.4 log
percentage points. Difference specifications, which are appropriate given that these are
asset prices, yield an estimated effect of 8-16 percentage points.13

Bush's Re-election Prospects and the Stockmarket
75

1160

70

1140

65

1120

60

1100

55

1080

50

1060

Level of S&P 500

Probability that George W. Bush is Re-elected, %

Figure 3

Jan 04 Feb 04Mar 04 Apr 04May 04 Jun 04 Jul 04 Aug 04 Sep 04 Oct 04 Nov 04
Price of Bush Re-election Contract on Tradesports
Level of S&P 500

Only a few careful commentators noted the potential of an endogeneity issue: bad
economic news was hurting both financial markets and Bush’s re-election prospects. The
disappointing non-farm payrolls report released three weeks prior to the election provides
a stark example of the importance of this omitted causal link: immediately upon the
12

See, for example, Browning, E.S. “As Bush Goes So Goes the Market,” Wall Street Journal, 9/20/2004,
p. C1.
13
As we encountered in our analysis of the Saddam Security in Leigh, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2003), bidask bounce and slow incorporation of information into the Tradesports security require using specifications
that allow for these issues.

16

report’s release, the Bush re-election contract fell by 1.5 percentage points (and the S&P
500 future fell by about 0.5 percent).
A common approach to endogeneity issues is to use instrumental variables
estimation. In this context, a valid “instrumental event” must affect Bush’s reelection
probability and affects the stock market only through Bush’s reelection probability. The
third debate provides one such example.14 In the three-hour period consisting of the
debate and 1½ hours of post-debate spin, the Bush reelection security fell 3 percentage
points and the S&P 500 rallied by 10 basis points. The standard deviation of a three-hour
S&P move at that time of day is about 9 basis points, so a 95 percent confidence interval
around the estimated market effect of the debate would range from -8 to +28 basis points.
Scaling this up to an estimate of the effect of the re-election of President Bush relative to
a Kerry counterfactual suggests that the effect of Bush’s reelection can be bounded by
-9.3 and +2.7 percentage points. Wherever the true causal effect lies in this interval, we
can be confident that the naïve inference that a Bush White House would raise the value
of U.S. equities by 20 percent, was false.
As Snowberg, Wolfers, and Zitzewitz (2005) report, an even starker experiment
was provided on election night 2004. Figure 4 shows the price of the Bush security on
Tradesports, sampled every ten minutes, and the S&P 500 (or the December S&P future
when the New York markets closed). Clearly there is strong co-movement in the chart,
but the magnitudes are particularly interesting. From 3pm-6pm various websites leaked
early exit polls that suggested a likely Kerry presidency. These revelations were
accompanied by a 1 percent decline in the S&P and roughly a 25 percentage point decline
in the Bush security (from 55 to 30). Later that evening, election returns overturned the
exit polls, and from 8:30 pm to 1:00 am ET the Bush security rallied from 30 to over 90
and the stockmarket increased by about 1.5 percent.15 The former movement scales to an

14

The other debates are unfortunately of less use. For the first debate there were no instant polls to
objectively determine a winner; it took at least one news cycle for a consensus to emerge that Kerry had
won, and this leaves us with too long an event window. The second debate was on a Friday evening when
futures markets were closed, and the Vice Presidential debate was considered to be approximately a draw.
15
The slow incorporation of information in prediction markets is illustrated by Figure 4. The bulk of the
exit poll related movement occurred between 2:50 and 3:30 PM ET in the stock market while it lasted until
5:30 ET in the Tradesports reelection market. Likewise, the subsequent rally began about 10-20 minutes
earlier in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange than on Tradesports.

17

estimated Bush effect of +4 percentage points (=-1/-25), the latter to an estimate of +2.5
percentage points (=1.5/60).16 Again, these experiments strongly suggest a different
causal effect of a Bush presidency on the stockmarket than a naïve interpretation of
Figure 3 suggested.
Figure 4
100

1150

1145

75
1140

50
1130

S&P Index Level

1135

1125
25

1120

0
12:00

15:00

18:00

21:00

0:00

3:00

1115
6:00

Time, EST
November 2-3, 2004
% Probability Bush wins Presidency (Tradesports)

S&P 500 Future, Delivery Date 12/2004 (CME)

Finally, an instrumental variables approach could potentially be extended to
decisions markets. For instance, we argued earlier that the price of the “Democrat Vote
Share if Edwards” contingent security only provided an estimate of the correlation
between Edwards winning the nomination and the Democrats vote share. An ideal
instrument for Edward’s receiving the nomination would be an event that affected the
likely winner of the Democratic primary, but not Edwards’ general election chances.
One such event might have been if a sex scandal hurt his only rival.17 And indeed, rather
16

Standard deviations of S&P changes during the 2:50 to 3:30 PM and 8:30 PM to 1:00 AM windows are
26 and 12 basis points respectively. These imply standard errors of roughly 1 and 0.2 percentage points
respectively.
17
Of course, a sex scandal involving a senior Democrat might affect the general public’s views of all
Democrats, which would potentially invalidate this instrument.

18

than waiting for the event to occur (or as Matt Drudge did, pretending it occurred), we
could run prediction markets to derive the market’s expectations of the relevant moments
required for an IV estimator.
That is, an “IV prediction market” would require five contracts, from which one
could derive the two moments required for an IV estimate:
•

A contract paying $1 if Edwards is nominated, P1=p(Edwards)

•

A contract paying $1 if Edwards is nominated and a scandal occurs,
P2=p(Edwards & Scandal)

•

A contract paying $1 if a scandal occurs, P3 = p(Scandal)

•

A contract paying the Democratic vote share if Edwards is nominated and
a sex scandal occurred, P4 = E[Democrat Votes | Edwards & Scandal) *
p(Edwards & Scandal)

•

A contract paying the Democratic vote share if Edwards is nominated,
P5 = E(Democrat Votes|Edwards)*p(Edwards)

The ratio P2/P3 yields the probability of Edwards’ nomination conditional on a
scandal, p(Edwards|Scandal). Further, subtracting the unconditional probability of
Edwards winning the nomination (P1) yields the increase in probability resulting from the
scandal: P2/P3-P1 = p(Edwards|Scandal) – p(Edwards). This difference is analogous to
the first-stage regression coefficient in a Wald Estimator. Likewise, the ratio P4/P3 yields
Edwards’ expected general election vote share condition on a scandal: E{[E(Democrat
Votes|Edwards)*p(Edwards)]|Scandal}*p(Edwards|Scandal). Subtracting the expected
Democratic vote share if Edwards is nominated (P5) yields the effect of the scandal on
Edwards’ expected general election vote share: P4/P3 - P5 = E[Democrat Votes *
p(Edwards) | Scandal] – E[Democrat Votes * p(Edwards)]. This difference is analogous
to the coefficient from the reduced-form regression. The ratio of the reduced-form and
the first-stage regression coefficients yields the “Prediction IV” Wald estimator, which in
this case would be the ratio of the scandal’s effect on Edwards’ expected general election
vote share and its effect on his chances of winning the nomination, or:

19

β Prediction IV =

P4 /( P3 − P5 )
.
P2 /( P3 − P1 )

The numerator of this ratio is the increase in Edwards’ expected general election
vote share resulting from the scandal, and the denominator is the increase in his
probability of being nominated. Given our identifying assumption that the scandal does
not affect Edwards’ general election chances, this ratio provides an estimate of Edwards’
general election performance in states of the world in which he would not have won the
nomination but for an exogenous event.18 It seems plausible that “IV prediction markets”
like this better identify causal parameters, and hence yield estimates that are more
directly applicable for decision making.19
Of course, while we are optimistic that “Prediction IV’s” are feasible, they run
into the same five open questions that we asked in this paper:
•

Would traders be willing to trade the relevant securities? This is
particularly problematic given that few traders have a need to hedge
against the types of possible events that make for plausibly exogenous
experiments.

•

Are the relevant outcomes contractible?

•

Are these markets manipulation proof? Even though the prediction IV’s
isolate the causal parameter of interest, as is well known, even small
changes in the first-stage estimate (or market price) yield large changes in
the estimated causal parameter, suggesting that the returns to manipulation
may be large.

•

Would the market be well calibrated on the small probabilities in these
multi-state contingent contracts?

18

Note that as with most applications of IV methods, we identify a Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE). Naturally whether this is the causal parameter of interest depends on the context. For example, if
Edwards is of higher average quality in states of the world in which he can take advantage of a small
scandal than in states of the world where he can take advantage of a large scandal, then a LATE estimator
based on a small scandal may overstate the performance one could expect from exogenously choosing him
as the nominee.
19
Naturally this example shows only one of many such market designs that can be used to recover the
causal parameter of interest.

20

•

Can we ever fully separate correlation from causation? As with a lot of
other empirical work, it can be hard to find experiments that truly do
identify the causal parameter. The one reason for real optimism on this
front is that we no longer need wait for natural experiments, but rather can
trade on the likely effects of experiments that may never happen.

Conclusions

In a previous paper (Wolfers and Zitzewitz, 2004a), we reviewed much of the
accumulated evidence on the operation of prediction markets, concluding on an
optimistic note. In this paper, we pose five questions that we argue require answers for
prediction markets to reach their considerable potential. The research agenda suggested
by these questions spans several fields of economics and encroach significantly on related
disciplines.
The first question arguably falls more in the field of marketing than economics:
how to attract uninformed order flow to markets? This is important because these traders
provide the potential profit motivating informed groups to trade. Lower transaction costs,
in both the monetary and the convenience sense, are important, but inherent interest or
buzz is clearly an important determinant.
Our second question concerns contractability: how does one trade off interest with
outcome contractability? Of course the domain of contracts has expanded considerably
over the past few centuries, and there may be lessons in the history of contracts that
prediction market designers would be well advised to follow.
Third, many of the corporate and policy decision markets that have been proposed
raise questions about manipulation, especially in environments where free entry by
arbitrageurs cannot eliminate the problem. With position limits, a prediction market may
turn into voting; with no position limits, it may turn into an auction. If the markets
literally turn into a complicated version of a vote or an auction, presumably we are better
off with the simple version. But one might imagine situations in which they turn into a

21

hybrid, and more work into understanding when those hybrids are sensible mechanisms
could be productive.
Fourth, psychologists and insurance salesmen have known for years that most
people are badly calibrated when evaluating small probabilities and some of their
difficulties appear to be spilling over into prediction market pricing. Given the current
scale of prediction markets, the relevant limit to arbitrage is probably not the agency
problems discussed in Shleifer and Vishny (1997) but rather transaction costs. We are
optimistic that both declining transaction costs, and carefully framed prediction market
contracts will yield more accurate responses.
Finally, there is the issue of separating causation and correlation, a difficult issue,
but one that is more or less on empirical economists’ home turf. For settings where
interpretation of correlations is problematic we propose an “instrumental events”
approach for analyses based on time series movements, and an analog in contingent
markets - “Prediction IV’s” – which may help isolate causal parameters.

22

References

Abramowicz, Michael (2004), “Information Markets, Administrative Decisionmaking,
and Predictive Cost-Benefit Analysis”, University of Chicago Law Review, 71(3).
Berg, Joyce and Thomas Rietz (2003), “Prediction Markets as Decision Support
Systems”, Information Systems Frontiers, 5(1), 79-93.
Chen, Kay-Yut and Charles Plott (2002), “Information Aggregation Mechanisms:
Concept, Design and Field Implementation for a Sales Forecasting Problem.”
Forsythe, Robert, Forrest Nelson, George R. Neumann, and Jack Wright (1992),
“Anatomy of an experimental political stock market.” American Economic Review, 82(5),
1142-1161.
Hahn, Robert and Paul Tetlock (2004), “Using Information Markets to Improve Policy”,
AEI-Brookings Center Working Paper #04-18.
Hanson, Robin (1999), “Decision Markets”, IEEE Intelligent Systems, 14(3), 16-19.
Hanson, Robin (2003), “Shall We Vote on Values, But Bet on Beliefs?”, mimeo, George
Mason University.
Hanson, Robin (2004), “Impolite Innovation: The Technology and Politics of ‘Terrorism
Futures’ and Other Decision Markets,” mimeo, George Mason University.
Hanson, Robin and Ryan Oprea (2004), “Manipulators Increase Market Accuracy,”
mimeo, George Mason University.
Kyle, Albert (1985), “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica, 53,
1315-1336.
Leigh, Andrew, Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz (2003), “What do Financial Markets
Think of War in Iraq?”, NBER Working Paper 9587.
Milgrom, Paul and Nancy Stokey (1982), “Information, Trade and Common
Knowledge”, Journal of Economic Theory, 26.
Ortner, Gerhard (1998), “Forecasting Markets – An Industrial Application”, mimeo,
Technical University of Vienna.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1997), “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of
Finance 52(1), 35-55.
Servan-Schreiber, Emile, Justin Wolfers, David Pennock and Brian Galebach (2004),
“Prediction Markets: Does Money Matter?”, Electronic Markets 14(3).

Slemrod, Joel and Timoth Greimel (1999), “Did Steve Forbes Scare the Municipal Bond
Market?”, Journal of Public Economics, 74(1), 81-96.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz (2005), “Partisan Impacts on the
Economy: Evidence From Prediction Markets and Close Elections,” mimeo, Stanford
GSB.
Strumpf, Koleman (2004), "Manipulating the Iowa Political Stock Market", mimeo,
University of North Carolina.
Thaler, Richard H., and William T. Ziemba (1988), “Anomalies: Parimutuel Betting
Markets: Racetracks and Lotteries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 2, No. 2.
Spring, pp. 161-174.
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz (2004a), “Prediction Markets,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 18(2).
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz (2004b), “Experimental Political Betting Markets and
the 2004 Election,” Economist’s Voice, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Wolfers, Justin and Eric Zitzewitz, (2005), “Interpreting Prediction Market Prices as
Probabilities,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

