                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CEO TURNOVER AND RELATIVE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

                                                Dirk Jenter
                                               Fadi Kanaan

                                          Working Paper 12068
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12068


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




We thank Nittai Bergman, Robert Gibbons, David McAdams, Andrew Bernard, François Degeorge, Diego
Garcia, Rafael LaPorta, Jonathan Lewellen, Katharina Lewellen, Kalina Manova, Antoinette Schoar, Karin
Thorburn, Joel Vanden, Eric Van den Steen, Kent Womack, and seminar participants at MIT Sloan, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth for their
comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Dirk Jenter and Fadi Kanaan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evaluation
Dirk Jenter and Fadi Kanaan
NBER Working Paper No. 12068
February 2006
JEL No. G30, G34, D20, D23, M51

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines whether CEOs are fired after bad firm performance caused by factors beyond
their control. Standard economic theory predicts that corporate boards filter out exogenous industry
and market shocks to firm performance when deciding on CEO retention. Using a new hand-
collected sample of 1,590 CEO turnovers from 1993 to 2001, we document that CEOs are
significantly more likely to be dismissed from their jobs after bad industry and bad market
performance. A decline in the industry component of firm performance from its 75th to its 25th
percentile increases the probability of a forced CEO turnover by approximately 50 percent. This
finding is robust to controls for firm-specific performance. The result is at odds with the prior
empirical literature which showed that corporate boards filter exogenous shocks from CEO dismissal
decisions in samples from the 1970s and 1980s. Our findings suggest that the standard CEO turnover
model is too simple to capture the empirical relation between performance and forced CEO
turnovers, and we evaluate several extensions to the standard model.
Dirk Jenter
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-446
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
djenter@mit.edu

Fadi Kanaan
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-442
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
fadi@mit.edu
The decision whether to retain or fire an incumbent CEO after bad stock price or accounting
performance is one of the most important decisions made by corporate boards. Standard
economic theory suggests that in assessing the quality of its CEO the board of directors should
ignore components of firm performance which are caused by factors beyond the CEO’s control.
Previous studies that have examined the relation between (arguably exogenous) market or
industry shocks and CEO turnover have found evidence largely consistent with this hypothesis.
Using a larger data set of CEO dismissals over a more recent time period and an improved
methodology, we find to the contrary that CEOs are significantly more likely to be fired after
negative performance shocks to their peer group.


In a newly assembled data set of 1,206 voluntary and 384 forced CEO turnovers in 2,548 firms
from 1993 to 2001, we document that low industry stock returns and low market returns
significantly increase the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers. A decline in the industry
component of firm performance from its 75th to its 25th percentile increases the probability of a
forced CEO turnover by approximately 50 percent. There is some evidence that boards partially
filter industry and market performance from their assessment of CEO quality, but the extent of
this filtering is too limited to remove most of the peer performance effect. We conclude that
boards fail to fully filter exogenous shocks to firm performance from their CEO retention
decisions.


We document more effective filtering of more visible indicators of outside performance, such as
the performance of the value-weighted market index, suggesting that boards may use some rule-
of-thumb relative performance evaluation when assessing CEO quality. We also find that the
effect of peer group performance on CEO dismissals is almost entirely concentrated on CEOs
who underperform their peer group. CEOs who outperform their peer group are not affected by
worsening industry or market performance. Finally, we document that firm-specific performance
affects CEO dismissals most strongly when the peer group is not doing well. The evidence is
consistent with the hypothesis that performance in recessions is more informative about CEO
quality than performance in booms, and with the hypothesis that boards mistakenly credit or
blame CEOs for performance caused by factors beyond their control.




                                               2
Our empirical results contrast with the small prior literature on the relationship between peer
group performance and CEO turnover. Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988) examine CEO turnover
from 1963 to 1978 and find that stock returns relative to the overall market are a better predictor
of CEO dismissals than absolute performance. The results involving lagged returns are
ambiguous, and they find no evidence that industry shocks are filtered from the CEO dismissal
decision. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989) examine turnovers of entire top management teams
between 1980 and 1985 and find such turnovers equally likely to occur in troubled and in healthy
industries, suggesting that industry shocks are filtered from the dismissal decision. Barro and
Barro (1990) find evidence similarly consistent with complete filtering of peer performance in a
sample of CEO turnovers in commercial banks from 1982 to 1987. All three studies are based on
small samples, with 43 forced CEO turnovers in Warner et al., 93 cases of internally precipitated
turnover in Morck et al., and 51 bank CEO turnovers in Barro and Barro. Gibbons and Murphy
(1990), on the other hand, examine a large sample of 1,000 CEO successions over the 1974 to
1986 period and find strong evidence that both market-wide shocks and industry shocks are
filtered from stock price performance for the CEO dismissal decision. In summary, most of the
evidence from previous studies supports the hypothesis that corporate boards filter industry and
market shocks from firm performance when deciding whether to fire their CEO.1


Agency theory shows that there are benefits associated with evaluating agents on the basis of
their relative performances whenever agents’ performances are affected by common shocks
(Holmström (1979, 1982), Diamond and Verrechia (1982)). Most of the theoretical literature
modeling the CEO dismissal decision envisions a situation in which the corporate board learns
from firm performance and other public and private signals about the quality of its current CEO.2
If the board’s assessment of CEO quality falls below some threshold, often equal to the expected
quality of a replacement manager, then the board dismisses the CEO. Since CEO quality does
not change as a function of the business cycle in these models, it follows directly that efficient
boards do not force out more CEOs in down markets than in up markets. More generally, boards
1
  Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988), Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989), and Gibbons and Murphy (1990) do not
formally test whether market or industry returns are completely filtered from firm performance for the management
dismissal decisions. Barro and Barro (1990) do perform a formal test and find results consistent with complete
filtering, with the caveat that their test imposes the assumption that firms have a stock return beta of one with respect
to the benchmark return.
2
  See, for example, Hirshleifer and Thakor (1994, 1998), Hermalin and Weisbach (1998, 2003), Warther (1998),
Goldman, Hazarika, and Shivdasani (2003), Adams and Ferreira (2005), and Hermalin (2005).


                                                           3
should filter all observable exogenous shocks from firm performance when updating their
assessment of CEO quality. This prediction is strongly rejected by the empirical results we find,
and we conclude that the simple framework used in much of the literature does not fully explain
real-world CEO dismissal decisions.


We discuss several extensions and modifications to the basic CEO turnover model which might
explain our empirical results. There is a large literature aimed at understanding the well-
documented absence of relative performance evaluation in CEO compensation.3 We first note
that most of the explanations offered by this literature do not apply in the CEO turnover context.4
We propose instead that the negative relation between the likelihood of forced CEO turnover and
peer group performance could be caused (i) by CEOs’ actions and skills affecting industry
performance through strategic interactions in oligopolistic industries, (ii) by CEOs being
dismissed for moving their firms into the wrong industries, (iii) by performance in recessions
being more informative about CEO quality than performance in booms, (iv) by shareholders or
boards who incorrectly blame the CEO for negative performance shocks beyond her control, and
(v) by shareholders or boards whose limited attention is triggered by low absolute levels of
performance.


We analyze the relation between peer group performance and forced CEO turnover in detail to
assess which of the five hypotheses above are more likely to explain the empirical results. We
find that the effect of industry performance on CEO turnover persists as we broaden the industry
definition and as we restrict the sample to small firms. Since large industries are unlikely to be
oligopolistic, and since small firms are unlikely to affect the product market equilibrium in their
industries, these results speak against the hypothesis that our findings are driven by CEOs
operating in oligopolistic settings. We show next that the effect of industry performance on CEO
turnovers persists when we benchmark firm performance against industry competitors from
several years ago, which speaks against the hypothesis that our findings are driven by CEOs
being punished for moving their firms into the wrong industries. To test the hypothesis that


3
  For the empirical evidence see, among others, Murphy (1985), Coughlan and Schmidt (1985), Antle and Smith
(1986), Gibbons and Murphy (1990), Janakiraman et al. (1992), Garen (1994), Aggarwal and Samwick (1999),
Murphy (1999), and the review in Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2001).
4
  See the detailed discussion in Section I.C.


                                                    4
performance in recessions may be more informative about CEO quality than performance in
booms, we interact firm-specific performance with indicators for low, medium, and high industry
performance in the CEO turnover regressions. We find mostly confirmatory evidence showing
that CEO turnover is indeed more sensitive to firm-specific performance when industry
performance is low, but the result does not obtain in all specifications.


We test the hypothesis that boards mistakenly blame CEOs for exogenous performance shocks
by noting that such mistakes should affect underperforming CEOs more strongly than CEOs who
outperform their peer group. Even with systematic attribution errors, outperforming CEOs
should only rarely be dismissed; they can always point out to their board that competitors are
performing worse and induce the board to use relative performance evaluation. Underperforming
CEOs, on the other hand, are more likely to be affected by attribution errors. Given that their
performance is trailing the peer group, they are less able to mount a strong defense against
incorrect performance attribution in recessions, but will be happy to hide behind good industry
and market performance in booms. The empirical results strongly support the predicted
asymmetry: the documented effect of peer performance on CEO turnover is shown to be almost
entirely restricted to underperforming CEOs. This is consistent with boards committing
attribution errors and failing to use relative performance evaluation unless prodded by the CEO.


Finally, we directly test the hypothesis that our results are caused by shareholders whose limited
attention is triggered by low levels of performance. Under this hypothesis, efficient filtering of
peer performance from the CEO dismissal decision should obtain after low absolute returns
because investors have woken up and correctly assess CEO performance. It follows that the
relative performance evaluation hypothesis should be confirmed for firms with very low levels of
prior performance. Instead, we find that the effect of peer group performance on CEO turnover
persists among firms with large negative prior returns. Furthermore, the relative performance
evaluation hypothesis is also rejected for large and high-profile firms which are likely to be
continuously monitored by the press and institutional investors. We conclude that limited
investor attention is unlikely to be the main cause of the failure of the relative performance
evaluation hypothesis.




                                                  5
While far from conclusive, the results of our tests are broadly consistent with the idea that
performance in recessions is more revealing about CEO quality than performance in booms, and
with the idea that boards mistakenly credit or blame CEOs for performance components beyond
their control. We also find that boards tend to filter the performance of the value-weighted
market and of the largest firms in the industry from firm performance when deciding on CEO
retention. This suggests that boards may use some form of intuitive rule-of-thumb benchmarking
against the most visible benchmarks, while failing to properly account for other exogenous
performance components.5 For further suggestive evidence on whether the observed turnover
patterns are optimal or the symptom of a behavioral inefficiency, we examine the stock price
reactions to CEO turnover announcements in our sample. We find no evidence of different stock
price reactions in recessions compared to booms, and conclude that the market does not view the
more frequent CEO dismissals in recessions as better or worse news than the less frequent
dismissals in booms.


Independently of the underlying mechanism, the documented effect of industry and market
performance on CEO turnover has interesting implications for our understanding of CEO
incentives and horizons. Our findings are also important for the correct design of CEO turnover
studies. The prior literature customarily assumes that CEOs are evaluated based on relative
performance, and therefore regresses turnover on market- or industry-adjusted stock returns only.
Given our evidence that CEO dismissals are in fact determined by both firm-specific
performance and by industry and market performance, the regressions using only peer-adjusted
performance suffer from omitted variable bias. It follows that future studies should include both
firm-specific and peer group performance as explanatory variables.6 An interesting question for
future research is how the effect of peer group performance on CEO turnover we identify in this


5
  Fisman, Khurana, and Rhodes-Kropf (2005) propose a model in which shareholders misattribute firm-specific
performance to the CEO rather than circumstance, and in which the board needs to decide whether to give in to
shareholder demands to fire the CEO. Our results are consistent with the basic idea in Fisman et al., but suggest that
shareholders may misattribute peer group performance to the CEO.
6
  A further frequent cause of misspecification is the implicit assumption that firm performance moves one-to-one
with market or industry performance. Prior studies simply subtract index performance from firm performance,
effectively imposing a beta of one on all firms. This assumption is often incorrect, as the sample betas in Panel A of
Tables 2 and 5 demonstrate. The problem is more severe when industry and firm performance are measured using
return-on-assets. In unreported results we found that the average firm in our sample has a return-on-assets beta of
below 0.3 with its equal-weighted industry benchmark and a beta of below 0.15 with its value-weighted industry
benchmark. Assuming a beta of one in these cases leads to severely biased inferences.


                                                          6
paper varies cross-sectionally with the determinants of the turnover-performance relationship
documented in the prior literature.7

The next section reviews the theory behind relative performance evaluation in the CEO turnover
context and derives the central testable hypothesis. Section I.B develops the empirical
specification. Section I.C discusses a number of reasons why relative performance evaluation
may not obtain in the CEO turnover context. Section II describes the construction of the CEO
turnover sample, and Section III presents the main results on the effect of peer group
performance on forced CEO turnover. Section IV examines the relationship between CEO
dismissals and peer performance in more detail in an attempt to distinguish between different
explanations for the observed regularities. The final section summarizes and concludes.



I. Theoretical background and hypotheses development
This section starts with an informal review of relative performance evaluation in the CEO
turnover context. We use a simple model in which the board learns about CEO ability from firm
performance to demonstrate that the optimal likelihood of CEO dismissals should be unrelated to
industry and market performance. Section I.B restates this testable hypothesis in an instrumental
variables (IV) framework in which market and industry performance act as instruments for firm
performance. This reformulation forms the basis of the subsequent empirical analysis. Stating the
relative performance evaluation hypothesis in an IV framework helps to illustrate the
circumstances under which the hypothesis is likely to fail empirically. On this basis, Section I.C
discusses several reasons why relative performance evaluation may not be observed in the CEO
turnover context.


A. Relative performance evaluation and CEO turnover
The simple CEO turnover model sketched in this section is not meant to be an accurate
description of the realities of CEO retention decisions, but illustrates the logic behind relative
performance evaluation and delivers the central empirical predictions. Deviations from the


7
  The effect of firm performance on the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers has been shown to vary, among other
factors, with CEO stock ownership (Salancik and Pfeffer, 1980, Denis et al., 1997), the presence of a blockholder
(Denis et al. 1997), the composition of the board (Weisbach, 1988), and the availability of suitable outside
candidates (Parrino, 1997).


                                                       7
simplifying assumptions of the model may render (complete) relative performance evaluation
inefficient, as we discuss in Section I.C below. The derivation in this section relies heavily on
Holmström (1982) and Gibbons and Murphy (1990).


Formally, let CEO i’s ability be given by α i and the performance of firm i by yi :

(1)                                              yi = α i + ε i + η

Here ε i is an idiosyncratic noise term affecting firm i only, and η is an unobserved shock
common to all firms, of which there are n in the reference group. The board cannot observe CEO
ability and tries to learn it from observed firm performance. The board believes that α i is

normally distributed with mean zero and variance σ α2 . Suppose further that ε i and η are

normally distributed with mean zero and variances σ ε2 and σ η2 , respectively. The common shock

and the n CEOs’ individual abilities and idiosyncratic shocks are independent.


The board of directors of firm i observes the performance of firm i and the performance of the n-
1 other firms in the reference group. Given the distributional assumptions made, the board uses
the standard formula for the conditional expectation of a multivariate normal variable to
calculate the optimal estimate of CEO ability:
                                    σ α2 (σ α2 + σ ε2 + (n − 1)σ η2 )          σ η2          n −1   
                                                                                          2 ∑ j
(2)     E [α i | y1 ,..., yn ] =                                      
                                                                   2  i
                                                                        y −                        y 
                                   (σ α + σ ε )(σ α + σ ε + nση )  (σ α + σ ε + (n − 1)σ η ) j≠i 
                                      2        2    2     2                 2 2



The estimate of CEO i’s ability is positively related to the performance of firm i, and negatively
to the average performance of the firms in the reference group. The crucial insight is that the
optimal estimate of CEO ability in (2) completely purges the (noisily estimated) common shock
from firm performance. To see this, note that the term in brackets is the residual from a
population regression of firm i’s performance on the performance of all other firms in the
industry:
                                          n            
                             yi = β 0 +  ∑ β j ⋅ y j  + v~i
                                          j ≠i         
(3)
                                            σ η2             n −1     
                             = 2
                                σ + σ + (n − 1)σ j ≠i 
                                    (      2              2
                                                             )∑    y j  + v~i
                                α         ε              η            



                                                                 8
The performance residual v~i in (3) is the purely firm-specific component of firm i’s total
performance. Combining (2) and (3), the optimal estimate of CEO i’s ability can be rewritten as
a function of this idiosyncratic performance component only:
                                                            σ η2                    n −1     
(4)                                           
                  E [α i | y1 ,..., yn ] = k ⋅ yi − 2
                                                    (
                                                   σ α + σ ε2 + (n − 1)σ η2      )   ∑    y          ~
                                                                                            j  = k ⋅ vi
                                                                                    j ≠i     
Here k is a constant given by the first term in (2) above. It follows directly that the optimal
estimate of CEO i’s ability is uncorrelated with the average performance of the reference group.
Said differently, the performance of the peer group has no predictive power for the ex-post
assessment of CEO i’s ability. Good peer group performance does not make it any more or less
likely that any individual CEO is assessed as having high or low ability than does bad peer group
performance. Formally,
                                                  1 n−1              k        ~ n−1 
(5)               Cov E[α i | y1 ,..., y n ] ,
                                                 n − 1
                                                       ∑     y   
                                                               j  =
                                                                     n − 1
                                                                           Cov  vi , ∑ y j  = 0.
                                                                                           
                                                      j ≠ i                   j ≠i 
In standard models of CEO turnover, CEOs are dismissed when the board’s optimal estimate of
CEO ability falls below some threshold α , which may be the expected ability of a replacement
CEO.8 Because the board completely filters the common shock from its assessment of CEO
ability, it follows from (5) and the distributional assumptions made that the incidence of forced
CEO turnover is uncorrelated with peer group performance:
                                                  1 n−1         1               ~ < α ] , y  = 0.
                                                                                            n −1
(6)      Cov I [E [α i | y1 ,..., y n ] < α ] ,      ∑ j  y  =
                                                  n − 1 j ≠i  n − 1
                                                                      Cov 
                                                                           I [k ⋅ vi       ∑    j 
                                                                                          j ≠i   
Here I[.] is an indicator function that takes a value of one if the optimal estimate of CEO ability
falls below the threshold level α . Equation (6) states that forced CEO turnover is uncorrelated
with the performance of the reference group, and is the central testable implication of the simple
theory of relative performance evaluation presented here. Assessing CEO competence in this
model is a standard signal extraction problem, and imperfect performance filtering would imply
inefficient inferences about CEO ability, and ultimately inefficient CEO dismissal decisions.



8
 The ability threshold below which the current CEO is dismissed has to be adjusted for any costs of firing the CEO
and for any costs of finding a suitable replacement. See, for example, Hirshleifer and Thakor (1994, 1998),
Hermalin and Weisbach (1998, 2003), Warther (1998), Goldman et al. (2003), Adams and Ferreira (2005), and
Hermalin (2005).


                                                              9
B. The empirical strategy
The main implication of the relative performance evaluation model presented in the previous
section is that the agent is evaluated on the unsystematic component of her firm’s performance
only. Whether the reference group is booming or in a recession contains no information about
CEO quality and has no predictive power for the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers. The
prediction that peer group performance is completely filtered from the evaluation of the CEO has
been termed the strong-form relative performance evaluation hypothesis in the prior literature.9
The empirical strategy developed in this section to test for strong-form relative performance
evaluation in CEO turnovers borrows heavily from Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001), Wolfers
(2002), and Garvey and Milbourn (2004).


We estimate the sensitivity of CEO turnover to common performance factors using a two-stage
regression approach: The first stage regression decomposes firm performance into a systematic
component caused by peer group performance and a firm-specific component that should, in
part, reflect CEO ability. In the second stage, we predict the probability of a forced CEO
turnover using the peer group component and the residual component of firm performance
estimated in the first stage.10 This two-stage procedure is effectively an instrumental variables
estimation, with peer group performance serving as an instrument for firm performance:


(7)   (i) ri ,t −1 = β 0 + β1 ⋅ rpeer group ,t −1 + ν i ,t −1

                                                                            (
      (ii) Probability(CEO dismissali,t) = γ 0 + γ 1 ⋅ βˆ0 + βˆ1 ⋅ rpeer group ,t −1 + γ 2 ⋅νˆi ,t −1 + ς i ,t )
                                                           = γ 0 + γ 1 ⋅ rˆi ,t −1 + γ 2 ⋅νˆi ,t −1 + ς i ,t


Here rˆi ,t −1 is the estimated exogenous component of firm performance common to the peer group

and not attributable to CEO actions or CEO quality, and νˆi ,t −1 is the estimated firm-specific

performance component. The prediction of strong-form relative performance evaluation is that


9
   See, for example, Janakiraman et al. (1992) and Albuquerque (2005). We discuss the corresponding weak-form
relative performance evaluation hypothesis below.
10
   Many variables other than firm and peer group performance affect the probability of a forced CEO turnover, with
CEO tenure and board composition as obvious examples. Since none of these other determinants are likely to be
correlated with peer group performance, they do not affect our test of relative performance evaluation.


                                                                        10
the exogenous performance component does not affect CEO turnover, and hence γ 1 = 0 . The
interpretation of the γ 2 coefficient on firm-specific performance is more subtle since the residual
variation in firm performance reflects in part CEO skill and in part unobserved shocks not related
to industry or market performance.11 Since firm-specific performance is partly driven by CEO
skill, we expect that firm-specific performance is negatively related to the likelihood of CEO
dismissal ( γ 2 < 0 ).12


An important choice in the empirical design is whether to allow the sensitivity of firm
performance to peer performance to differ across firms. Estimating firm-specific betas introduces
estimation error into the peer performance term in the second stage regression, with two possible
consequences: If the estimation error is simply noise, then the coefficient on peer performance in
the CEO turnover regression is biased towards zero, making us more likely to accept the relative
performance evaluation hypothesis. If, on the other hand, the estimation error introduces
elements of firm-specific performance into the estimated peer performance term, then we may
erroneously reject the relative performance evaluation hypothesis.13 To avoid these problems,
and to be consistent with the related literature, we estimate a common peer performance beta for
all firms in the first stage regression. As a robustness check we repeat the estimations with firm-
specific betas and obtain similar results.



11
   In Bertrand and Mullainathan’s (2001) analysis of relative performance evaluation in CEO compensation the firm-
specific performance residual is dropped from the second stage regression and a standard IV regression estimated.
Wolfers (2002), on the other hand, includes the corresponding state-specific performance residual in his analysis of
relative performance evaluation in gubernatorial election outcomes. In the linear regressions used in both papers, the
inclusion or exclusion of the first stage residual has no effect on the estimated coefficient on the peer group
component of performance: the residual is by construction uncorrelated with peer group performance and there is no
omitted variable bias. In the binary choice models we use in our second stage regressions, the coefficient on peer
group performance would be biased even if the omitted variable were uncorrelated with peer performance (Yatchew
and Griliches (1985), Wooldridge (2002)), and we need to include the first stage residual in the second stage
regressions.
12
   The difficulty in fully separating performance variation due to CEO skill from performance variation due to good
or bad luck unrelated to industry or market shocks means that the estimated effect of firm-specific performance on
CEO dismissals is a mix of the effect of skill and the effect of luck. Assuming that the true effect of luck does not
exceed the true effect of skill, the coefficient on firm-specific performance is a downward biased estimate of the
actual effect of CEO skill on forced CEO turnover.
13
   We have simulated the two-stage estimation using actual firm stock returns and randomly generated peer group
returns. The peer group returns are by construction unrelated to firm returns, which is reflected in average firm-
specific betas close to zero in the first stage regressions. Using these firm-specific betas, we are able to erroneously
reject the relative performance evaluation hypothesis at high levels of significance in the CEO turnover regressions
if the firm-specific betas are estimated with too few data points.


                                                          11
The instrumental variables set-up clarifies the conditions under which we expect the predictions
of strong-form relative performance evaluation to obtain in the data. The tests treat peer group
performance as a plausibly exogenous instrument for the “luck” that has aided or hampered the
CEO’s running of the firm. For peer group performance to be a valid instrument it is required
that (i) the instrument is exogenous and that (ii) the instrument does not have a direct effect on
CEO dismissals independent from firm performance. Violations of these two assumptions
correspond directly to the arguments against relative performance evaluation in CEO turnover
which we discuss in the next section. Briefly, the exogeneity assumption could be violated
because CEO skill or actions affect peer group performance, as may be the case in oligopolistic
settings. The second assumption could be violated if times of high (or low) peer group
performance were times in which boards receive more (or less) informative signals about their
CEOs. For example, an industry downturn may test certain aspects of CEO skill which are
otherwise unobservable by the board.


The two-stage regression approach in (7) above is not used by the prior literature which does not
test for strong-form relative performance evaluation in CEO turnover. Prior studies instead test
the so-called weak-form implication of the theory: the likelihood of CEO dismissals should be
negatively related to firm performance, and positively to the performance of the reference group.
Unlike strong-form relative performance evaluation, this weak-form hypothesis does not predict
complete filtering of exogenous peer-group performance, and instead predicts only that some
performance filtering is used by corporate boards. Following, among others, Gibbons and
Murphy (1990) and Barro and Barro (1990), we test for weak-form relative performance
evaluation using the following regression model:


(8)        Probability(CEO dismissalt) = γ '0 +γ '1 ⋅rpeer group ,t −1 + γ '2 ⋅ri ,t −1 + ν i ,t


Weak-form relative performance evaluation predicts that CEO dismissals are negatively related
to firm performance ( γ ' 2 < 0 ), holding peer performance constant, and positively related to peer
performance ( γ '1 > 0 ), holding firm performance constant. Including both firm and peer group
performance in the same single-stage regression produces coefficients which are hard to



                                                            12
interpret. The estimated γ '1 coefficient on peer performance is the product of the peer
performance coefficient from the second stage regression 7(ii) and the sensitivity of firm
performance to peer performance from the first stage regression 7(i) described above
( γ '1 = γ 1 ⋅ β1 ). Hence the estimated coefficient can be small either because there is no effect of
peer group performance on CEO dismissals, or because firm performance is not sensitive to peer
performance. The two-stage IV procedure circumvents this problem by effectively scaling the
effect of “luck” on firm performance.14


C. Reasons for the absence of full relative performance evaluation in forced CEO turnover
The previous sections have made the case for relative performance evaluation in CEO retention
decisions. In this section we discuss several reasons why peer group performance may not be, or
at least not be fully, filtered from firm performance when boards decide whether to dismiss their
CEOs. We review five hypotheses which posit that the simple agency model used to develop the
relative performance evaluation predictions is not descriptively valid for CEOs, and which
instead predict that peer performance should affect the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers. The
first three hypotheses interpret a peer performance effect on CEO dismissals as an efficient
contracting outcome, while the last two hypotheses describe it as a behavioral inefficiency.


Hypothesis 1: CEOs in oligopolistic industries interact strategically
Linking CEO retention decisions to rival firm performance may serve shareholders by softening
competition in industries subject to oligopolistic competition. Aggarwal and Samwick (1999)
model optimal CEO compensation contracts in an environment with strategic interactions
between imperfectly competitive firms.15 They show that the optimal compensation contract may
put positive weight on both own-firm and rival-firm performance, in contrast to the standard
relative performance evaluation predictions. In the CEO turnover context, boards may dismiss

14
   Some papers in the CEO compensation literature incorrectly test for strong-form relative performance evaluation
by testing the restriction that γ '1 and γ ' 2 are of opposite sign and equal magnitude (γ '1 +γ '2 = 0) in equation (8).
The correct test for strong-form relative performance evaluation using equation (8) instead corresponds to testing a
non-linear constraint of the form γ '1 / γ ' 2 = − β1 , where β1 is the sensitivity of firm performance with respect to
industry performance from equation (7(i)). See Janakiraman, Lambert, and Larcker (1992) for a paper implementing
the correct test in the CEO compensation context.
15
   The optimal incentive contracts for managers in oligopolistic settings have been previously analyzed by Sklivas
(1987) and Fershtman and Judd (1987).


                                                          13
CEOs for low industry performance if such performance is caused by CEO actions, for example
because the CEO started a price war with competitors. We evaluate this hypothesis empirically
in Section IV.A by testing whether the effect of industry performance on CEO turnover vanishes
as the industry definition broadens (as broader industries are less likely to be oligopolistic) and
whether the effect is weaker for small firms (which are less likely to affect the product market
equilibrium in their industry).


Hypothesis 2: CEOs are fired for choosing the wrong industry
Optimal CEO evaluations may not filter peer group performance out because CEOs have at least
some control over the peer group among which their firm operates. Dye (1992) has argued that
relative performance evaluation motivates executives to invest in industries where they can
outperform their competitors, rather than in industries that offer the highest absolute returns. The
problem described by Dye can be solved by selecting the peer group benchmark for each CEO
before any industry relocation choices are made. Practically speaking, firms should be
benchmarked against their direct competitors from several years ago. Such a benchmark provides
the CEO with efficient incentives: moving her firm into the industry with the highest expected
returns allows her to outperform the competitors from her prior industry. We incorporate the Dye
hypothesis into our empirical tests in Section IV.B by lagging industry affiliation by five years.


Hypothesis 3: Performance in recessions reveals more about CEO quality than performance in
booms
Industry or market-wide recessions may allow boards to learn more about the quality of their
CEO than booms, for example because recessions test aspects of CEO skill which are otherwise
difficult to observe. On the simplest level, a recession tests whether a CEO has anticipated and
properly prepared for the downturn, and such preparation is likely an important part of CEO
performance. This hypothesis does not argue against relative performance evaluation, but simply
posits that relative performance evaluation yields more informative signals in recessions. The
testable implication of this hypothesis is that CEO turnover should be more sensitive to firm-
specific performance in recessions than in booms. In Section IV.C we test this prediction by
interacting firm-specific performance with indicators for low, medium, and high industry
performance in the CEO turnover regressions.



                                                14
Hypotheses 1 to 3 show that an effect of peer group performance on CEO dismissals may be the
result of efficient and rational decision making by corporate boards. The next two hypotheses are
behavioral and explain a peer performance effect on CEO turnover based on either systematic
performance attribution errors or on limited investor attention.


Hypothesis 4: Corporate boards commit systematic attribution errors
Corporate boards and shareholders may make systematic mistakes in attributing performance and
blame CEOs for bad performance caused by factors beyond their control. Social psychologists
and economists studying attribution have found that subjects tend to take insufficient account of
background and environmental factors, and as a result credit and blame individuals too much for
observed outcomes.16 Boards may therefore dismiss their CEO following bad performance even
if the bad performance is (partly) caused by industry or market shocks. Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2001) offer the same argument in the CEO compensation context.17 The effect of
attribution errors on forced CEO turnovers is unlikely to affect all CEOs symmetrically. During
recessions, CEOs who outperform their peer group are likely to bring that fact to the board’s
attention and to argue successfully against being punished for bad performance caused by
outside factors. Underperforming CEOs, on the other hand, are less able to defend themselves
against attribution errors in recessions, but are happy to hide behind high industry performance
in booms. It follows that industry performance should have only weak effects on outperforming
CEOs, but should strongly affect the likelihood of dismissal for underperforming CEOs. We test
this hypothesis in Section IV.D by separately estimating the effect of peer performance on CEO
turnover for under- and outperforming CEOs.



16
   Systematic attribution errors have been documented in several contexts. Shea (1998) finds that the salaries of
Major League baseball hitters (pitchers) are higher (lower) in more hitter-friendly home ballparks. Durell (2001)
provides experimental evidence that employers underweight task difficulty when assessing the productivity of
employees. Weber, Rottenstreich, Camerer, and Knez (2001) find that experimental subjects tend to underweight
group size when assessing the ability of group leaders to inspire coordination outcomes. Wolfers (2002) shows that
U.S. voters irrationally reward state governors for economic fluctuations that are likely unrelated to gubernatorial
actions. For instance, governors in oil-producing states are more likely to be re-elected following a rise in oil prices,
while governors in the rust-belt are more likely to be ousted.
17
   A related and observationally equivalent hypothesis is that hindsight bias leads boards to dismiss CEOs after a
negative industry or market shock because boards incorrectly believe the CEO should have seen the shock coming
and should have prepared for it. See Camerer and Malmendier (2004) for further discussion of this idea.


                                                          15
Hypothesis 5: Shareholder attention is triggered by low absolute performance
Shareholders may not be able to monitor all firms in their portfolios simultaneously, and may
instead selectively direct their scrutiny to firms which have triggered their attention. Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2001) propose that absolute performance measures like stock returns,
accounting returns, or sales growth are easily observable and likely to function as attention
triggers for otherwise passive investors. Once investors pay attention to a firm, we expect
underperforming CEOs to be removed and outperforming CEOs to be retained. This hypothesis
has three testable implications: First, larger and more high-profile firms which are likely to be
continuously monitored by the press and institutional investors should show a smaller effect of
peer performance on CEO turnovers. Second, efficient filtering of peer performance from the
CEO dismissal decision should obtain after low absolute returns because investors have woken
up and correctly assess CEO performance. It follows that peer group performance should not
affect forced CEO turnovers for firms with very low levels of prior returns. Finally, and similar
to Hypothesis 3 above, the effect of firm-specific performance on CEO turnover should be
strongest when peer performance is low, as shareholders are more likely to pay attention. We test
these implications in Sections IV.C and IV.E.18


To summarize, there are both rational and behavioral explanations for an effect of peer group
performance on the likelihood of forced CEO turnover. Under the first three hypotheses
discussed, a negative correlation between peer group performance and CEO dismissals is an
efficient contracting outcome, while under the last two hypotheses it is a symptom of a
behavioral inefficiency. We analyze the stock market reaction to turnover announcements for
suggestive evidence of which view is closer to the truth in Section IV.F.19



18
   Given that the board of directors of each firm monitors one firm only, it is fair to ask why corporate boards do not
pay attention to relative CEO performance continuously and independently of absolute performance. A possible
explanation is that corporate boards are ineffective monitors and under CEOs’ thumbs except when faced with
attentive shareholders.
19
   The executive compensation literature provides a number of explanations for the absence of relative performance
evaluation in CEO pay above and beyond the ones discussed in the text above. Examples are marginal products of
CEO labor which rise and fall with industry fortunes (Barro and Barro (1990), Himmelberg and Hubbard (2000),
Oyer (2004), and Rajgopal, Shevlin, and Zamora (2005)), the futility of indexing compensation when CEOs can
trade the index (Core and Guay (2001), Jin (2002), Jenter (2002), Core, Guay and Verrecchia (2003), and Garvey
and Milbourn (2003)), and the favorable accounting treatment of non-indexed options compared to indexed options
and restricted stock (Core, Guay, and Larcker (2003) and Hall and Murphy (2003)). None of these explanations can
explain our findings in the CEO turnover context.


                                                         16
II. Data sources, sample construction, and variable definitions
CEO turnover is observed for all firms in the Standard & Poors ExecuComp database for the
time period 1993 to 2001. The ExecuComp sample contains information on the top executives of
all firms in the S&P 500, S&P MidCap, and S&P SmallCap indexes. We recognize a CEO
turnover for each year in which the CEO identified in ExecuComp changes. We then search the
Factiva news database for the exact turnover announcement date and classify each CEO turnover
according to whether the turnover was forced or voluntary.


The classification of turnovers into forced and voluntary follows Parrino (1997): all departures
for which the press reports state that the CEO is fired, forced out, or retires or resigns due to
policy differences or pressure, are classified as forced. All other departures for CEOs above and
including age 60 are classified as not forced. All departures for CEOs below age 60 are reviewed
further and classified as forced if either the article does not report the reason as death, poor
health, or the acceptance of another position (including the chairmanship of the board), or the
article reports that the CEO is retiring, but does not announce the retirement at least six months
before the succession. Finally, the cases classified as forced can be reclassified as voluntary if
the press reports convincingly explain the departure as due to previously undisclosed personal or
business reasons that are unrelated to the firm’s activities. This careful classification scheme is
necessary since CEOs are rarely openly fired from their positions.20 We separately identify CEO
turnovers caused by mergers and spin-offs and exclude them from our subsequent analysis.


All accounting information comes from the Compustat Industrial Annual files, and all stock price
and stock return information from the monthly CRSP tapes. Industry performance benchmarks
are calculated as equal-weighted and value-weighted average stock returns for all firms available
on CRSP in the same industry as the sample firm. Industries are defined using the Fama and
French (1997) classification of firms into 48 industries. The corporate boards evaluating the
CEOs in our sample inevitably have access to more precise measures of peer group performance
than the market and industry benchmarks we employ. Using a less informative benchmark than
the board in our tests biases us in favor of accepting the relative performance evaluation


20
  Weisbach (1988), for example, analyzed 286 CEO changes over ten years and found only nine cases in which
boards mentioned performance as an explicit reason why the CEO was replaced.


                                                   17
hypothesis. We exclude each sample firm from the construction of its specific peer group index
to eliminate any artificial correlation between peer group performance and CEO turnover.


III. Empirical results

A. Descriptive statistics
Table 1 presents an overview of the new CEO turnover data set. The final sample has 2,548
firms with 15,798 firm-year observations from 1993 to 2001 and contains 1,590 CEO turnovers.
Of these CEO turnovers, 1,206 are classified as voluntary and 384 are classified as forced.21
Panel A shows the number of observations and the frequency of forced and voluntary CEO
changes in the data. Panel B shows performance measures and firm characteristics by CEO
retention outcome (CEO is retained, CEO leaves voluntarily, or CEO is dismissed). Firms in
which the CEO is dismissed are smaller than firms with voluntary CEO turnover in terms of
book assets, market value of equity, annual sales, and number of employees. Part of that
difference is likely due to the fact that CEO dismissals are preceded by bad performance and
associated declines in firm size. Average stock returns in the 12 months before a forced CEO
turnover are -17.90%. Interestingly, the average equal-weighted industry return is lower before
forced (13.01%) than before voluntary turnovers (16.45%) or CEO retentions (19.17%). Both
differences are statistically significant. This suggests that CEO dismissals are most common in
industries which have performed badly and appears inconsistent with strong-form relative
performance evaluation. The same pattern obtains in weaker form for value-weighted industry
returns, but the differences are not statistically significant.

B. Testing for strong-form relative performance evaluation in CEO turnover
The strong-form version of the relative performance evaluation hypothesis predicts that peer
group performance is completely filtered from the CEO retention decision. We estimate the
sensitivity of CEO turnover to peer performance using the two-stage approach described in
Section I.B, and use industry stock returns as measure of peer group performance in this section.
The first stage regression partitions variation in firm performance into a predictable component


21
  The number of voluntary and forced CEO turnovers is larger than in any of the prior papers which hand-classify
CEO turnovers into forced and voluntary. The data sets used in previous studies are usually based on the Forbes
executive compensation surveys and are therefore restricted to the 800 largest firms. See Parrino (1997), Huson,
Parrino, and Starks (2001), and Dezso (2005) for some of the most extensive data sets used in prior studies.


                                                      18
caused by the industry shock and a residual firm-specific component. The second stage regresses
an indicator variable for forced CEO turnovers on the predicted value (the peer performance
component) and the residual (the firm-specific performance component) from the first stage
regression. We include industry fixed effects in the second stage regression to account for
industry differences in the likelihood of forced CEO turnover.


Table 2 presents the main result of this paper: When regressing forced CEO turnover on
idiosyncratic firm performance and the component of firm performance predicted by industry
performance, both idiosyncratic and predicted performance strongly predict CEO dismissals.
Column (1) uses equal-weighted industry returns over the previous twelve months as instrument
for firm performance. Instead of the expected coefficient of zero on predicted firm performance
in the second stage regression, we find that the point estimate on predicted performance (-1.848,
robust t-stat 7.78) is almost as large as the point estimate on idiosyncratic performance (-2.246,
robust t-stat 9.65). This implies that bad industry performance increases the likelihood of CEO
dismissals almost as much as bad firm-specific performance. Industry performance is clearly not
fully filtered from the CEO retention decision, and strong-form relative performance evaluation
is rejected.


Column (2) extends the performance measurement period and uses equal-weighted industry
returns in year t-1 and year t-2 as instruments to predict company stock returns in two separate
first stage regressions. The results from the second stage regression confirm that low stock
returns caused by bad industry performance predict CEO dismissals almost as strongly as low
firm-specific stock returns. The estimated coefficient on idiosyncratic and predicted stock returns
for the previous year are -2.245 (t-stat 9.89) and -2.209 (t-stat 7.71) respectively, and are -0.632
(t-stat 5.23) and -1.056 (t-stat 4.56) for year t-2 respectively. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the
analysis but replace equal-weighted industry returns by value-weighted industry returns. The
negative coefficients on predicted performance in the second stage regression are smaller than
before but remain large and statistically highly significant. The smaller effect of value-weighted
industry performance on CEO turnover suggests that there may be better filtering of value-
weighted than of equal-weighted peer performance from firm performance, a possibility we
revisit below.



                                                19
The effect of industry performance on the likelihood of CEO dismissals is economically large.
Table 3 presents the implied likelihood of a forced CEO turnover calculated from the Logit
models in columns (1) and (3) of Table 2 using stock returns over the previous year as the
measure of performance. The average implied probability of forced CEO turnover in the base
case (all independent variables left at their actual values) is 2.4% and equal to the unconditional
probability of a forced turnover in the sample. The low frequency of CEO dismissals is
consistent with the prior literature.22 The average implied probability of a forced turnover
increases to 3.25% (3.09%) when the component of firm performance attributable to equal-
weighted (value-weighted) industry performance is set to its 25th percentile value. The average
implied probability falls to 2.09% (2.13%) when the peer group component of performance is set
to its 75th percentile value. Hence a decline in the peer group component of firm performance
from its 75th to its 25th percentile increases the average implied probability of a CEO dismissal
by approximately 50%.23


We conclude that industry-wide shocks to stock returns are not fully filtered from firm
performance in CEO retention decisions. The strong-form relative performance evaluation
hypothesis appears to be rejected by the data. This still leaves the possibility that corporate
boards at least partially filter industry shocks from firm performance when assessing their CEO,
a hypothesis we test in the next section.


C. Testing for weak-form relative performance evaluation in CEO turnover
Most of the prior literature on CEO compensation and CEO turnovers does not test for strong-
form relative performance evaluation, but tests a weaker implication of the theory: CEO

22
   See, for example, Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988), Parrino (1997), and Huson, Parrino, and Starks (2001) for
forced turnover probabilities of a similar magnitude. Kaplan (1999) reports that the relationship between executive
turnover and firm performance in Japan and Germany is similar to the one in the United States. The low implied
probabilities of forced CEO turnover even for extreme bad performance may be partly due to the turnover
regressions not having the right functional form. In particular, the true performance-turnover relationship is likely to
be non-linear, with turnover most sensitive to performance when performance is below certain thresholds. We
experiment with alternative functional forms in Section III.E and do find larger coefficients and larger implied
turnover probabilities for underperforming CEOs.
23
   An alternative method for calculating the implied probabilities is to set all independent variables to their
respective means, rather than to their actual values, before varying the variable of interest. The advantage of the
method used in Table 3 is that the implied probability of forced turnovers in the base case corresponds exactly to the
empirical likelihood of forced CEO turnovers in the sample. Both methods deliver qualitatively similar results.


                                                          20
dismissals should be negatively related to firm performance, holding industry performance
constant, and positively related to industry performance, holding firm performance constant.
Unlike strong-form relative performance evaluation, the weak form of the hypothesis does not
predict complete filtering of peer performance, and instead posits only that some filtering of peer
performance from firm performance is done by corporate boards.


Tests for weak-form relative performance evaluation do not use the two stage approach from the
previous section, but instead simply regress forced CEO turnover on firm performance and peer
performance. Table 4 provides some evidence consistent with partial filtering of industry shocks.
Regressing forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance over the previous year, firm
performance comes in strongly negatively and industry performance comes in with the opposite
sign, as predicted. The coefficients on industry performance are much smaller in absolute value
(between 0.360 and 0.811) than the coefficients on firm performance (between -2.246 and -
2.323) and have lower statistical significance, consistent with the previous result that industry
shocks are far from fully filtered from CEO retention decisions.24 The results become less
consistent with weak-form relative performance evaluation when performance two years before
the turnover decision is included in the regressions. The coefficient on industry performance in
year t-2, predicted to be significantly positive, is insignificantly positive in the value-weighted
industry specification and borderline significantly negative in the equal-weighted industry
specification.


The findings in Table 4 support the notion that corporate boards do take at least some account of
industry performance when assessing the performance of their CEO. Interestingly, the
regressions using value-weighted industry returns as measure of peer performance (columns (3)
and (4)) are more supportive of relative performance evaluation than the regressions using equal-
weighted industry returns, suggesting again that boards may do a better job filtering value-
weighted industry performance from firm performance. One explanation for these findings is that


24
  For complete filtering of industry performance from firm performance in the CEO retention decision, the ratio of
the coefficients on industry performance and firm performance in Table 4 has to equal the average industry beta of
the sample firms. In the notation of equations (7) and (8), complete filtering implies that − γ '1 / γ '2 = β1 . Using the
point estimates from column (1) in Tables 2 and 4, we have − γ '1 / γ ' 2 = 0.360/2.246 = 0.160 and β1 = 0.905.
Hence theory predicts five to six times more intense filtering than observed in the data.


                                                           21
boards intuitively benchmark the performance of their CEOs against the largest and most visible
firms in their industry, but fail to properly account for other, less salient components of industry
performance.


D. Market returns as the measure of peer group performance
The previous sections show that firm performance attributable to industry performance affects
the likelihood of forced CEO turnovers. We examine next whether market-wide stock returns
have similar effects. We again decompose firm performance into its peer group and its firm-
specific components using the two-stage regression approach described in Section I.B.


Table 5 presents the results with peer performance measured as equal-weighted (columns (1) and
(2)) and value-weighted (columns (3) and (4)) stock market returns. The results using equal-
weighted market returns are similar to the ones using industry returns: both the firm-specific and
the market-induced performance components strongly affect the likelihood of CEO dismissals.
The increase in the likelihood of a CEO dismissal caused by low market returns is of the same
order of magnitude as the increase caused by low firm-specific returns. The rejection of the
strong-form relative performance evaluation hypothesis continues to hold when peer group
performance is measured by equal-weighted market returns.


Interestingly, the same is not true when peer group performance is measured by value-weighted
market returns. Value-weighted market returns have no effect on the likelihood of a forced CEO
turnover, even though the first stage regressions show that value-weighted market returns
significantly predict firm-level returns. It appears that corporate boards take the performance of
value-weighted market indexes such as the S&P 500 into account when assessing the
performance of their CEO. This hypothesis is confirmed in Table 5B which uses single-stage
regressions to show that forced CEO turnover is significantly positively related to value-
weighted (but not equal-weighted) market returns, holding firm stock returns constant. These
findings reinforce the impression that boards may use rule-of-thumb relative performance
evaluation against the most salient benchmarks, while ignoring less directly visible outside
influences on firm performance.




                                                22
E. Robustness tests
We have subjected the regression results from Tables 2, 4, and 5 to a variety of robustness
checks. First, we have replaced the second stage Logit regressions by Multinomial Logit
regressions allowing for three CEO turnover outcomes: retention, voluntary turnover, and forced
turnover. Table 6 presents the results from a two-stage Multinomial Logit model using stock
returns over the previous year as measure of firm performance and industry returns as measure of
peer performance. The coefficient estimates for forced CEO turnovers are remarkably similar to
before, with both idiosyncratic and peer performance strongly predicting CEO dismissals.
Unsurprisingly, the effects of the two performance components on voluntary CEO turnover are
much weaker in their economic and their statistical significance. The results including stock
returns for year t-2 and the results using market returns as measure of peer performance are
similar and are omitted to conserve on space.


The second robustness test re-estimates all regressions allowing for firm-specific peer
performance sensitivities in the first stage regressions. Estimating firm-specific betas introduces
estimation errors into the peer performance term in the CEO turnover regressions, as discussed in
detail in Section 1.B. We do not allow for firm-specific intercept terms in the first stage
regressions; doing so would attribute the average firm performance over the sample period to the
“luck” component of performance and bias the tests towards rejecting the relative performance
evaluation hypothesis.25 Table 7 reports summary statistics for the estimated firm-specific
industry betas in Panel A and the results from the CEO turnover regressions using industries as
peer group in Panel B. The peer performance effect on CEO dismissals remains economically
and statistically highly significant, though smaller than in the base regressions in Table 2.


In a further robustness test, we allow for a non-linear performance-turnover relationship. The
assumption that firm performance enters linearly into the turnover regressions is common to the
CEO turnover literature but is likely incorrect. For example, a moderate decrease in performance
is likely to have a stronger effect on the likelihood of a CEO dismissal when performance is
already low than when it is high. The correct functional form for the relationship between

25
  In the CEO compensation context, Garvey and Milbourn (2004) do not include firm fixed effects in the first stage
regressions based on the same argument. As expected, including firm fixed effects in our regressions strengthens the
rejection of the relative performance evaluation hypothesis.


                                                        23
performance and forced CEO turnover is unknown and likely varies across firms. A reasonable
assumption is that the performance-turnover relationship differs between CEOs who
underperform and CEOs who outperform their peer groups, effectively allowing for a break-
point in the idiosyncratic performance-turnover relationship at zero. The results in Table 8
confirm that the effect of firm-specific performance on CEO dismissals is much stronger for
firms with negative firm-specific performance, i.e. firms which underperform their industry.26
More importantly for our purposes, the estimated effect of peer group performance on CEO
dismissals, and hence the rejection of the relative performance evaluation hypothesis, is
strengthened in Table 8.


In additional unreported robustness checks, we vary the time period over which firm and peer
group performance are measured before the turnover decision. We replace the robust standard
errors in the second stage regressions with bootstrapped standard errors to correct for any biases
caused by the inclusion of generated regressors. We drop the industry fixed effects from the
second stage turnover regressions, thereby allowing average industry performance to affect the
peer performance term. None of these modifications changes the conclusion that both firm-
specific and peer group performance strongly affect the likelihood of CEO dismissals.27


IV. A more detailed examination of the peer performance effect on CEO dismissals
The results so far demonstrate that peer group performance in the form of industry and market
returns is not fully filtered from CEO dismissal decisions. Instead, bad industry performance
increases the likelihood of a CEO dismissal by almost as much as bad firm-specific performance.
We have discussed a number of potential causes for an industry performance effect on forced
CEO turnovers in Section I.C. In order to shed more light on why CEOs are more likely to be
laid off when their peer group is not doing well, this section examines the relationship between
CEO dismissals and peer group performance in more detail.




26
   Goldman, Hazarika, and Shivdasani (2003) and Fisman, Khurana, and Rhodes-Kropf (2005) similarly argue for
break-points in the performance-turnover relationship at zero, but define the break-point in terms of absolute levels
of performance rather than relative or idiosyncratic performance. Both papers find evidence consistent with a
stronger performance-turnover relationship at low levels of performance.
27
   The additional robustness tests are available from the authors upon request.


                                                        24
A. The oligopolistic industry hypothesis
Linking CEO retention decisions to rival firm performance may serve shareholders by softening
competition in oligopolistic industries. Boards may dismiss CEOs for low industry performance
if such performance is caused by CEO actions, for example because the CEO started a price war
with competitors. This strategic interaction hypothesis predicts that the effect of industry
performance on CEO turnover should vanish as the industry definition broadens (as larger
industries are less likely to be oligopolistic), and that the effect should be weaker for small firms
(which are less likely to affect the product market equilibrium in their industry). The evidence
presented so far speaks against the strategic interaction hypothesis: The 48 Fama and French
(1997) industries used in our analysis are quite broad, with the majority of industries having
more than one hundred publicly listed firms on CRSP at any point during the sample period.
Furthermore, we saw in Table 5 that the peer group effect on forced CEO turnover persists when
peer performance is measured as equal-weighted market returns, a finding that is hard to
reconcile with the strategic interaction hypothesis.


Table 9 tests whether the effect of industry performance on CEO dismissals vanishes for firms
which are small relative to their industry and therefore unlikely to affect the product market
equilibrium. Small firms are identified as firms with equity market values below 1 percent of the
total market value of all firms in the same industry found on CRSP (columns 1 and 2), or as
firms with book assets below 1 percent of the total book assets of all firms in the same industry
found on Compustat (columns 3 and 4). Independently of the exact definition of small firms, the
results in Table 9 show that the industry component of firm performance continues to have a
statistically and economically large effect on the likelihood of a forced CEO turnover. We
conclude that the strategic interaction hypothesis is unlikely to explain the documented peer
performance effects on forced CEO turnover.


B. The endogenous industry choice hypothesis
Dye (1992) argues that relative performance evaluation motivates executives to invest in
industries where they can outperform their competitors, rather than in industries that offer the
highest absolute returns. Efficient CEO evaluations may therefore not filter industry performance
out if CEOs have (some) control over which industry their firm operates in. There is a simple fix



                                                 25
for the problem described by Dye: select the peer group benchmark for each CEO before any
industry relocation choices are made. Practically speaking, CEOs should be benchmarked against
their competitors from several years ago to provide them with efficient incentives to move their
firms into the best performing industries. We test the Dye hypothesis in Table 10 by re-running
the base regressions from Table 2 with the industry affiliation lagged by five years, effectively
comparing the current performance of each firm to the current performance of its competitors
from five years ago. The results are almost unchanged from Table 2 and show a statistically and
economically large effect of peer group performance on CEO dismissals. We conclude that the
endogenous industry choice hypothesis is unlikely to explain the main result of this paper.


C. Variation in the informativeness of performance between recessions and booms
Industry or market-wide recessions may allow boards to learn more from firm performance about
the quality of their CEO than booms, for example because recessions test aspects of CEO skill
which are otherwise difficult to observe. The testable implication of this hypothesis is that CEO
turnover should be more sensitive to firm-specific performance in recessions than in booms. We
test this prediction in Table 11 by interacting firm-specific performance with indicators for low,
medium, and high industry performance in the CEO turnover regressions. The results are
supportive of the hypothesis tested when firm and peer group performance are measured over
year t-1 before the turnover decision: the effect of firm-specific performance on CEO turnover is
smallest when industry performance is high, and is largest when industry performance is low.
The difference in slope coefficients is statistically significant at the 10% level in the equal-
weighted industry specifications and at the 1% level in the value-weighted industry
specifications. The hypothesis is not supported by firm-specific performance in year t-2 which
yields slope coefficients which are not significantly different from each other at different levels
of industry performance. The results using equal-weighted market returns as measure of peer
performance are again supportive of the hypothesis tested, and show an effect of firm-specific
performance on CEO dismissals that is largest at low levels of market performance.28




28
  Value-weighted market returns have again no effect on CEO dismissals, as already documented in Table 5. The
regression results using market returns as measure of peer performance are omitted to conserve on space and are
available from the authors.


                                                      26
D. The systematic attribution error hypothesis
Corporate boards and shareholders may make systematic mistakes in attributing performance,
and credit or blame CEOs for performance caused by factors beyond their control. Such
systematic attribution errors are unlikely to affect all CEOs symmetrically. CEOs who
outperform their peer group are able to bring that fact to the board’s attention and are unlikely to
be dismissed during a downturn. CEOs who underperform their peer group, on the other hand,
are less able to defend themselves against attribution errors in downturns, but are happy to hide
behind good industry performance in booms. The attribution errors hypothesis therefore predicts
that industry performance should have only weak effects on outperforming CEOs, but should
strongly affect the likelihood of dismissal for underperforming CEOs.


Table 12 tests this hypothesis by estimating whether the sensitivity of CEO turnovers to peer
group performance depends on whether a CEO underperforms or outperforms her benchmark.
We find that the effect of industry-induced performance on CEO dismissals previously
documented is almost entirely restricted to firms which underperform their benchmarks. There is
almost no effect of peer group performance on the likelihood of a dismissal for CEOs who
outperform their industries. Similar results obtain when peer performance is measured as equal-
weighted market returns (unreported). These findings are consistent with the idea that boards
commit systematic attribution errors when evaluating their CEOs, and that these attribution
errors mainly affect the dismissal likelihood for underperforming CEOs.29


E. The limited investor attention hypothesis
According to the limited investor attention hypothesis, otherwise passive shareholders scrutinize
firms more closely during bad times because shareholder attention has been triggered by low
stock returns or other easily observable variables. This hypothesis is consistent with the result in
the previous section that the peer performance effect on CEO dismissals is strongest for CEOs
who underperform at the same time. In unreported results, we repeat the base regressions from
Tables 2 and 5 for firms in the S&P 500 index only. Since these firms are likely to be
continuously monitored by the press and professional investors, we would expect that CEO


29
  The result is also consistent with the hypothesis from the previous section that firm-specific performance is more
informative about CEO quality in recessions than in booms.


                                                        27
dismissals are less sensitive to peer group performance. The results are virtually unchanged from
Tables 2 and 5 and from the results for small firms in Table 9, which we interpret as evidence
against the limited attention hypothesis.


In this section we perform a more direct test of the limited attention hypothesis: If investors start
paying attention to CEO performance after low absolute returns, then we should expect efficient
filtering of peer group performance from the CEO dismissal decision after low returns. We
therefore sort our sample by the level of prior returns, and test whether the industry component
of firm performance continues to affect CEO turnovers even in firms with very bad prior
performance. Table 13 repeats the base regressions from Table 2, but restricts the second stage
CEO turnover regressions to firm-years with negative returns (columns (1) and (3)) and firm-
years with returns below -20% (columns (2) and (4)). The estimated coefficients on the industry-
component of firm performance are as large and significant as the ones estimated for the full
sample in Table 2. We conclude that even for firms with prior stock returns below -20%, worse
industry performance increases the likelihood of a forced CEO turnover. These results are further
evidence against the limited attention hypothesis as an explanation for the role of peer
performance in CEO dismissals.


F. Stock price reactions to forced CEO turnovers across the industry business cycle
In this section we measure the stock market reaction to the announcement of a forced CEO
turnover. In particular, we are interested in whether the stock market views the more frequent
CEO dismissals in industry recessions as better or worse news than the less frequent dismissals
in industry booms. A crucial caveat to this analysis is that the stock price reaction measures only
new information released on the announcement date, and conflates the market reaction to the
dismissal with the reaction to any other news revealed about the firm at the announcement. For
example, the market may react negatively to a CEO dismissal not because the market views the
dismissal as a bad decision, but because the market was not fully aware of how bad the CEO’s
performance had been.30



30
   Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) argue that the stock price reaction to CEO turnovers should be negative if the
CEO is fired on the basis of private information of the board, and positive if the CEO is fired on the basis of public
information.


                                                         28
Table 14 measures the market-adjusted stock price reaction to forced CEO turnovers using three
and five trading day windows around the announcement date. The average stock price reaction in
this sample is negative and statistically significant. Comparing dismissals of CEOs who
outperformed their industries to dismissals of underperforming CEOs, we find that the market
reaction appears to be more negative for CEOs who outperform, even though the difference is
not statistically significant. The more negative reaction to the dismissal of outperforming CEOs
may be due to the fact that such dismissals are much less common and hence more surprising.
Most interesting from our perspective, Table 14 shows that the stock market reaction to CEO
dismissals does not depend on whether the CEO turnover occurs in an industry recession or an
industry boom. All differences between the announcement returns across the business cycle have
t-statistics below one. There is no evidence that the market views the more frequent CEO
dismissals in industry recessions as different from the less frequent dismissals in industry booms.


V. Conclusion
Using a new hand-collected CEO turnover data set from 1993 to 2001, we document that low
industry stock returns and low market returns significantly increase the likelihood of forced CEO
turnovers. The increase in the likelihood of a forced turnover following bad peer group
performance is concentrated on CEOs who underperform their peer group at the same time. We
find some evidence that boards partially filter industry performance from their assessment of
CEO quality, but the extent of the filtering is too limited to remove most of the peer performance
effect. We conclude that boards fail to fully filter what appear to be exogenous shocks to firm
performance from their CEO retention decisions.


We consider several explanations for the failure of relative performance evaluation in our CEO
turnover sample. While far from conclusive, our results are consistent with the hypothesis that
corporate boards commit systematic attribution errors and credit or blame CEOs for performance
caused by factors beyond their control. There appears to be more filtering of more salient
measures of peer performance, such as the returns to the value-weighted market index,
suggesting that boards may use some imperfect rule-of-thumb relative performance evaluation
when assessing CEO quality. We emphasize that our results are also consistent with the
hypothesis that firm performance in recessions is more revealing about CEO skill than firm



                                                29
performance in booms, leaving the possibility that the observed patterns reflect efficient learning
about CEO quality by corporate boards. Independently of the underlying mechanism, the
documented effect of industry and market performance on CEO turnover has interesting
implications for our understanding of CEO incentives and horizons.




                                                30
References

Adams, Renee B. and Ferreira, Daniel, 2005, A theory of friendly boards, forthcoming, Journal
of Finance.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K., and Andrew A. Samwick, 1999, Executive compensation, strategic
competition, and relative performance evaluation: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance, 54,
p. 1999-2043.

Albuquerque, Ana, 2005, Who are your peers? A study of relative performance evaluation,
Working Paper, Simon School of Business, University of Rochester, January.

Antle, Rick, and Abbie J. Smith, 1986, An empirical investigation of the relative performance
evaluation of corporate executives, Journal of Accounting Research, 24(1), p. 1-39.

Barro, Jason R., and Robert J. Barro, 1990, Pay, performance, and turnover of bank CEOs,
Journal of Labor Economics, 8, p. 48-481.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Jesse M. Fried, and David I. Walker, 2001, Executive compensation in
America: Optimal contracting or extraction of rents?, The Berkeley Law & Economics Working
Papers, 2001(2), Article 10.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2001, Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones
without principles are, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), p. 901-32.

Blackwell, David W., James A. Brickley, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1994, Accounting
information and internal evaluation: Evidence from Texan banks, Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 17(3), p. 331-359.

Camerer, Colin F., and Ulrike Malmendier, 2004, Behavioral organizational economics, Working
Paper, Stanford University Graduate School of Business, March.

Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay, 2001, When contracts require risk-averse executives to hold
equity: Implications for option valuation and relative performance evaluation, Working Paper,
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Core, John E., Wayne R. Guay, and David F. Larcker, 2003, Executive equity compensation and
incentives: A survey, Economic Policy Review 9, p. 27-50.

Core, John E., Wayne R. Guay, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 2003, Price versus non-price
performance measures in optimal CEO compensation contracts, The Accounting Review 78, p.
957-981.

Coughlan, Anne, and Ronald Schmidt, 1985, Executive compensation, management turnover,
and firm performance: An empirical investigation, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 7(1-3),
p. 43-66.




                                             31
Denis, David J., Diane K. Denis, and Atulya Sarin, 1997, Ownership structure and top executive
turnover, Journal of Financial Economics, 45, p. 193-222.

Deszo, Cristian, 2005, Entrenchment and changes in performance following CEO turnover,
Working Paper, Stern School of Business, New York University, August.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrechia, 1982, Optimal managerial contracts and
equilibrium security prices, Journal of Finance, 37, p. 275 -288.

Durell, Alan, 2001, Attribution in performance evaluation, Working Paper, Dartmouth College,
March.

Dye, Ronald A., 1992, Relative performance evaluation and project selection, Journal of
Accounting Research, Vol. 30 No. 1, Spring, p. 27-52.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
Economics 43, p. 153-193.

Fershtman, Chaim, and Kenneth L. Judd, 1987, Equilibrium incentives in oligopoly, The
American Economic Review, Vol. 77, No. 5., p. 927-940.

Garen, John E., 1994, Executive compensation and principal-agent theory, Journal of Political
Economy, 102(6), p. 1175-1199.

Garvey, Gerald T., and Todd T. Milbourn, 2003, Incentive compensation when executives can
hedge the market: Evidence of relative performance evaluation in the cross-section, Journal of
Finance, 58-4, p. 1557-1582.

Garvey, Gerald T., and Todd T. Milbourn, 2004, Asymmetric benchmarking in compensation:
Executives are rewarded for good luck but not penalized for bad, forthcoming, Journal of
Financial Economics.

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990, Relative performance evaluation for chief
executive officers, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43(3), p. 30-51.

Goldman, Eitan, Sonali Hazarika, and Anil Shivdasani, 2003, What determines CEO turnover?,
Working Paper, Kenan-Flagler Business School, University of North Carolina – Chapel Hill,
September.

Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2003, The trouble with stock options, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Volume 17, Number 3, p. 49-70.

Heckman, James J., 1981, The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial
conditions in estimating a discrete time – discrete data stochastic process, in C. F. Manski and D.
McFadden (eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, MIT
Press.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., 2005, Trends in corporate governance, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


                                                32
Himmelberg, Charles P., and R. Glenn Hubbard, 2000, Incentive pay and the market for CEOs:
An analysis of pay-for-performance sensitivity, Working Paper, Columbia University, March.

Hirshleifer, David, and Anjan V. Thakor, 1998, Corporate control through board dismissals and
takeovers, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, Vol. 7(4), p. 489-520.

Holmström, Bengt, 1979, Moral hazard and observability, Bell Journal of Economics, 10, 74-91.

Holmström, Bengt, 1982, Moral hazard in teams, Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 324-340.

Huson, Mark R., Robert Parrino, and Laura T. Starks, 2001, Internal monitoring mechanisms and
CEO turnover: A long term perspective, Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, p. 2265-2297.

Janakiraman, Surya N., Richard A. Lambert, and David F. Larker, 1992, An empirical
investigation of the relative performance evaluation hypothesis, Journal of Accounting Research,
30, 53-69.

Jenter, Dirk, 2002, Executive compensation, incentives, and risk, Working Paper, MIT Sloan
School of Management, April.

Jin, Li, 2002, CEO compensation, diversification and incentives, Journal of Financial
Economics, 66(1), 29-63.

Kaplan, Steven N., 1999, Top Executive Incentives in Germany, Japan and the U. S.: A
Comparison, in Executive Compensation and Shareholder Value, Jennifer Carpenter and David
Yermack, eds.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1985, Corporate performance and managerial remuneration: An empirical
investigation, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 7(1-3), p. 11-42.

Murphy, Kevin J., 1999, Executive Compensation, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.),
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3b, Elsevier Science North Holland, Chapter 38: 2485-
2563.

Oyer, Paul, 2004, Why do firms use incentives that have no incentive effects?, Journal of
Finance, 59(4), 1619-1649.

Parrino, Robert, 1997, CEO turnover and outside succession: A cross-sectional analysis, Journal
of Financial Economics, 46(2), p. 165-197.

Rajgopal, Shivaram, Terry Shevlin, and Valentina Zamora, 2005, CEOs’ outside employment
opportunities and the lack of relative performance evaluation in compensation contracts,
forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Salancik, Gerald R., and Jeffrey Pfeffer, 1980, Effects of ownership and performance on
executive tenure in U.S. corporations, Academy of Management Journal, 23, p. 653-664.




                                              33
Shea, John, 1998, Nominal illusion: Evidence from major league baseball, Working Paper,
University of Maryland.

Sklivas, Steven D., 1987, The strategic choice of managerial incentives, RAND Journal of
Economics, Vol. 18, No. 3, p. 452-458.

Warner, Jerold B., Ross L. Watts, and Karen H. Wruck, 1988, Stock prices and top management
changes, Journal of Financial Economics, 20, p. 461-492.

Warther, Vincent A., 1998, Board effectiveness and board dissent: A model of the board's
relationship to management and shareholders, Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 4 (1), p. 53-
70.

Weber, Roberto, Colin Camerer, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Marc Knez, 2001, The illusion of
leadership: Misattribution of cause in coordination games, Organization Science, 12(5), p. 582-
598.

Weisbach, Michael S., 1988, Outside directors and CEO turnover, Journal of Financial
Economics, 20, p. 431-460.

Wolfers, Justin, 2002, Are voters rational? Evidence from gubernatorial elections, Working
Paper, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, March.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002, Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, Cambridge,
Mass., MIT Press.

Yatchew, A., and Z. Griliches, 1985, Specification error in probit models, The Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, p. 134-139.




                                              34
                                           Table 1
                                      Summary statistics
This table presents an overview of the new CEO turnover data set. Panel A shows the number of
observations and the frequency of forced and voluntary CEO turnovers in the sample. Panel B
shows performance measures and firm characteristics by CEO retention outcome.

Panel A: Frequency of voluntary and forced CEO turnovers
                              Number of         Average percentage    Average percentage       Average percentage
Number       Number of        voluntary           of firms with at    of firms with at least   of firms with at least
of firm-    forced CEO          CEO                least one CEO        one forced CEO         one voluntary CEO
 years       turnovers        turnovers          turnover in a year    turnover in a year       turnover in a year
15,798          384             1,206                  9.47%                 2.36%                    7.47%




Panel B: Firm characteristics, firm performance, and industry performance by CEO turnover outcome
                                                                            Voluntary          CEO is
                                                       CEO is retained     CEO turnover       dismissed
                                                                        Firm characteristics
Book assets ($m)                                            7,703              9,427            5,196
Market value of equity ($m)                                 4,745              6,550            3,318
Sales ($m)                                                  3,345              4,478            3,268
Number of employees                                        16,061             20,565           16,127

                                                                     Firm and industry performance
Stock return in the 12 months before the CEO turnover        29.56%             12.63%             -17.90%
[S.E.]                                                        [0.65]             [1.77]             [2.30]
EW industry stock return in the 12 months before the         19.17%             16.45%             13.01%
CEO turnover [S.E.]                                           [0.25]             [0.89]             [1.50]
VW industry stock return in the 12 months before the         18.33%             17.50%             16.65%
CEO turnover [S.E.]                                           [0.20]             [0.75]             [1.37]




                                                        35
                                               Table 2
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced CEO turnover using the predicted
values and the residuals from the first stage regression as measures of the predicted (peer-group)
and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock returns respectively. The industry
definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48 industries. The second stage
Logit regressions include industry fixed effects. All t- and z-statistics are calculated with robust
standard errors clustered at the industry level.

    Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on industry performance
                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                  Firm stock         Firm stock         Firm stock           Firm stock
                               return in year t-1 return in year t-1 return in year t-1   return in year t-1
    Constant                         0.096              0.096              0.076                0.076
                                   [5.06]***          [5.06]***          [3.97]***            [3.97]***
    EW industry stock return         0.905              0.905
    in year t-1                   [11.30]***         [11.30]***
    VW industry stock return                                               1.036                1.036
    in year t-1                                                          [9.37]***            [9.37]***
    R-squared                         0.12               0.12               0.10                 0.10
                                                     Firm stock                              Firm stock
                                                  return in year t-2                      return in year t-2
    Constant                                            0.097                                   0.063
                                                      [5.78]***                               [3.72]***
    EW industry stock return                            0.884
    in year t-2                                      [15.12]***
    VW industry stock return                                                                   1.089
    in year t-2                                                                              [12.00]***
    R-squared                                            0.12                                   0.11

    Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and
    idiosyncratic firm performance
                                    Forced CEO         Forced CEO     Forced CEO      Forced CEO
                                      turnover            turnover       turnover        turnover
    Constant                           -19.536             -19.276        -19.637         -19.519
                                    [301.10]***         [232.92]***   [211.40]***     [118.82]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return          -2.246              -2.246         -2.323          -2.298
    in year t-1                      [9.65]***           [9.90]***     [10.11]***       [9.52]***
    Industry-induced stock              -1.848              -2.210         -1.540          -1.623
    return in year t-1               [7.78]***           [7.73]***      [6.44]***       [6.43]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return                              -0.633                         -0.683
    in year t-2                                          [5.26]***                      [5.90]***
    Industry-induced stock                                  -1.058                         -0.495
    return in year t-2                                   [4.56]***                       [2.37]**
    Industry fixed effects               Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                     36
                                              Table 3
                        Implied probabilities of a forced CEO turnover
The implied probabilities of a forced CEO turnover are calculated using the second stage
regression coefficients from columns (1) and (3) of Table 2. For the base case implied
probability, all independent variables are set equal to their actual values in the data and the
associated implied probabilities are averaged across all observations. This implied probability
equals the observed likelihood of forced CEO turnovers in the data. The implied probability is
varied by setting either the idiosyncratic or the predicted component of firm performance equal
to their 25th or 75th percentile values. The other independent variables remain at their actual
values.

            Implied probabilities of a forced CEO turnover for different levels of the
            independent variables
                                                Peer group performance Peer group performance
                                                    measured as EW             measured as VW
                                                industry returns over the industry returns over the
                                                     previous year               previous year
                                                   Implied likelihood of a forced CEO turnover
            Base Case                                    2.40%                      2.40%
            Peer-group induced stock
            return set to 25th percentile               3.25%                      3.09%
            Peer-group induced stock
            return set to 75th percentile               2.09%                      2.13%
            Idiosyncratic stock return set to
            25th percentile                             3.03%                      2.92%
            Idiosyncratic stock return set to
            75th percentile                             1.06%                      1.02%




                                                       37
                                               Table 4
 Single-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
The single-stage Logit regressions regress forced CEO turnover on company and industry stock
returns. The industry definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48
industries, and the regressions include industry fixed effects. All z-statistics are calculated with
robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

    Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on firm performance and industry performance
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
                                    Forced CEO        Forced CEO      Forced CEO       Forced CEO
                                      turnover          turnover        turnover         turnover

    Constant                               -19.498           -19.314        -19.577      -19.456
                                       [1082.46]***        [516.66]***   [240.51]***   [133.75]***
    Firm stock return in year t-1           -2.246            -2.246         -2.323       -2.298
                                         [9.65]***          [9.90]***     [10.11]***    [9.52]***
    EW industry stock return in             0.360             0.033
    year t-1                              [2.30]**            [0.18]
    VW industry stock return                                                0.811         0.699
    in year t-1                                                           [4.08]***     [3.80]***
    Firm stock return in year t-2                              -0.633                     -0.683
                                                             [5.26]***                  [5.90]***
    EW industry stock return in                                -0.376
    year t-2                                                   [1.57]
    VW industry stock return                                                             0.205
    in year t-2                                                                          [0.87]
    Industry fixed effects                   Yes                Yes         Yes           Yes
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        38
                                               Table 5
        Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and stock market
                                            performance
The first stage regressions use market-wide stock returns to predict contemporaneous company
stock returns. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced CEO turnover using the
predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as measures of the predicted
(peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock returns respectively. The
second stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects using the Fama and French (1997)
classification into 48 industries. All t- and z-statistics are calculated with robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level.

    Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on market performance
                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                  Firm stock         Firm stock         Firm stock           Firm stock
                               return in year t-1 return in year t-1 return in year t-1   return in year t-1
    Constant                         0.128              0.128              0.133                0.133
                                   [9.15]***          [9.15]***          [7.54]***            [7.54]***
    EW market return in year         0.732              0.732
    t-1                            [5.55]***          [5.55]***
    VW market return in                                                    0.766                0.766
    year t-1                                                             [5.32]***            [5.32]***
    R-squared                         0.03               0.03               0.02                 0.02
                                                     Firm stock                              Firm stock
                                                  return in year t-2                      return in year t-2
    Constant                                            0.111                                   0.047
                                                      [6.48]***                               [2.87]***
    EW market return in year                            0.792
    t-2                                               [8.42]***
    VW market return in                                                                        1.162
    year t-2                                                                                 [10.64]***
    R-squared                                            0.04                                   0.04

    Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and
    idiosyncratic firm performance
                                    Forced CEO         Forced CEO     Forced CEO      Forced CEO
                                      turnover            turnover      turnover         turnover
    Constant                           -19.593             -18.808       -20.005          -19.981
                                    [172.84]***         [57.94]***    [125.57]***     [101.93]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return          -2.190              -2.180        -2.299           -2.262
    in year t-1                      [9.37]***           [9.64]***     [9.91]***        [9.45]***
    Market-induced stock                -1.700              -3.062        -0.214           -0.368
    return in year t-1               [4.41]***           [5.60]***        [0.39]           [0.71]
    Idiosyncratic stock return                              -0.657                         -0.698
    in year t-2                                          [5.89]***                      [6.19]***
    Market-induced stock                                    -1.954                          0.031
    return in year t-2                                   [3.37]***                         [0.10]
    Industry fixed effects               Yes                 Yes           Yes               Yes
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                     39
                                             Table 5B
      Single-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and stock market
                                           performance
The single-stage Logit regressions regress forced CEO turnover on company stock returns and
market-wide returns. The industry definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification
into 48 industries, and the regressions include industry fixed effects. All z-statistics are
calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

  Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on firm performance and market performance
                                          (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)
                                     Forced CEO       Forced CEO      Forced CEO        Forced CEO
                                       turnover         turnover        turnover          turnover

  Constant                                  -19.53             -19.065      -19.728       -19.695
                                         [217.53]***         [97.08]***   [244.99]***   [189.52]***
  Firm stock return in year t-1             -2.190              -2.180       -2.299        -2.262
                                          [9.37]***           [9.64]***    [9.91]***     [9.45]***
  EW market return in year t-1              0.358               -0.646
                                            [1.21]              [1.53]
  VW market return in year t-1                                               1.597         1.451
                                                                           [3.51]***     [3.32]***
  Firm stock return in year t-2                                 -0.657                     -0.698
                                                              [5.89]***                  [6.19]***
  EW market return in year t-2                                  -1.027
                                                               [2.18]**
  VW market return in year t-2                                                            0.847
                                                                                         [2.45]**
  Industry fixed effects                      Yes                 Yes        Yes           Yes
  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        40
                                               Table 6
  Two-stage Multinomial Logit regressions of voluntary and forced CEO turnover on firm
                                     and industry performance
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns. The second stage Multinomial Logit regressions predict voluntary and forced CEO
turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as measures
of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock returns
respectively. The industry definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48
industries. The second stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects. All t- and z-
statistics are calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

        Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on industry performance
                                                  (1)                               (2)
                                    Firm stock return in year t-1      Firm stock return in year t-1
        Constant                                0.096                             0.076
                                              [5.06]***                         [3.97]***
        EW industry stock return                0.905
        in year t-1                          [11.30]***
        VW industry stock return                                                  1.036
        in year t-1                                                             [9.37]***
        R-squared                                0.12                              0.10

        Panel B: Second stage Multinomial Logit regressions of voluntary and forced CEO
        turnover on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic firm performance
                                                   (1)                                (2)
                                        Voluntary      Forced CEO           Voluntary     Forced CEO
                                     CEO turnover        turnover         CEO turnover       turnover
        Constant                          -1.644          -26.433             -1.700          -26.541
                                       [50.59]***      [420.12]***         [33.45]***     [291.50]***
        Idiosyncratic stock return        -0.470           -2.289             -0.509           -2.370
        in year t-1                     [4.88]***       [9.74]***           [5.19]***      [10.20]***
        Industry-induced stock            -0.440           -1.888             -0.217           -1.557
        return in year t-1               [2.18]**       [7.63]***             [0.93]        [6.33]***
        Industry fixed effects             Yes              Yes                Yes              Yes
        * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                     41
                                               Table 7
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
                                 using firm-specific beta estimates
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns and allow for variation in the industry sensitivities of monthly firm-level log stock
returns. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced CEO turnover using the cumulated
predicted values and residuals from the first stage regression as measures of the predicted (peer-
group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock returns respectively. The industry
definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48 industries. The second stage
Logit regressions include industry fixed effects. All t- and z-statistics are calculated with robust
standard errors clustered at the industry level.

    Panel A: Firm-specific beta estimates from first stage regressions of firm performance on industry
    performance
                                 Monthly firm log stock return on      Monthly firm log stock return on
                                    EW industry performance                VW industry performance
    Average beta estimate                    0.881                                 0.893

    Median beta estimate                     0.845                                 0.875
    1st percentile beta
                                             0.032                                 0.047
    estimate
    99th percentile beta
                                             2.062                                 2.120
    estimate

    Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and
    idiosyncratic firm performance
                                           (1)                 (2)           (3)             (4)
                                    Forced CEO         Forced CEO     Forced CEO      Forced CEO
                                       turnover            turnover      turnover        turnover
    Constant                            -19.378             -19.186       -19.342         -19.183
                                    [155.77]***         [130.38]***   [185.04]***     [489.92]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return           -1.723              -1.645         -1.69          -1.624
    in year t-1                      [14.60]***          [14.72]***    [17.24]***      [16.49]***
    Industry-induced stock               -0.934              -1.122        -0.711          -0.894
    return in year t-1                [5.71]***           [7.54]***     [3.24]***       [3.87]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return                               -0.714                        -0.743
    in year t-2                                           [8.45]***                     [9.25]***
    Industry-induced stock                                   -0.933                        -0.672
    return in year t-2                                    [3.71]***                       [1.86]*
    Industry fixed effects                Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                     42
                                               Table 8
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
             Different turnover-performance slopes for under- and outperformers
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns and are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced
CEO turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as
measures of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock
returns respectively. Underperformers and outperformers are defined as firms with negative or
positive firm-specific residual performance in the first stage regressions respectively. The second
stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects using the Fama and French (1997)
classification into 48 industries. All t- and z-statistics are calculated with robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level.

Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic firm
performance
                                         Peer performance measured as EW     Peer performance measured as VW
                                                  industry stock returns             industry stock returns
                                                 (1)                   (2)          (3)                   (4)
                                          Forced CEO             Forced CEO   Forced CEO            Forced CEO
                                             turnover               turnover     turnover              turnover
Constant                                      -19.521                -19.27        -19.3                -19.22
                                          [254.99]***            [246.89]***  [556.08]***            [98.23]***
Positive idiosyncratic stock return            -0.872                -0.899       -0.779                -0.782
in year t-1 (outperformer)                  [3.94]***              [3.22]***    [2.79]***              [2.57]**
Negative idiosyncratic stock return            -2.689                -2.648       -2.774                -2.712
in year t-1 (underperformer)               [12.05]***             [14.53]***   [13.32]***            [14.06]***
Industry-induced stock return in               -2.065                -2.397       -1.739                -1.786
year t-1                                    [8.68]***              [9.49]***    [7.09]***             [7.32]***
Positive idiosyncratic stock return                                  -0.379                             -0.394
in year t-2 (outperformer)                                           [1.46]                             [1.42]
Negative idiosyncratic stock return                                  -0.884                             -0.932
in year t-2 (underperformer)                                       [3.02]***                          [3.15]***
Industry-induced stock return in                                     -1.191                             -0.659
year t-2                                                           [4.15]***                           [2.46]**
Industry fixed effects                          Yes                   Yes           Yes                  Yes
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                      43
                                               Table 9
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
                                         Small firms only
The estimation is performed for firms with equity market values less than 1% of total industry
market value (columns 1 and 2) and for firms with book assets less than 1% of total industry
book assets (columns 3 and 4) only. The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to
predict contemporaneous company stock returns. The second stage Logit regressions predict
forced CEO turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression
as measures of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock
returns respectively. The second stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects using the
Fama and French (1997) classification into 48 industries. All t- and z-statistics are calculated
with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

   Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on industry performance

                                   Market value less than 1% of              Book assets less than 1% of
                                     industry market value                     industry books assets

                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                Firm stock return    Firm stock return   Firm stock return   Firm stock return
                                   in year t-1          in year t-1         in year t-1         in year t-1

   Constant                           0.079               0.059               0.080               0.066
                                    [3.64]***            [2.69]**           [3.50]***            [2.64]**
   EW industry stock return           0.970                                   1.016
   in year t-1                     [12.26]***                               [8.89]***
   VW industry stock return                               1.060                                   1.089
   in year t-1                                          [9.16]***                               [6.68]***
   R-squared                          0.13                 0.10                0.13                0.10

   Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic
   firm performance

                                  Forced CEO           Forced CEO          Forced CEO          Forced CEO
                                    turnover             turnover            turnover            turnover

   Constant                            -4.290               -4.252             -18.9             -18.895
                                    [48.27]***           [54.13]***        [238.30]***         [146.07]***
   Idiosyncratic stock return          -2.211               -2.265            -2.005              -2.054
   in year t-1                       [9.41]***            [9.76]***         [8.81]***           [9.28]***
   Industry-induced stock              -1.723               -1.450            -1.580              -1.315
   return in year t-1                [8.27]***            [6.55]***         [7.14]***           [5.36]***
   Industry fixed effects               Yes                  Yes                Yes                Yes
   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        44
                                              Table 10
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
                              Industry affiliation lagged by five years
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns. The industry affiliations are lagged by five years so that each firm is benchmarked
against its competitors from five years ago. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced
CEO turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as
measures of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock
returns respectively. The industry definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification
into 48 industries. The second stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects. All t- and z-
statistics are calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

    Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on industry performance
                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                  Firm stock         Firm stock         Firm stock           Firm stock
                               return in year t-1 return in year t-1 return in year t-1   return in year t-1
    Constant                         0.050              0.050              0.043                0.043
                                   [3.59]***          [3.59]***          [2.81]***            [2.81]***
    EW industry stock return         0.888              0.888
    in year t-1                   [10.34]***         [10.34]***
    VW industry stock return                                               0.872                0.872
    in year t-1                                                          [7.88]***            [7.88]***
    R-squared                         0.14               0.14               0.10                 0.10
                                                     Firm stock                              Firm stock
                                                  return in year t-2                      return in year t-2
    Constant                                            0.050                                   0.025
                                                      [3.17]***                                 [1.39]
    EW industry stock return                            0.859
    in year t-2                                      [11.18]***
    VW industry stock return                                                                   0.922
    in year t-2                                                                              [8.28]***
    R-squared                                            0.13                                   0.11

    Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and
    idiosyncratic firm performance
                                    Forced CEO         Forced CEO     Forced CEO      Forced CEO
                                      turnover            turnover      turnover         turnover
    Constant                           -19.540             -18.962       -19.664          -19.306
                                    [229.78]***         [157.59]***   [246.18]***     [107.17]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return          -2.255              -2.213        -2.337           -2.269
    in year t-1                      [8.32]***           [9.89]***     [9.04]***        [9.53]***
    Industry-induced stock              -1.748              -2.218        -1.306           -1.450
    return in year t-1               [6.42]***           [6.79]***     [3.85]***        [4.04]***
    Idiosyncratic stock return                              -0.718                         -0.807
    in year t-2                                          [3.70]***                      [4.05]***
    Industry-induced stock                                  -1.650                         -0.745
    return in year t-2                                   [4.44]***                        [1.91]*
    Industry fixed effects               Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                     45
                                              Table 11
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
     Different turnover-performance slopes for different levels of industry performance
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns and are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced
CEO turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as
measures of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock
returns respectively. The second stage Logit regressions allow for different effects of
idiosyncratic performance on CEO turnover depending on whether industry performance is in the
bottom, middle, or top third of all observations. The second stage regressions include industry
fixed effects using the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48 industries. All t- and z-
statistics are calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic firm performance
                                          Peer performance measured as EW      Peer performance measured as VW
                                                    industry stock returns              industry stock returns
                                                   (1)                    (2)          (3)                    (4)
                                            Forced CEO             Forced CEO   Forced CEO             Forced CEO
                                               turnover               turnover     turnover               turnover
Constant                                        -19.542                -19.307      -19.785                -19.657
                                            [181.87]***            [183.90]***  [194.75]***            [157.61]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-1:          -1.841                 -1.872       -1.901                 -1.883
high industry performance                     [4.95]***              [4.76]***    [7.28]***              [6.24]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-1:          -2.314                 -2.272       -2.298                 -2.289
medium industry performance                  [11.96]***             [11.74]***   [10.22]***             [10.35]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-1:          -2.592                 -2.599       -2.986                 -2.904
low industry performance                      [9.74]***             [10.71]***    [9.79]***              [9.55]***
Industry-induced stock return in                 -1.385                 -1.740       -0.961                 -1.058
year t-1                                      [3.96]***              [3.97]***    [3.66]***              [3.28]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-2:                                 -0.714                              -0.855
high industry performance                                            [4.17]***                           [5.30]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-2:                                 -0.829                              -0.505
medium industry performance                                          [4.16]***                           [2.59]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year t-2:                                 -0.300                              -0.517
low industry performance                                                [0.73]                             [1.77]*
Industry-induced stock return in                                        -1.072                              -0.551
year t-2                                                             [4.42]***                            [2.08]**
Industry fixed effects                            Yes                    Yes          Yes                    Yes
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        46
                                              Table 12
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
             Different industry performance effects for under- and outperformers
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns and are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced
CEO turnover using the predicted values and the residuals from the first stage regression as
measures of the predicted (peer-group) and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock
returns respectively. Underperformers and outperformers are defined as firms with negative or
positive firm-specific residual performance in the first stage regressions respectively. The second
stage Logit regressions include industry fixed effects using the Fama and French (1997)
classification into 48 industries. All t- and z-statistics are calculated with robust standard errors
clustered at the industry level.

Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic firm
performance
                                        Peer performance measured as EW     Peer performance measured as VW
                                                 industry stock returns              industry stock returns
                                                (1)                    (2)          (3)                    (4)
                                         Forced CEO             Forced CEO   Forced CEO             Forced CEO
                                            turnover               turnover     turnover               turnover
Constant                                     -19.592                -19.332      -19.693                -19.560
                                         [515.24]***            [235.00]***  [202.58]***            [117.60]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year            -2.507                 -2.522       -2.504                 -2.449
t-1                                       [10.35]***             [11.26]***   [10.25]***             [10.06]***
Industry-induced stock return                 -0.315                 -0.598       -0.469                 -0.695
in year t-1 for outperformers                 [0.48]                 [0.81]       [0.69]                 [0.85]
Industry-induced stock return                 -2.124                 -2.506       -1.754                 -1.811
in year t-1 for underperformers            [7.83]***              [8.57]***    [6.06]***              [6.49]***
Idiosyncratic stock return in year                                   -0.681                              -0.753
t-2                                                               [4.18]***                           [4.44]***
Industry-induced stock return                                        -0.863                              -0.273
in year t-2 for outperformers                                      [2.01]**                              [0.59]
Industry-induced stock return                                        -1.093                              -0.580
in year t-2 for underperformers                                   [3.99]***                            [2.40]**
Industry fixed effects                         Yes                    Yes          Yes                    Yes
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                      47
                                               Table 13
  Two-stage Logit regressions of forced CEO turnover on firm and industry performance
                        Firm-years with negative prior stock returns only
The first stage regressions use industry stock returns to predict contemporaneous company stock
returns. The second stage Logit regressions predict forced CEO turnover using the predicted
values and the residuals from the first stage regression as measures of the predicted (peer-group)
and of the idiosyncratic component of company stock returns respectively. The second stage
regressions are run for firms with negative returns (columns (1) and (3)) or firms with returns
below -20 percent (columns (2) and (4)) only. The second stage Logit regressions include
industry fixed effects using the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48 industries. All t-
and z-statistics are calculated with robust standard errors clustered at the industry level.

   Panel A: First stage regressions of firm performance on industry performance

                                   Firm stock return in year t-1           Firm stock return in year t-1
   Constant                                   0.096                                   0.076
                                            [5.06]***                               [3.97]***
   EW industry stock return                   0.905
   in year t-1                             [11.30]***
   VW industry stock return                                                           1.036
   in year t-1                                                                      [9.37]***
   R-squared                                   0.12                                    0.10

   Panel B: Second stage Logit regressions of CEO dismissals on peer-group induced and idiosyncratic
   firm performance conditional on low absolute performance

                                Absolute returns Absolute returns      Absolute returns   Absolute returns
                                    below 0%           below -20%         below 0%          below -20%
                                         (1)                  (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                   Forced CEO           Forced CEO       Forced CEO         Forced CEO
                                     turnover             turnover         turnover            turnover
   Constant                           -19.573              -19.432          -19.65              -19.434
                                   [104.91]***          [132.50]***      [102.23]***         [70.16]***
   Idiosyncratic stock return          -3.006               -2.636          -3.079                -2.73
   in year t-1                      [8.98]***            [6.92]***        [9.73]***           [7.80]***
   Industry-induced stock              -2.464               -2.095          -2.272               -1.924
   return in year t-1               [7.10]***            [5.64]***        [6.61]***           [5.22]***
   Industry fixed effects               Yes                  Yes             Yes                   Yes
   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                      48
                                            Table 14
                      Stock price reactions around forced CEO turnovers
This table reports 3- and 5-day market-adjusted announcement returns around forced CEO
turnover announcements. Average announcement returns are calculated separately for
observations with positive and negative firm-specific stock returns preceding the CEO turnover,
and observations with equal-weighted industry stock returns above and below the mean industry
stock return in the sample. Firm-specific stock returns are calculated as the residuals from OLS
regressions of annual firm returns on equal-weighted industry stock returns (shown in column 1
of Table 2). The industry definitions follow the Fama and French (1997) classification into 48
industries.

Panel A: 3-day stock price reaction around announcements of forced CEO turnovers
                                 Below-average industry         Above-average industry
                                      performance                    performance
                                                  3-day                          3-day        T-test for
                                  No. of      announcement       No. of      announcement   differences in
                               observations       return      observations       return         means
Positive idiosyncratic stock
return in year t-1                 36           -3.46%            20           -3.62%           0.07
(outperformer)
Negative idiosyncratic stock
return in year t-1                 198          -1.18%            112          -1.70%           0.35
(underperformer)
T-test for differences in
                                                  1.21                           1.00
means



Panel B: 5-day stock price reaction around announcements of forced CEO turnovers
                                 Below-average industry         Above-average industry
                                      performance                    performance
                                                  5-day                          5-day        T-test for
                                  No. of      announcement       No. of      announcement   differences in
                               observations       return      observations       return         means
Positive idiosyncratic stock
return in year t-1                 36           -3.03%            20           -4.68%           0.58
(outperformer)
Negative idiosyncratic stock
return in year t-1                 198          -1.18%            112          -2.60%           0.87
(underperformer)
T-test for differences in
                                                  0.93                           0.80
means




                                                         49
