                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PUTTING BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS TO WORK:
                    TESTING FOR GIFT EXCHANGE IN LABOR MARKETS
                              USING FIELD EXPERIMENTS

                                               Uri Gneezy
                                               John A. List

                                          Working Paper 12063
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12063


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2006




David Levine and four anonymous reviewers provided comments that significantly improved the study. Ernst
Fehr and Glenn Harrison also provided remarks that improved the manuscript. Michael Price provided fine
research assistance. Craig Landry, Andreas Lange, and Nicholas Rupp also helped with gathering the data.
Jamie Brown-Kruse worked with us in her capacity as the Director of the Hazards Center. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Uri Gneezy and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field
Experiments
Uri Gneezy and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 12063
February 2006
JEL No. J2, J30, J41, C93

                                             ABSTRACT

Recent discoveries in behavioral economics have led scholars to question the underpinnings of

neoclassical economics. We use insights gained from one of the most influential lines of behavioral

research – gift exchange – in an attempt to maximize worker effort in two quite distinct tasks: data

entry for a university library and door-to-door fundraising for a research center. In support of the

received literature, our field evidence suggests that worker effort in the first few hours on the job is

considerably higher in the “gift” treatment than in the “non-gift treatment. After the initial few hours,

however, no difference in outcomes is observed, and overall the gift treatment yielded inferior

aggregate outcomes for the employer: with the same budget we would have logged more data for our

library and raised more money for our research center by using the market-clearing wage rather than

by trying to induce greater effort with a gift of higher wages.

Uri Gneezy
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
ugneezy@gsb.uchicago.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu
I. Introduction

         Neoclassical economics treats labor as a hired input in much the same manner as

capital. Accordingly, in equilibrium, the firm pays market-clearing wages and workers

provide minimum effort. The validity of this assumption is not always supported by real-

life observations—some employers pay more than the market-clearing wage, and workers

seemingly invest more effort than necessary (Akerlof, 1982). The “fair wage-effort”

hypothesis of Akerlof (1982) and Akerlof and Yellen, (1988; 1990) extends the

neoclassical model to explain higher than market clearing wages by using a gift exchange

model, where “On the worker’s side, the ‘gift’ given is work in excess of the minimum

work standard; and on the firm’s side the ‘gift’ given is wages in excess of what these

women could receive if they left their current jobs” (Akerlof, 1982, p.544).1

         The gift exchange model is based on the critical assumption of a positive

relationship between wages and worker effort levels. Workers are assumed to respond to

high wage levels by increasing their effort (positive reciprocity) and to low wage levels

by decreasing their effort (negative reciprocity) to the minimum required, in retaliation

for the low wage. A large and influential body of empirical evidence in support of

reciprocity has been reported in the past two decades.2 One of the first experiments to

test this assumption is Fehr et al. (1993), who constructed a market with excess supply of

labor, ensuring a low equilibrium wage. Under their setup, employees had no pecuniary

1
  The notion of gift exchange was apparently first proposed by Adams (1963), who posited that in social
exchange between two agents the ratio of the perceived value of the inputs (e.g., wage) to the perceived
value of outputs (e.g., resulting from the employee’s effort) would be equivalent.
2
  See, for example, Kahneman et al. (1986), Fehr et al. (1993, 1997), Berg et al. (1995), Guth et al. (1982),
Guth (1995), Roth (1995), Mowday (1991), Charness (2005), Falk and Gächter (2002), and Fehr and Falk
(1999). For a survey and discussion of positive and negative reciprocity, see Fehr and Gächter (2000). For
a survey of the theoretical models of reciprocity see Sobel (2005). This picture is confirmed by scholarly
work in many other fields. It is accounted for in interview studies that economists have conducted with
business leaders (Agell and Lundborg, 1995) and it is consistent with discussions in organization theory
(Steers and Lyman, 1991) and psychology (Argyle, 1989).


                                                                                                           1
incentive to raise the quality of their work above the exogenously given minimum. If an

employer expects employees to invest only the minimum effort required, then she has no

compelling reason to pay wages above the market-clearing level.           Contrary to this

prediction, however, most employers attempted to induce employees to invest greater

effort by offering them higher (at times by more than 100%) than market-clearing wages.

On average, this high wage was reciprocated by greater employee effort, making it

profitable for employers to offer high wage contracts. Subsequent laboratory exercises

have largely led to similar conclusions.

       While the literature has taken the experimental results as providing key support

for the received labor market predictions of Akerlof (1982)—see, e.g., Fehr et al. (1993,

p. 437), who note that their results “provide…experimental support for the fair wage-

effort theory of involuntary unemployment”—it remains largely unknown whether such

inference is appropriate from observed laboratory behavior. In this case, for example, is

the behavior of laboratory subjects, who are asked to choose an effort or wage level (by

circling or jotting down a number) in response to pecuniary incentive structures, a good

indicator of actual behavior in labor markets?

       We tackle this issue directly by focusing on real effort in labor markets using field

experiments. In this regard, one key missing link in the literature between the laboratory

and labor markets is the duration of the task. While interaction in the lab is typically

abbreviated, and usually takes no longer than one or two hours, interaction in labor

markets typically lasts weeks, months, or years. One lesson learned from the psychology

literature is that there are important behavioral differences between psychological

processes in the short run and in the long run: for example, hot versus cold decision




                                                                                          2
making. In many cases, the immediate reaction to an event is dictated by what is called

“hot” decision making (Loewenstein, 2005). People’s decision making behavior in this

“hot” phase is different than in the “cold” phase (the folk wisdom of counting to 10

before one reacts is based on such a difference). Additionally, adaptation has been found

to be important. Much like the human eye adapts to changes in light, decision makers

tend to adapt to new situations over time (Gilbert et al., 1998).

       To provide a first test of the gift exchange hypothesis in an actual labor market,

we invited people to take part in an effort to computerize the holdings of a small library

at a large university in the Midwest. Recruitment was done via posters that promised

participants one-time work that would last six hours and that would pay $12 per hour, or

$72. Participants were not informed that they were taking part in an experiment.

       The first treatment paid a flat wage of $12 per hour, as promised. In the second

treatment, once the task was explained to the participants, they were told that they would

be paid $20 per hour, not the $12 that had been promised. We found that, in line with the

gift exchange hypothesis, participants in the $20 treatment provided significantly higher

effort in the first 90 minutes than participants in the $12 treatment. After 90 minutes on

the job, however, effort levels were indistinguishable across the two treatments.

       Our second field experiment invited students to take part in a door-to-door

fundraising drive to support the Natural Hazards Mitigation Research Center at a large

university in the Southeast. Similar to the library task, participants were told that this

was one-time work for which they would be paid $10 per hour. Yet an important

difference in this case is that workers have a better idea about the surplus and how much

the employer valued the task. This difference is important because if the surplus is




                                                                                        3
known, the share of the surplus that the workers receive will determine whether they

perceive their wage as fair.3

        The first treatment was a flat wage of $10 per hour, as promised. In the second

treatment, once the solicitors were trained, they were told that they would be paid $20 per

hour, not the $10 that had been advertised. Empirical results mirror those in the library

task: solicitors in the $20 treatment raised significantly more money in the first few

hours of the task than solicitors in the $10 treatment. Yet after a few hours the observed

outcomes were indistinguishable.

        The remainder of our study proceeds as follows.                       Section II presents the

experimental design.         Section III discusses the experimental results.                 Section IV

summarizes how our work relates to the literature. Section V concludes.

II. Experimental Designs

A. Library Task

        Our first field experiment was conducted at a large university, using

undergraduate student participants who were invited to take part in an effort to

computerize the holdings of a small library at the university.                     Recruitment posters

informed potential participants that this was one-time work that would last exactly six

hours, for which they would be paid $12 per hour. Each participant performed the task

alone, without viewing the other participants.

        Treatment noGift offered laborers a flat wage of $12 per hour, as promised. In the

second treatment, denoted Treatment Gift, once the task was explained to the participants

they were told that they would be paid $20 per hour rather than the $12 rate advertised.


3
 Alternatively, if workers know only the promised wage and not the surplus, as in our library task, only the
promised wage can serve as a reference point. We thank Ernst Fehr for pointing us in this direction.


                                                                                                          4
The task

       Participants were seated in front of a computer terminal next to boxes filled with

books, and asked to enter data regarding the books into a database on the computer. The

data included title, author, publisher, ISBN number, and year of publication. Participants

could take a break from their work whenever was necessary. The experimental monitor

recorded the number of books they entered every 90 minutes.

       Before proceeding to a discussion of the second field experiment, we should

briefly mention a few design issues. First, students were not informed that they were

taking part in an experiment. This is important given that we wished to observe subjects

in a natural work environment. Second, we were careful to remind them that this was a

one-time work opportunity. This is important in light of an alternative theory to the fair

wage effort hypothesis—efficiency wage theory—which surmises that employers pay

above market-clearing wages to motivate workers to increase their effort level in order to

avoid being fired, which economizes on firm-level monitoring (see, e.g., Katz, 1986).

Third, we calculated that we would need roughly 100-120 hours of total worker time to

complete the task. Thus, to test our duration hypothesis we hired 19 workers for 6 hours

each, splitting the sample into n=10 and n=9 for the noGift and Gift treatments

respectively.   Finally, we distributed books across individuals randomly in order to

ensure orthogonality of book type and treatment.

B. Fundraising Task

       Our second field experiment was part of a door-to-door fundraising drive to

support the Natural Hazards Mitigation Research Center (henceforth the Hazards Center)




                                                                                        5
at a large university.4 Door-to-door fundraising is widely used by a diverse range of

organizations.      In both treatments, which follow the two library task treatments,

households in predetermined neighborhood blocks in Pitt County, North Carolina, were

approached by a paid solicitor and asked if they would like to make a contribution to

support the Hazards Center.           Households that answered the door were provided an

informational brochure about the Hazards Center and read a fixed script that outlined the

reason for the solicitor’s visit. The script included a brief introduction which informed

the resident of who the solicitors were, the purpose of their visit, and a one- to two-

sentence summary of the non-profit organization. Copies of the script are provided in the

Appendix.

        As summarized in the Appendix, potential donors were informed that all proceeds

raised in the fundraising campaign would be used to fund the Hazards Center.

Households were also informed that each dollar contributed to the Hazards Center would

provide them with one ticket for a $1000 lottery, with the chances of winning the prize

based upon the total number of tickets allocated.5

        The experimental treatments were conducted on two different weekends in

November 2004. In total, we employed 23 solicitors – 10 in the noGift treatment and 13

in the Gift treatment. Potential subjects were recruited via flyers posted around campus,


4
  The Natural Hazard Mitigation Research Center was authorized to begin operations in the fall of 2004 by
the North Carolina state government. The Hazard Center was founded in response to the widespread
devastation in eastern North Carolina caused by hurricanes Dennis and Floyd and designed to provide
support and coordination for research on natural hazard risks. For more information on the Hazard
Mitigation Research Center see www.artsci.ecu.edu/cas/auxiliary/hazardcenter/home.htm. The design
discussion follows Landry et al. (2006), who explore various mechanisms—voluntary contributions
mechanisms with and without seed money and two types of lotteries—for inducing charitable
contributions.
5
  We also randomly placed solicitors in a treatment with a multiple-prize lottery. The data across these two
lottery types are not significantly different so we pool them and suppress further discussion. See Landry et
al. (2006) for a further discussion of the broader lottery results.


                                                                                                          6
announcements on a university electronic bulletin board, advertisements in the local

campus newspaper, and direct appeal to students during undergraduate economics

courses. All solicitors were told they would be paid $10 per hour during training and

employment.

        Each solicitor’s experience typically followed four steps: (1) consideration of an

invitation to work as a paid volunteer for the research center, (2) an in-person interview,

(3) a training session, and (4) participation as a solicitor in the door-to-door campaign.

Upon being hired (all applicants were hired), all solicitors attended a one-hour training

session on Friday afternoon of the weekend they were scheduled to work.6 Upon arriving

on Saturday morning, subjects were split randomly into two groups, after which one

group (Treatment Gift) was informed separately that its members would receive $20 per

hour, rather than the $10 hourly rate the other group (Treatment noGift) received. All

solicitors participated during a single weekend and were not informed that they were

participants in an experimental study; nor were they informed that different solicitors

were being paid different amounts. Further, care was taken to keep solicitors in different

experimental treatments isolated from one another to prevent cross-contamination and

information exchange across treatments.

        A few important design issues should be discussed before proceeding to the

results summary. First, solicitors were provided with a record sheet which included

columns to record the race, gender, and approximate age of potential donors, along with

their contribution level. The trainer stressed the importance of recording the contribution

6
  Each training session was conducted by the same researcher and covered a single treatment. The training
sessions provided the solicitor with background/historical information about the Hazards Center and
reviewed the organization’s mission statement and purpose. Solicitors were provided a copy of the
brochure and the press release announcing the formation of the Hazards Center. Once solicitors were
familiarized with the Hazards Center, the trainer reviewed the data collection procedures.


                                                                                                       7
(or non-contribution) data immediately following the solicitation “sales-pitch”. This

permits us to examine the temporal nature of effort and contributions secured. Second,

solicitors were instructed to distribute an information brochure after introducing

themselves to potential donors. This provided legitimacy to the fundraising drive, as

brochures are a common tool in the industry. Finally, solicitors were instructed to wear

khaki pants (or shorts) and were provided with a polo shirt that displayed the name of the

Hazard Center.

III. Empirical Results

       A quick summary of the empirical results is that, consistent with the bulk of past

experimental evidence from the lab, there are signs of significant gift exchange in the

data: in the early hours of the task, effort in the Gift treatments is markedly higher than

in the noGift treatments. Across both tasks, however, this increased effort wanes quickly,

and after the first few hours effort levels across the Gift and noGift treatments are

statistically indistinguishable. This drop in effort causes us to conclude that for the wage

levels considered in our treatments, our resources would have been better spent hiring

agents at market-clearing wages. Evidence for these empirical findings are described

more fully below.

A. Library Task

       Table 1 provides a raw data summary, and Figure 1 summarizes the temporal

work effort in the library task split into 90-minute intervals. In the first 90 minutes, the

average number of books logged into the computer is quite different across the two

treatments: whereas workers logged, on average, 51.7 books in the Gift treatment, an

average of only 40.7 books were logged in the noGift treatment. This nearly 25 percent



                                                                                          8
difference is statistically significant at the p < .05 level using a one-tailed Wilcoxon

(Mann-Whitney) nonparametric test, which has an alternative hypothesis of the Gift

treatment having more books logged. To construct the test statistic, we first calculated

the individual mean books logged in the 90-minute period and then ranked subjects via

these means. The test statistic is normally distributed, and takes on a value of z = 1.76.

A t-test assuming unequal variances also yields statistical significance at the p < .05 level

using a one-sided alternative: t = 1.85.

        While this 25 percent difference in effort is indeed noteworthy, inspection of the

remainder of the temporal effort profile does not provide compelling evidence in favor of

the gift exchange hypothesis.        None of the remaining effort levels are significantly

different at conventional levels using Wilcoxon non-parametric tests (z = 0.37; z = 0.96;

z = -0.40), and the data become quite similar in the final 3 hours; t-tests assuming

unequal variances yield similar insights.

        To complement these insights we estimate a panel data regression model in which

we regress the individual number of books logged on a dummy variable for treatment,

dummy variables for time indicators, and their interaction. Because the treatment dummy

variable is static, we report panel data estimates from a random effects regression model

(the rank condition would be violated if we estimated a fixed effects model). Estimates

in Column 1 of Table 2 are consistent qualitatively with the results reported in Table 1

and Figure 1: the wage gift increases worker effort levels early on in the experiment but

this results dissipates over time.

B. Fundraising Task




                                                                                           9
       Table 3 provides a summary of the average total contributions collected per hour

by treatment split into hourly time segments. Similar to the library task, in the beginning

of the work day the Gift treatment yields significantly higher outcomes. For example, as

shown in Figure 2, examining data in the first (pre-lunch) three hours of the capital

campaign, we find an average total collection figure in the Gift treatment of $11.00,

whereas in the noGift treatment solicitors raised only $6.40 per hour, a difference of 70

percent. A non-parametric Wilcoxon statistical test indicates that these averages are

different at the p < .01 level using a one-sided alternative. This outcome highlights the

strength of the gift exchange effect.

       Yet as Table 3 reveals, after a few hours on the job the average dollars collected

(denoted “earnings”) across the two treatments become quite similar. Indeed, only $0.39

separates the average dollars collected per hour after lunch across the two treatments.

And, in any given hourly time period post-lunch, the average total collection earnings

across the two treatments are not statistically significant at conventional levels. The data

summary in Table 4 and Figure 2 provides an indication of why this convergence occurs.

While the solicitors in the non-gift exchange treatment garner hourly contributions in the

3-hour block before lunch similar to those in the 3-hour block after lunch ($6.40 versus

$6.63), solicitors in the gift exchange treatment raise significantly less in the post-lunch

time period than they raise in the pre-lunch time period—$7.03 per hour versus $11 per

hour. Using a matched pairs t-test, we find that this difference is statistically significant

at the p < .05 level using a two-sided alternative, whereas the temporal difference for the

non-gift exchange treatment is not significant.




                                                                                          10
        For further evidence we again turn to a panel data regression model in which we

regress the individual monies raised on a dichotomous variable for treatment, dummy

variables for time indicators, and their interaction. We again include random effects and

we should note that we experimented with the individual-specific variables found to be

important in Landry et al. (2006) and found that their inclusion does not change the

qualitative insights. Thus, for parsimony we exclude these variables. Columns 2 and 3

of Table 2 contain parameter estimates. As Column 2 indicates, the hourly data are quite

noisy, and strong inference cannot be gained from these estimates (a Tobit random effects

model yields similar insights). Yet the data split by three hour blocks, pre- and post-

lunch, are consistent with the results discussed above (see Column 3 of Table 2): the

wage gift worked well in the first few hours but its influence waned considerably in the

latter hours.

        One interpretation of these findings is in the spirit of the psychology literature,

which reminds us that there are differences between psychological processes in the short

run and in the long run, or “hot” and “cold” phases. For example, shortly after being

injured, people with spinal injuries report very low quality of life. The same people

report a much higher quality of life after a few years (Gilbert et al., 1998). One way to

think of this process is a change in the reference point. At the beginning of the process,

people use their “old” reference point (being healthy, previous wage, etc.). With time,

the reference point changes to account for the new environment (being injured, new

wage, etc.), and thus behavior changes accordingly. In our case, an interpretation of our

findings is that our agents’ effort levels may simply be adapting to new referentials in

their progression from a “hot” to “cold” phase of the time spent on their task, although in



                                                                                        11
our case the “hot” phase lasts only a few hours. This would suggest that the equilibrium

behavior is one where gift exchange has nominal long-term effects.

        We must exercise caution when making this interpretation, however. The data

show a pattern of convergence, but whether this result obtains because solicitors become

physically exhausted as the day progresses is unknown. If our solicitors were to return

the following morning and resumed the higher collection averages of the initial morning,

we would wonder whether the physical nature of the task may play a role in the temporal

effort profile.

        To examine the explanation for the higher solicitor performance in the Gift

treatment in the early hours in greater detail, we dig a level deeper into the data. This is

important in light of the fact that individual characteristics such as physical attractiveness

and sociability might influence contributions (see Landry et al., 2005). With this in mind,

we collected additional data from a subset of solicitors who returned to work on the

Sunday morning directly after their Saturday solicitation. Nine solicitors in the Gift

treatment and four solicitors in the noGift treatment were included in the subset.

        We provide Figure 3 in the Appendix to include these Sunday morning data. In

this case, Gift subjects and noGift subjects perform similarly, as their outcomes are not

statistically significant at conventional levels:     Gift solicitors raised roughly $6.50

whereas noGift solicitors raised nearly $8.50. We view these data as providing evidence

that exhaustion effects are not important in attenuating gift exchange in our Saturday

afternoon data.

        Most importantly for our purposes, as employers genuinely interested in creating

a library at least cost and adequately funding a public good in North Carolina, we




                                                                                           12
attempted to put a set of seminal findings from behavioral economics to work.

Unfortunately, our plan backfired, as paying wages of merely $10-$12 would have netted

us more books logged and more donations collected per dollar spent on labor. Of course,

similar to any empirical exercise, it is possible that a different experimental design and

calibration, or other types of manipulations, might provide evidence that suggests certain

behavioral findings have some relevancy for wage policies.7 We hope that our study,

which should be viewed as a first exploration of whether social preferences per se are

enough to justify wage policies predicated on their existence, will stimulate further work

using real pay and productivity measures from field settings of varying work durations.

IV. Discussion

        Besides their significance in testing important economic theories, our field results

are important in interpreting empirical findings gathered in laboratory experiments. To

our knowledge, there has been no direct test of whether experimental results gathered in

the span of an hour or two can be used to make inference on tasks that are inherently

much longer lived. There is, however, an emerging literature using laboratory and survey

evidence that relates to our work.

        Concerning laboratory evidence, a handful of recent studies explore conditions

that facilitate or weaken the strength of gift exchange. For example, Fehr and List (2004)

use a laboratory experiment to examine how Chief Executive Officers in Costa Rica

behave in sequential prisoner’s dilemma games and compare their behavior with that of

Costa Rican students. They find that for both subject pools use of sanctions can reduce


7
  For instance, it would have been useful to obtain insights on how the subjects’ interpreted the wage
increase in terms of a fairness variation. Yet, such a manipulation check would be unusual in this sort of
environment and potentially compromise the naturalness of the field experiment; thus we avoided such a
design.


                                                                                                       13
cooperative behavior (see also Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000). Houser et al. (2005) report

similar results using a large sample of George Mason University undergraduate student

subjects. Charness et al. (2004) report that laboratory gift exchange is considerably

influenced by whether or not a comprehensive payoff table is made available to subjects.

Likewise, data from Engelmann and Ortmann (2002) and Rigdon (2002) highlight that

student     behavior      depends      critically     on    parameterization        and     implementation

considerations.

          While these studies represent important tests in drawing out the boundary

conditions for laboratory gift exchange experiments, our results make a much different

distinction. We interpret our findings as suggesting that great care should be taken before

making inference from laboratory experiments, which might be deemed as “hot” decision

making, to field environments, which typically revolve around “cold” decision making.

Our results therefore lend insights to perhaps a different interpretation of these laboratory

studies as well.8

          Survey evidence is another important source of data to study behavior in labor

markets. In an extensive study of business executives, Bewley (1999) considers why

wages are downwardly rigid during a recession. He reports that managers are worried

that wage cuts might result in decreases in morale that would subsequently result in poor

worker performance when the economy recovered, if not immediately.                                 Put more


8
  Of course, with our data alone we cannot pinpoint whether the move to the field was necessary to observe
the effects of task duration on behavior. We trust that future work will parse these factors and explore
whether longer timeframes in the lab can cause similar behavioral changes as those observed herein. In this
spirit, our study showcases the complementarities of field and lab experimentation that have been discussed
in the literature (see, e.g., Harrison and List, 2004): given that we have discovered this behavioral pattern in
naturally-occurring environments, researchers might wish to return to the lab and detail the types of
variables that can cause, attenuate, or exacerbate these duration effects. With this new evidence in hand,
and perhaps equipped with deeper theoretical models, subsequent lab and field experiments can be
conducted to examine the predictions.


                                                                                                            14
succinctly, Bewley (p. 54) argues that “many factors influence morale, including

especially good personal contact with supervisors, a spirit of community within the

business, and the perception that company policy is fair. Businesspeople value good

morale because it fosters high productivity, low turnover, and ease in recruiting new

workers.”

       This line of reasoning highlights the importance of fairness considerations in

cases of negative reciprocity. With respect to positive reciprocity, as considered in our

study, Bewley’s evidence is less conclusive. He argues that morale is less important

when considering wage increases, but finds that one main consideration when

determining raises is the effect on employee turnover once the recession ends. In this

spirit, our results are consonant with those of Bewley: his work suggests that there

appears to be little connection between increasing pay and productivity, except to the

extent that higher wages make it possible to attract, and retain, higher quality workers.

V. Epilogue

       Empirical evidence shows that wages in labor markets do not always clear the

market: in many cases, firms pay a higher than market-clearing wage, resulting in

involuntary unemployment. One of the seminal theories that was put forward to explain

this observation is the fair wage-effort theory, which predicts that wages above market-

clearing levels can be an equilibrium in labor markets. Despite its profound implications,

there does not exist compelling evidence from naturally occurring markets supporting or

refuting this theory. This is not surprising in light of the difficulties associated with

executing a clean empirical test of such phenomena. When such data are available, it is




                                                                                            15
difficult to separate out the consequences of factors of primary interest from the host of

simultaneously occurring stimuli.

           Experimental markets and laboratory studies alleviate many of these problems

and provide an attractive basis for analyzing such issues. In this spirit, an influential line

of laboratory experimental research has evolved that shows the importance of reciprocity

in labor market settings, lending empirical support to the fair wage-effort theory.

           Whether such results have important implications for real labor markets remains

an open empirical issue, however. We begin to resolve this uncertainty by exploring

individual behavior in two distinct labor markets:                     data entry and door-to-door

fundraising.       We report two major insights.             First, consistent with findings in the

experimental literature, a higher wage was reciprocated by greater effort on the part of

the employees during the early hours of the task. Second, this higher effort level was not

persistent: after a few hours, effort levels in the gift treatment mirrored those in the non-

gift treatment.

           More generally, a methodological contribution of this study is to show that field

experiments can be used as a means to examine the representativeness of the

environment. For example, before we can begin to make sound arguments that behavior

observed in the lab is a good indicator of behavior in the field, we must explore whether

certain dimensions of the laboratory environment might cause differences in behavior

across these domains.           This study highlights one of several important dimensions.9

Future research should explore these insights more closely, and extend the tests to

examine other dimensions as well as negative reciprocity. We should stress that our

sample sizes are small and that we do find behavioral similarities across the lab and the
9
    Harrison and List (2004) provide a discussion of many other important dimensions.


                                                                                                16
field over short durations (as does, e.g., Gneezy, 2006). A useful exercise for future

research is to increase the sample sizes and to return to the lab to explore the robustness

of our insights by examining, for example, whether, and to what extent, our results are

robust to various lab manipulations.



                                       References

Adams, J.S. (1963) “Toward an understanding of inequality,” Journal of Abnormal and
   Social Psychology, LXVII, 422-436.
Agell, J. and Lundborg, P. (1995) “Theories of pay and unemployment: Survey evidence
   from Swedish manufacturing firms,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 97, 295-
   307.
Akerlof, George A. (1982), “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 97, 543-569.
Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen (1988), “Fairness and Unemployment,” American
   Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 83(2), 44-49.
Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen (1990), “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and
   Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 255-283.
Argyle, M (1981) The Social Psychology of Work. Penguin Books.
Berg, Joyce, John W. Dickhaut, and Kevin A. McCabe (1995), “Trust, Reciprocity, and
   Social History,” Games and Economic Behavior 10, 122-142.
Bewley, T.F. (1999) Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Harvard University
   Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Charness, Gary (2005), “Attribution and Reciprocity in an Experimental Labor Market,”
   forthcoming Journal of Labor Economics.
Charness Gary, Guillaume R. Frechette, and John H. Kagel (2004), How Robust is
   Laboratory Gift Exchange?” Experimental Economics, forthcoming.
Engelmann Dirk and Andreas Ortmann (2002). “The Robustness of Laboratory Gift
   Exchange: A Reconsideration,” working paper, Charles University.
Falk, A. and S. Gächter (2002) “Reputation and reciprocity-Consequences for labour
   relation,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 104, 1-26.
Fehr, Ernst and Armin Falk (1999), Wage Rigidity in a Competitive Incomplete Contract
   Market, Journal of Political Economy, 107, 106-134.
Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter (2000), Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
   Reciprocity, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3), 159-181.
Fehr, E., G. Kirchsteiger and A.Riedl (1993) “Does fairness prevent market clearing? An
   experimental investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 2, 437-460.
Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter, and George Kirchsteiger (1997). Reciprocity as a
   Contract Enforcement Device, Econometrica, 65 (4), 833-860.




                                                                                        17
Fehr, Ernst, George Kirchsteiger, and Arno Riedl (1993). “Does Fairness Prevent Market
   Clearing? An Experimental Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 437-
   460.
Fehr, Ernst and List, John A. (2004). "The Hidden Costs and Returns of Incentives—
   Trust and Trustworthiness among CEOS, " Journal of the European Economic
   Association, September, 2(5), pp. 743-71.
Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J., & Wheatley, T. (1998).
   Immune neglect: A source of durability bias in affective forecasting. Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 617-638.
Gneezy, U. and A. Rustichini (2000) “A fine is a price,” Journal of Legal Studies, XXIX,
   1, 1-18.
Gneezy, U. (2006) “Bonuses versus predetermined wages: A study of incentives and
   reciprocity.” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Guth, W., R. Schmittberger, and B. Schwarze (1982) “An experimental analysis of
   ultimatum bargaining,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3, 367-388.
Guth, W. (1995) “On ultimatum bargaining experiments: A personal review,” Journal of
   Economic Behavior and Organization, 329-44.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List (2004), “Field Experiments,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, XLII, pp. 1009-1055.
Houser Daniel, Erte Xiao, Kevin McCabe, and Vernon Smith, 2005. “When Punishment
   Fails: Research on Sanctions, Intentions and Non- Cooperation,” George Mason
   Working Paper.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler (1986). “Fairness as a
   Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market,” American Economic
   Review, 76, 728-741.
Katz, Lawrence. F. (1986). “Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation,” in NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, ed. S. Fischer, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and Nicholas Rupp. 2005.
   "Toward an Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field
   Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Loewenstein, George (forthcoming). “Hot-cold Empathy Gaps and Medical Decision-
   Making,” Health Psychology.
Mowday, Richard (1991) “Equity theory predictions of behavior in organizations,” in
   R.M. Steers and L.W. Porter, eds., Motivation and Work Behavior (New York:
   McGraw-Hill).
Rigdon, Mary (2002) Efficiency wages in an experimental labor market, Proceedings of
   the National Academy of Sciences 99(20): 13348-13351.
Roth, A. (1995) “Bargaining Experiments,” in J. Kagel and A. Roth eds., The Handbook
   of Experimental Economics, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sobel, J. (2005) “Interdependent preferences and reciprocity,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, 43(2): 392-436.
Steers, Richard M. and Lyman, W. Porter (1991). Motivation and work behavior 5th
   edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.




                                                                                     18
Table 1 Summary Data—Books Logged
                                               Participant   90           180       270       360
                                               #             minutes      minutes   minutes   minutes
                    noGift                     1             56           61        58        63
                                               2             52           52        51        45
                                               3             46           44        52        42
                                               4             45           41        43        38
                                               5             41           29        33        25
                                               6             38           42        44        46
                                               7             37           39        38        38
                                               8             34           35        32        37
                                               9             32           32        28        27
                                               10            26           30        33        35
                                               Average       40.7         40.5      41.2      39.6

                    Gift                       11            75           71        60        58
                                               12            64           65        63        61
                                               13            63           65        59        63
                                               14            58           40        35        31
                                               15            54           42        33        34
                                               16            47           35        28        25
                                               17            42           37        47        39
                                               18            37           29        30        30
                                               19            25           20        20        22
                                               Average       51.7         44.9      41.7      40.3



Figure 1: Average Books Logged Per Time Period
         Average # of books entered per




                                          55                                                          No Gift
                                                                                                      Gift
                                          50
                  90 minutes




                                          45

                                          40

                                          35

                                          30
                                                   90               180             270         360
                                                                          Minutes




                                                                                                                19
Table 2 Regression Results

                Library Task                                               Fundraiser
Variable                                    Variable            (Hourly)       (3 Hour Block)

Gift                  10.9                     Gift                 3.4                 13.8
                      (6.6)                                        (3.3)                (5.8)

Time2                 -0.2                    Time2                 3.0                  ---
                      (1.6)                                        (2.8)

Time3                  0.5                    Time3                 -3.6                 ---
                      (1.6)                                        (2.8)

Time4                  -1.1                   Time4                 -1.2                 ---
                      (1.9)                                        (2.8)

Gift*Time2             -6.6                   Time5                 2.6                  ---
                      (3.1)                                        (2.8)

Gift*Time3           -10.5                    Time6                 -1.3               0.70
                     (3.1)                                         (2.8)               (4.4)

Gift*Time4           -10.2                 Gift*Time2               2.0                  ---
                     (3.3)                                         (3.7)

Constant              40.7                 Gift*Time3               1.6                  ---
                      (3.6)                                        (3.7)

                                           Gift*Time4               -0.9                 ---
                                                                   (3.7)

                                           Gift*Time5               -5.8                 ---
                                                                   (3.7)
                                           Gift*Time6               -2.2               -12.6
                                                                   (3.7)               (5.9)
                                            Constant                6.6                19.2
                                                                   (2.4)               (4.4)

N                      76                                          138                   46
Notes:
1. Dependent variable is the number of books logged in the library task and money raised in the
fundraiser (in 3-hour blocks in Column 3). Gift = 1 if the agent is in the gift treatment, 0 otherwise.
Timet variables are dichotomous and equal 1 when work is carried out in that period, 0 otherwise.
Gift*Timet variables are dichotomous interactions between the gift treatment and the time period.
2. Standard errors are in parentheses beneath coefficient estimates.



                                                                                                20
Figure 2: Average Earnings – by 3 Hour Block


              12


              11


              10


               9


               8


               7
 $'s Earned




               6                                                   No Gift
                                                                   Gift

               5


               4


               3


               2


               1


               0
                   Pre-Lunch                          Post-Lunch
                                 3-Hour Time Blocks




                                                                             21
Table 3: Summary Statistics – Average Earnings by Treatment
                   Non-Gift              Gift                                 Difference
Hour 1             6.6                   10.00                                -4.4
                   (2.271)               (2.179)
Hour 2             9.6                   15.00                                -5.4
                   (3.572)               (3.907)
Hour 3             3.00                  8.00                                 -5.00**
                   (0.789)               (2.069)
Hour 4             5.40                  7.846                                -2.446
                   (1.507)               (1.506)
Hour 5             9.20                  6.769                                2.431
                   (2.08)                (0.856)
Hour 6             5.30                  6.461                                -1.161
                   (2.547)               (1.483)

Pre-Lunch per Hour        6.40                      11.00                     -4.6**
(Hours 1 - 3)             (1.803)                   (1.443)
Post-Lunch per Hour       6.633                     7.026                     -0.392
(Hours 4 – 6)             (1.389)                   (0.787)
Entire Day per Hour       6.516                     9.013                     -2.496*
(Hours 1 – 6)             (1.474)                   (0.814)

Number of Solicitors 10                             13

Note: Cell observations give the mean and standard errors for the average earnings for solicitors
in the non-gift exchange and gift-exchange treatments (Columns 2 and 3 respectively). Column 4
provides the difference in average earnings between the solicitors in the non-gift treatment from
the earnings of solicitors in the gift treatments. The fourth column also indicates whether the
difference is significant at the p < 0.05 level (**) or p < 0.10 level (*) using a non-parametric
Wilcoxon test. For example, solicitors in the non-gift treatment raised on average $6.60 during
the first hour of work whereas solicitors receiving the gift earned an average of $10.00 during this
same hour.


Table 4: Average Earnings – Within Treatment by 3 Hour Block
                    Pre-Lunch           Post-Lunch          Difference
Gift Exchange       11.00               7.026               3.974**
                    (1.443)             (0.786)
Non-Gift Exchange 6.40                  6.633               -0.233
                    (1.803)             (1.389)

Note: Cell entries provide summary statistics for average earnings per hour for the 3-hour blocks
before and after lunch across our two treatments (gift exchange and non-gift exchange). Standard
errors for the earnings are in parentheses. Column 4 provides the difference in average hourly
earnings within a treatment across these blocks. ** indicates that the reported difference is
statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level using a matched pairs t-test.




                                                                                                 22
Appendix. Solicitation Scripts for Door-to-Door Fundraiser

                ECU Center for Natural Hazards Mitigation Research - Script

(If a minor answers the door, please ask to speak to a parent. Never enter a house.)

Hi, my name is _____________________. I am an ECU student visiting Pitt County households
today on behalf of the newly formed ECU Natural Hazards Mitigation Research Center.

(Hand the blue brochure to the resident).

You may recall hurricanes Dennis and Floyd five years ago led to widespread devastation in
Eastern North Carolina, hence the State authorized the new Hazards Center.

This research center will provide support and coordination for research on natural hazard
risks, such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and flooding.

The primary goal of the center is to reduce the loss of life and property damages due to
severe weather events.

We are collecting contributions today on behalf of the new ECU Hazards Center. The Center
is a non-profit organization.


To raise funds for the new ECU Hazard Center we are conducting a charitable raffle:
    • The winner receives a $1,000 prepaid MasterCard.
    • For every dollar you contribute, you will receive 1 raffle ticket.
    • The odds of winning this charitable raffle are based on your contribution and total
        contributions received from other Pitt County households
    • The charitable raffle winner will be drawn at the Center on December 17th at noon.
        The winner will be notified and the results posted on the Center’s web site.
    • All proceeds raised by the raffle will fund the Hazards Center, which is a non-profit
        organization.

Would you like to make a contribution today?

(If you receive a contribution, please write a receipt that includes their name and contribution
amount).

If you have questions regarding the Center or want additional information, there is a phone
number and web site address provided on the back of this blue brochure.




                                                                                             23
Appendix Figure 2: Average Solicitor Earnings – By 3 Hour Block


                                                     12


                                                     10
     T o t a l A v e ra g e E a rn in g s ( in $ )




                                                      8

                                                                                                              Gift
                                                      6
                                                                                                              noGift
                                                      4

                                                      2


                                                      0
                                                          Saturday Pre-Lunch   Saturday Post-Lunch   Sunday
                                                                                  Tim e Period




                                                                                                                       24
