NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYEE SCREENING: THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Fali Huang
Peter Cappelli
Working Paper 12071
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12071
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Fali Huang and Peter Cappelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Employee Screening: Theory and Evidence
Fali Huang and Peter Cappelli
NBER Working Paper No. 12071
March 2006
JEL No. J2, J3
ABSTRACT
Arguably the fundamental problem faced by employers is how to elicit effort from employees. Most
models suggest that employers meet this challenge by monitoring employees carefully to prevent
shirking. But there is another option that relies on heterogeneity across employees, and that is to
screen job candidates to find workers with a stronger work ethic who require less monitoring. This
should be especially useful in work systems where monitoring by supervisors is more difficult, such
as teamwork systems. We analyze the relationship between screening and monitoring in the context
of a principal-agent model and test the theoretical results using a national sample of U.S.
establishments, which includes information on employee selection. We find that employers screen
applicants more intensively for work ethic where they make greater use of systems such as teamwork
where monitoring is more difficult. This screening is also associated with higher productivity and
higher wages and benefits, as predicted by the theory: The synergies between reduced monitoring
costs and high performance work systems enable the firm to pay higher wages to attract and retain
such workers. Screening for other attributes, such as cognitive ability, does not produce these results.
Fali Huang
School of Economics and Social Sciences
Singapore Management University
90 Stamford Road
Singapore 178903
flhuang@smu.edu.sg
Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu

Employee Screening: Theory and Evidence
Fali Huang∗
Peter Cappelli∗∗

ABSTRACT
Arguably the fundamental problem faced by employers is how to elicit effort from
employees. Most models suggest that employers meet this challenge by monitoring
employees carefully to prevent shirking. But there is another option that relies on
heterogeneity across employees, and that is to screen job candidates to find workers with a
stronger work ethic who require less monitoring. This should be especially useful in work
systems where monitoring by supervisors is more difficult, such as teamwork systems. We
analyze the relationship between screening and monitoring in the context of a
principal-agent model and test the theoretical results using a national sample of U.S.
establishments, which includes information on employee selection. We find that
employers screen applicants more intensively for work ethic where they make greater use
of systems such as teamwork where monitoring is more difficult. This screening is also
associated with higher productivity and higher wages and benefits, as predicted by the
theory: The synergies between reduced monitoring costs and high performance work
systems enable the firm to pay higher wages to attract and retain such workers. Screening
for other attributes, such as cognitive ability, does not produce these results.

1. Introduction
Principal-agent models have been central to much of the work in economics, and they have
been especially useful in understanding employment relationships. A considerable amount
of research has been directed at understanding and addressing the inherent moral hazard
problem associated with employment in principal-agent frameworks -- the incentives for
individual employees to pursue their own interests at the expense of those of their
employer. Virtually all that research focuses on economic governance schemes that
provide incentives to induce employees to act in the interests of their employers (See, e.g.,
Gibbons 1998 and Prendergast 1999). These models begin with the definition of

∗

School of Economics and Social Sciences, Singapore Management University, 90 Stamford Road,
Singapore 178903. 65-68280859, FAX 65-68280833, flhuang@smu.edu.sg.
∗∗

The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370, 215.898.2722,
FAX 215.898.5908, Cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu and NBER.

1

appropriate performance, include monitoring to measure performance, and conclude with
economic rewards -- in some cases punishments -- to motivate employees. These
agency-based models have been most extensively used in the context of executive
employment where the agents have considerable control over their performance and where
the effects of their performance can be readily observed, albeit at the firm-level. It may be
fair to say that agency models have been used somewhat less for understanding production
or hourly employment where job performance may be less within the control of the
individual (e.g., more paced by machines or supervisors) and where individual
performance may be more difficult to measure. Models that are directed especially at
hourly workers include efficiency wage approaches and others that rely on punishment
(e.g., the loss of premiums). They also require monitoring, however, and many have a
strong agency feel to them.
There is a second way to address the moral hazard problems associated with
principal-agent frameworks in employment, however. That approach relies on
heterogeneity across employees in their abilities, specifically their interest in working hard,
that is sometimes included under the heading of “unobserved human capital.” Under this
view, some job applicants are simply better workers than others. Specifically, they may be
willing to work harder for the same rates of pay and/or are less inclined to shirk their
responsibilities, requiring less monitoring and supervision as a result. The complication for
the firm is first that while the applicants know their own capabilities, it is difficult for the
employer, short of hiring them, to tell. Hence the unobserved problem. Second, applicants
who are not hard workers may have an incentive to pretend that they are, especially if
regimes of low monitoring make it easier for them to shirk and if the jobs pay premiums of
the kind that might be associated with having better workers.
The models used to provide solutions to moral hazard problems from this
perspective often rely on self-selection: Potential applicants typically sort themselves out
across opportunities such that those who lack the unobserved human capital associated
with hard work do not apply for jobs that will require it while those that have it do. The
complication with extending these models more broadly is that they require reasonably
unique and sometimes complicated reward structures to create the separating equilibrium
that attracts hard workers and scares away lazy ones, such as piece rate systems or

2

back-loaded compensation where workers have to demonstrate their performance in
advance of the reward.
An alternative approach to self-selection is screening. Rather than requiring
applicants to sort themselves out, the employer attempts to use proxies or other clues to
identify which applicants have unobserved human capital in the form of a strong work
ethic. The screening approach is easily applied to a wide range of unobserved human
capital beyond work ethic and does not require that the applicant even be aware of their
relevant attributes (e.g., first-time applicants have no relevant experience with which to
ascertain all of their unobserved human capital).
In practice, virtually all employers use some level of applicant screening. It is a
fundamental part of the human resources function in most firms as well as the basis of a
substantial consulting industry. Further, screening and other forms of addressing the moral
hazard problem are not mutually exclusive, and most employers make use of both
screening and post-employment economic incentives (see for example Ichinowski et al.
1997, Morduch 1999, and Nagin et al 2002). Among popular screening practices are
interviews, reference letters, obtaining the agent's past histories through credit bureaus or
hiring detectives, written tests to uncover work attitudes and personality type, etc. (see
Rynes and Cable 2003 for a review). Employers differ substantially in the extent to which
they make use of applicant screening, however (see Wilk and Cappelli 2003), an issue that
merits explaining.
Work Ethic and Employment Practices. Although different kinds of jobs may
require different attributes, arguably the most fundamental attribute and the one that cuts
across virtually all jobs can be described as work ethic, what we might think of as the
ability to work hard independent of monitoring by employers or of reward. The seminal
discussion of work ethic related it to social norms – the “Protestant Ethic” (see Weber 2002)
- but in the context of understanding variations across individuals, it is more appropriate to
think about factors that are intrinsic to an individual. The field of industrial/organizational
psychology is devoted in large measure to understanding work-related differences across
individuals, and there is extensive research there on the attributes of employees who appear
to have strong work ethics. While there are several attributes that relate to this behavior, the
closest match is with the personality construct known as "conscientiousness." This

3

attribute has been found to be a reliable and consistent dimension of personality that can be
identified and measured across individuals. It also relates strongly to job performance
across types of jobs. Further, it appears to have a dispositional element that is stable across
jobs and contexts. That is, conscientiousness is a characteristic of individuals, and those
with it perform at a high level across situations (see, e.g., Judge and Ilies 2002 for a
survey).
The research on conscientiousness suggests that there is something very tangible to
the notion of work ethic, that it is an attribute of individuals and affects performance across
a range of settings. As a result, employers can expect to benefit from hiring conscientious
workers and should be willing to make investments to do so. While it may be possible in
some situations to create circumstances that cause applicants to sort themselves according
to their work ethic, these circumstances are far from universal. In general, employers can
be expected to have a keen interest in screening employees for work ethic. The effects of
employees' intrinsic motivation on firm performance are discussed by Kreps (1997) and
Rob and Zemsky (2002), among others.
Screening applicants for conscientiousness or work ethic involves costs, and firms
therefore have to decide how much to spend on screening. There may well be a trade-off
between screening and efforts to monitor employees: Greater use of screening can lead to a
more conscientious work force that can perform at a given level with less monitoring,
oversight, and performance-related incentives. Another option, in contrast, is to spend very
little on screening but rely on intensive monitoring to maintain performance.
We might also expect relationships between the monitoring/screening decision and
the choice of work systems. For example, employers with teamwork-based systems and
those that rely on employee empowerment where monitoring by supervisors is more
difficult should make greater investments in screening.
Because information about conscientiousness is not readily or accurately available
in the market (employers have to screen to find it), conscientiousness does not necessarily
raise one’s market wage. Once workers with these characteristics are hired, however, they
contribute value by reducing the need for monitoring costs, saving money for employers.
In order to retain these conscientious workers, employers may be motivated to pay them
higher compensation through rent sharing arrangements. We should therefore expect a

4

positive relationship between employer screening for work ethic and employee
compensation. Alternatively, a regime of lower screening requires more intensive
monitoring, which in turn makes it possible to hire less conscientious workers. They can be
paid less than the more conscientious workers because their productivity is lower and there
is no particular interest in retaining them.
Recent empirical research on high performance work systems has focused attention
on arrangements where work organization makes extensive use of teamwork and employee
involvement practices. These systems have drawn attention because they appear to be more
productive (MacDuffie 1996; Ichniowski et al 1999). The central element of these
arrangements is that employees are more involved in decision making (Cappelli and
Neumark 2001), which reduces the need for supervision. But because monitoring is lower,
these arrangements require employees who are more committed to the organization, hence
the alternative phrase for these arrangements, high commitment work systems (see
Applebaum and Batt 1994 for a survey).
Although some observers believe that work systems which increase employee
empowerment make all workers more productive, an important part of these systems in
practice appears to be screening employees carefully in order to identify those with
unobserved human capital and dispositions that are consistent with the strong work ethic
required in high commitment systems. Most of the research on employee screening in these
contexts is anecdotal and based on case studies of individual companies such as NUMMI,
the joint venture between Toyota and General Motors (Keller 1989), Saturn (Kochan and
Rubenstein 2000), and Southwest Airlines (Hoffer-Gittel 2002). While more systematic
studies of the relationship between applicant screening and other work practices seem
largely neglected (see Wilk and Cappelli 2003 for an exception), descriptive findings like
those above suggest that regimes with lower levels of employee monitoring should go
together with practices of high investments in applicant screening.
Arguments about complementarities between screening and the use of high
performance practices associated with regimes of low employee monitoring would
contribute to existing research on the synergies among work and human resource practices
(Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991; Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi 1997). Hamilton,
Nickerson, and Owan (2001), for example, estimate the effects of teamwork on worker

5

productivity in a garment plant and find that team-based systems make greater use of
collaborative skills, which are less valuable in individual production. The above arguments
also suggest a rational for the empirical findings where high performance practices are
often associated with higher wages and employee productivity even when they are not
associated with higher profits for firms (Lynch and Black 2003; Cappelli and Neumark
2001, Appelbaum, Bailey, and Berg 2000, Cappelli and Carter, 2000). More generally,
these arguments complement the recent work in labor economics showing that
non-cognitive skills are important elements for individual earnings (Heckman 1999,
Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne 2001, Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman 2004).
In the section that follows, we derive more formal hypotheses for the arguments
above using a simple principal-agent model, which we then test empirically.

2. A Simple Principal-Agent Model
In this model, there is a continuum of agents indexed by i ∈ [0,1] . Principals are identical
with unit mass. Each principal hires one agent from a pool of potential candidates to
complete a project. The outcome is stochastic. If the agent makes the appropriate effort e ,
he produces h > 0 with probability p ∈ [0,1] and 0 with probability 1 − p . If the agent
shirks, the probability of getting h is q ∈ [0,1) , where q < p . The cost of effort is e2 ,
where hp − e 2 > hq holds so that making effort e is the socially optimal choice. 1 The
reservation utility of agents/workers and the alternative return for principals/employers are
normalized to zero.
We implicitly assume that all agents have the same cognitive ability h ≥ 0 , but they
are heterogeneous in their levels of conscientiousness, or their work ethic, which we see as
including a disposition to work hard and cooperate with others in pursuing the employer’s
goals. More specifically, an agent i has a cooperative tendency α i ≥ 0 which may take
two different values. He is called a cooperative type if α i = α > 0 , or a selfish type if

α i = 0 . The proportion of cooperative type agents in the population is ρ ∈ (0,1) . In our
model, the cooperative tendency measures the level of disutility or guilt he feels if he does

1

This parametric model is used for simplicity. A general formulation would yield similar results.

6

not choose the socially optimal action.2 The joint distribution of cognitive ability h and
cooperative tendency α i among agents indicates the quality of workforce in this economy.
Agents are risk averse and thus prefer a constant wage to outcome-contingent
incomes. To reduce shirking associated with a fixed wage, the principal can use screening
and monitoring. The timeline of the game is illustrated as follows: First, principals decide
on a package of wage, benefits, screening and monitoring intensities. After observing the
distribution of packages among firms, workers decide which firms to apply to for jobs.
Some principals screen job candidates and hire only those perceived to be cooperative,
while others randomly hire from the pool of job candidates. After the labor market clears
where all workers and principals are matched, production starts on a project. Workers
decide to work hard or shirk on the project, and they can consume the benefits immediately,
regardless of whether shirking is eventually detected. Meanwhile, principals monitor
workers to catch shirking. Finally, when the project is finished, principals pay wages to
workers not found shirking and withhold them from those caught shirking – the equivalent
of firing them. The game is then over.
Suppose for an agent with a cooperative tendency α i , a principal chooses wage wi
and a monitoring level mi ∈ [0,1] , where mi is the probability that shirking is observed.
The total monitoring cost is mi2 km , where km measures the unit cost of using monitoring
technologies such as video cameras and supervisors in the workplace. If the agent is caught
shirking, he will get zero wage. A cooperative type agent incurs disutility or guilt α
whenever he shirks, regardless of being caught or not by the principal.
Let s ∈ [0,1] denote the screening intensity, such that the probability of detecting a
selfish type agent is s , and the probability of misjudgment is 1 − s . A cooperative type
agent is always revealed after being screened as long as the screening intensity is above a
minimum level s > 0 . Under this screening scheme, a principal either screens agents with

intensity s ≥ s to recruit some cooperative types, or she does not screen at all. The reason
is straightforward. By choosing s′ < s , a principal cannot recognize any cooperative agent
2

It could also be interpreted as an agent's shirking cost. The results would not change if we use the pleasure
derived from cooperation (instead of using the guilt from shirking) to model the cooperative tendency. As
noted earlier, it essentially captures a person's conscientiousness, which Shavell (2002) argues is formed in

7

and hence she will always end up with a selfish agent; but this can be achieved at a lower
cost by not screening at all.
If a principal screens with intensity s , a typical candidate screened is eventually
hired with probability ρ + (1 − ρ )(1 − s ) ≡ 1r , where r denotes the average number of
candidates screened for a job opening. Conditional on being hired, the probability of the
worker being a cooperative type is ρ r . Note that r is a positive monotonic transformation
of s and measures the selectivity of the screening process. It follows from s ∈ [0,1] that
r ∈ [1, ρ1 ] , where r = 1 means no screening and r =

screening cost is assumed to be

1
2

1

ρ

perfect screening. The total

(r 2 − 1)k s , where ks indicates the unit cost of using

screening schemes such as interviews.
An implication of this screening process is that a proportion (1 − ρ ) s ≡ 1 − 1r of
selfish agents are not hired by screening firms. In the equilibrium, they would be absorbed
by principals who choose not to screen at all. Because principals are otherwise identical,
they must earn the same profit in equilibrium, regardless of screening or not. In other
words, the proportion of screening principals is 1r , which is endogenously determined by
the economy characterized by ( ρ , α , h, e2 , ks , km , p, q ) .

2.1 The Optimization Problems
The game is solved by backward induction. We first study a worker's decision as to
whether to shirk or work hard, taking as given the incentive package ( wi , mi ) provided by
1

1

firms. His utility is wi2 − e2 when exerting effort e , and wi2 (1 − mi ) − α i if not. So he would
not shirk if
(1)

−1

mi ≥ wi 2 (e2 − α i )

holds.3 Because monitoring is costly, firms would always choose the minimum possible
monitoring level to deter shirking. This leads to the relationship between wage and
monitoring

one's childhood and becomes a stable character through one's life.
2
3
The condition holds trivially for agents with α i ≥ e who would never shirk due to high intrinsic
2
incentives. Since this is not our focus, we assume α < e .

8

−1

mi = ( wi ) 2 (e 2 − α i ).

(2)

Note that fixing wi , mi∗ strictly decreases in α i so that a principal can save on monitoring
costs by hiring a cooperative type agent as opposed to a selfish one. This gives her the
incentives to use screening schemes to distinguish and hire cooperative agents. Because
screening is also costly, the optimal combination of screening and monitoring is affected
by their relative costs.
The optimization problem for principals falls into two cases: some principals
screen while others do not. We assume for now both types of agents prefer to work for
principals who screen and monitor less (recognizing that screening may prevent selfish
applicants from being hired), which would be realized in equilibrium (see Lemma 1).

2.1.1 Principals with No Screening
The optimization problem for a non-screening principal is very simple since her agents will
certainly be of the selfish type. The optimal incentive package ( wn , mn ) > 0 must satisfy
condition (2) for α i = 0 , which becomes wn = mn−2e 4 . Her objective function is

max
Qn
m
n

s.t. w n

hp

wn

m 2n k m

m n2 e4 .

Solving this out, we get the optimal solution
−1

mn∗ = ek m 4 ,
1

wn∗ = e 2 k m2 .
Higher than the reservation wage zero, wn is indeed an efficiency wage to reward effort
and help prevent shirking.
The profit is
1

Qn∗ ≡ hp − wn∗ − mn∗2 k m = hp − 2e 2 k m2 ,
1

where M n∗ ≡ wn∗ + mn∗2 km = 2e 2 km2 is the economic governance cost of a non-screening
principal. The alternative choice of a non-screening principal is zero wage and no
monitoring, under which the agent always shirks and produces hq on average. This
implies that positive monitoring is chosen if and only if Qn∗ ≥ hq , that is,

9

1

km2 ≤ h( p − q) / 2e 2 ,

(A1)

where the monitoring cost is low enough. This condition is assumed true.

2.1.2 Principals with Perfect Screening
Before solving the general optimization problem for screening principals, we first study the
special case of perfect screening to illustrate the intuition. Principals choose the maximum
screening intensity s = 1 so that only cooperative type agents are hired. As a result, the
optimal incentive package ( ws , ms ) > 0 must satisfy condition (2) for α i = α , which
becomes ws = ms−2 (e 2 − α )2 ; and r = 1/ ρ holds by definition. The objective function of a
perfect screening principal is
1 1
max Qs ≡ hp − ws − ms2 km − ( 2 − 1)ks
ms
2 ρ
s.t. ws = ms−2 (e 2 − α ) 2 .
Solving this out, we get the optimal solution
1

−1

1

ms∗ = (e 2 − α ) 2 km 4 , and ws∗ = (e 2 − α )km2 .
Note both monitoring and wage levels are lower: ms∗ < mn∗ and ws∗ < wn∗ . So the economic
1

governance cost M s∗ ≡ 2(e 2 − α )km2 is also smaller than that of a non-screening principal
1

M n∗ ≡ 2e 2 km2 . This is achieved, however, by incurring a screening cost

ks
2ρ2

. In other words,

screening principals substitute screening for monitoring to handle moral hazard problems.
The resulted profit is
1− ρ 2
Q = hp − 2(e − α )km −
ks .
2ρ 2
∗
s

2

1
2

Because principals are otherwise identical, those who screen could always get Qn∗ by not
screening at all. Only when Qs∗ − Qn∗ ≥ 0 holds would principals choose to screen, which
happens under assumption
(A2)

ks ≤

4αρ 2 12
km .
1− ρ 2

2.1.3 Principals with Some Screening
A typical screening principal has to choose an optimal package ( w, m, r ) to maximize her

10

profit. Actually the only reasonable set of ( w, m) must satisfy condition (1) for α i = α to
guarantee that the cooperative type agent would not shirk, that is, w = m −2 (e2 − α )2 holds.4
Given this package, a cooperative agent will exert effort and produce hp , which happens
with probability ρ r ; a selfish agent will always shirk and produce hq , which happens
with probability 1 − ρ r . So a screening principal's objective function is
1
max Q ≡ ρ r (hp − w) + (1 − ρ r )(hq − (1 − m) w) − m2 km − (r 2 − 1)ks
m, r
2
2
2
−2
s.t. w = m (e − α ) .
∗
∗
Let (r , m ) denote the optimal solution for screening principals. Its existence and

characteristics are summarized in the following proposition.
Proposition 1. (i) The optimal solution (r ∗ , m∗ ) is uniquely determined by

(5)

ρ[h( p − q ) − 12 (e 2 − α ) 2 − km m∗3 ]
r =
,
ks − 12 ρ 2 (e 2 − α ) 2

(6)

(2 −

∗

ρ2
ks

(e2 − α )2 )m∗−1 − 2km (e 2 − α ) −2 m∗3 +

ρ2
ks

h( p − q) − 1 = 0.

The optimal wage is w∗ = m∗− 2 (e 2 − α )2 . Perfect screening is a special case of this problem
1

−1

where m∗ (r ∗ = ρ1 ) = ms∗ = (e 2 − α ) 2 km 4 .
(ii) Based on condition (5),

∂r ∗
∂m∗

<0 ,

∂r ∗
∂h

>0 ,

∂r ∗
∂k m

<0 ,

∂r ∗
∂k s

<0 .

(iii) m∗ < mn∗ holds where screening principals monitor less; Q∗ > Qn∗ holds under (A2).
Proof. In the appendix.

The proposition says that the optimal screening selectivity r ∗ is negatively related
to the optimal monitoring intensity m∗ , and both are uniquely determined by the economy.
Conditional on the monitoring intensity, principals screen job candidates more selectively
when the relevant cognitive ability h is higher and when screening and monitoring are less
costly. The total surplus Q∗ is higher under screening.
4

∗

It is too expensive to adopt ( wn

+ mn∗ ) to prevent the selfish type agents from shirking as the non-screening

principals do, given that she has already spent
the wage level

1
2

(r 2 − 1)k s on screening. On the other hand, conditional on
−1

w, monitoring more than the minimum level w 2 (e 2 − α ) is more costly and does not

11

2.2 The Equilibrium

If a principal gets higher profit Q∗ if she screens agents than if she does not, then all
principals would prefer to screen agents. But this cannot be so in equilibrium. In fact, given
that principals are identical with equal mass as agents, competition among principals will
eventually drive profits to Qn∗ . The extra profit Q∗ − Qn∗ will go to the agent. 5 So a
cooperative employee/agent working for a principal with some screening would have
income
I c = w∗ + Q ∗ − Qn∗ ,

where w∗ = m∗− 2 (e 2 − α )2 . This must be at least as big as wn∗ , the income he would have
gotten working for a non-screening principal. So the parameters of the economy must
satisfy I c ≥ wn∗ to support an equilibrium where some principals screen job candidates. But
this condition also implies that selfish agents would prefer to be hired by screening
principals as well.
Lemma 1. If a cooperative agent prefers to work for a screening principal, then a selfish

agent would also prefer to do so.
Proof. In the appendix.

The lemma suggests that self-selection would not work here because the package
that is attractive to cooperative agents would be just as attractive to selfish ones. So
effective screening is necessary to help identify and separate the two types of employees.
Though all agents prefer to work for principals who screen, some of those who are selfish
are detected as a result of screening and hence are not hired by screening principals. These
agents are of proportion (1 − ρ ) s∗ = 1 − r1∗ , and they have no choice but to work for
non-screening principals. Other selfish agents are lucky enough to be missed by the
screening process and secure jobs with the principals who screen, along with the
cooperative agents. The following proposition summarizes the equilibrium result.
Proposition 2. In equilibrium, a proportion

1
r∗

of principals screen job candidates with

intensity r ∗ , monitor hired workers with intensity m∗ , offer wage w∗ and benefits

reduce shirking for either type of agents.
5
The screening principals may share some of the extra profit with agents when there are market frictions.

12

Q∗ − Qn∗ to their agents; the other principals do not screen job candidates, monitor hired

workers with intensity mn∗ , offer wage wn∗ with no benefits to their agents. Both types of
agents prefer to work for screening principals.

2.3 The Empirical Implications
This simple model has many interesting empirical implications, which are tested
empirically below. Its main prediction is of an inverse relationship between screening
selectivity r ∗ and monitoring intensity m∗ , which is given by condition (5). The
corresponding econometric model is denoted by
r ∗ = β 0 + β m m∗ + β h h + β k km + β s ks + β rξ r +ε r .

(5’)

where ε r is a random element. The signs of coefficients β m < 0 , β h > 0 , β k < 0 , and β s < 0
are determined by the corresponding partial derivatives in Proposition 1. Note that
estimating (5’) using OLS may be biased since m∗ is an endogenous variable
simultaneously determined with r ∗ . This prompts us to use 2SLS where m∗ is estimated
first based on the linear approximation of (6). The term ξ r denotes the set of control
variables that may absorb the effects of difficult-to-measure variables in the model
including the optimal effort level e , the stochastic features of production function captured
by p and q , and the portion of cooperative agents in the population ρ and the level of
cooperative tendency α .
The second prediction is that the employee incomes are higher when the
monitoring intensity is lower. In the model, a worker’s income is composed of two distinct
parts, one is the pure incentive wage w∗ and a bonus Q∗ − Qn∗ . In the data, it is plausible
that the reported employee wage W contains both w∗ and a base salary proportional to
Q∗ − Qn∗ such that W = w∗ + ω (Q∗ − Qn∗ ) with ω ∈ [0,1) . And the reported level of

employee benefits B is the residual part of Q∗ − Qn∗ where B = (1 − ω )(Q∗ − Qn∗ ) . Plugging
Q∗ − Qn∗ = 1−Bω and w∗ = m∗− 2 (e 2 − α )2 into the equation of W , we get

(7)

W = m∗− 2 (e 2 − α ) 2 + φω B.

The corresponding econometric model is denoted by

13

W = φ0 + φm m∗ + φω B + φwξ w + ε w ,

(7’)

The signs of coefficients φm < 0 and φω ≥ 0 are derived from (7). Again ξ w denotes
control variables including effort e and cooperative tendency α , and ε w is a random term.
The third prediction is the positive relationship between screening intensity and
worker productivity. 6 Among firms with some screening, the average productivity of
workers is
(8)

P = ρ r ∗hp + (1 − ρ r ∗ )hq = ρ h( p − q)r ∗ + hq,

which strictly increases in r ∗ . This equation is estimated by
(8’)

P = γ 0 + γ r r ∗ + γ h h + γ pξ p + ε p ,

where γ r > 0 and γ h > 0 should hold according to (8). The control variables in term ξ p
are p and q , some stochastic features of production, and ε p is the residual term.

3. Data Description
Equations (5’), (7’), and (8’) are estimated using data from the 1997 National Employer
Survey, an establishment level survey of employment practices conducted by the U.S.
Bureau of Census. It is a nationally representative sample of private establishments with
more than 20 employees. In terms of criteria such as representativeness, response rate, and
breadth of questions about work practices and organizational characteristics, it appears to
be the broadest and best data available on employer practices and, therefore, for testing our
results (see Cappelli 2001 for an extensive description of the NES). The summary statistics
of variables are listed in Table A.
The NES97 asks a series of questions about how the employer selects employees -what type of information about applicants do they collect and how important is each in
their hiring decision. The stem of the question asks the plant or office manager: “After you
have established your applicant pool and obtained information about potential [production
or front-line job title provided earlier by the respondent] employee, what characteristics or
attributes are most critical in making your hiring decision?” The importance scale ranges
6

Though it is possible to have three types of screening intensity ( s

= 0, s = 1, s ∈ (0,1)) , most firms are

likely to have s ∈ (0,1) . Indeed, perfect monitoring and perfect screening may be feasible only in very small

14

from no value at 1 to important at 3 and to essential at 5. Respondents use this scale to
assess twelve general characteristics and attributes about applicants. The details of these
characteristics and their means and standard deviations are presented in Table A.
Screening for Work Ethic. Our first task is to measure the extent to which

employers are attempting to identify the unobserved human capital that would be
necessary for them to be productive in a regime of low supervision and monitoring, what
we might think of as their intrinsic work ethic or cooperative tendencies. Four items seem
specifically oriented toward that goal: screening for applicant attitude, high-quality
performance at previous jobs, communication skills, and participation in community
and/or extra-curricular activities. Applicant attitude may be the most general attribute and
is presumably capturing a range of work-related attributes other than ability, such as
motivation and willingness to work hard (see Cappelli 1995). It is also the most important
criterion reported by employers, with mean 4.4 and standard error 0.78. In the absence of
close supervision and monitoring, employees need to work together and communicate with
each other to coordinate efforts and solve problems. Communication skills are therefore
particularly important to effective work performance in a low monitoring environment.
Participation in community and/or extra-curricular activities reveals a willingness to work
on projects that may not offer monetary or even extrinsic rewards, consistent with
conscientiousness and a strong work ethic. Community and extra-curricular activities
typically involve group-based tasks, requiring cooperative skills, and community activities
in particular may also capture an interest in altruistic goals. Performance in previous jobs
may reflect a range of success factors in addition to intrinsic motivation and cooperative
attributes. As such, we also examine the relationships without this variable. (All of the
main results are unchanged when we use the attitude variable alone or when using the
average of screening selectivity on attitude and communication skills in a robustness
check.) The average importance of these four components is used to measure the
employer's interest in screening for the attributes associated with operating in a regime of
low monitoring and supervision. It has mean 3.57 and standard error 0.65.
Screening Selectivity in Cognitive Ability. We use the average importance of six

other criteria -- including industry based credentials, education level (years completed),
firms, which are ruled out in our data. So the empirical implications are restricted to firms with s ∈ (0,1) .

15

school reputation, academic performance, technical course work, and general course work
-- to measure a different kind of screening, the effort to identify cognitive skills. Its mean is
2.81 with standard deviation 0.68. The cognitive requirement of jobs is examined
separately by years of completed schooling for production and front-line employees, the
focus of the study, across establishments.
Monitoring Intensity. We use several variables to measure the extent of employee

monitoring across establishments, especially the low monitoring environment associated
with teamwork, employee involvement, and high performance work systems.

The

regularly scheduled meetings where employees discuss workplace problems is the most
extensively used of the low monitoring practices with 85% of all establishments in the
sample report making at least some use of them. In comparison, only 41% firms adopt
self-managed teams. Regularly scheduled meetings to discuss work related issues may
also be the most basic type of employee involvement (Cappelli and Carter 2000) while self
managed teams, where the team takes over much of the traditional responsibilities of
supervisors, may be the most intensive application of a low monitoring environment.
While teamwork of this kind reduces monitoring by management, in closely-knit teams,
group norms become important, and the group members may end up policing each other's
performance (Kandel and Lazear 1992).
An alternative measure of monitoring intensity is the employee-supervisor ratio
(Leonard 1987), the number of employees supervised by an individual manager. The
assumption is that a lower ratio allows for closer supervision and monitoring by managers.
On closer inspection, however, this measure has several drawbacks as a proxy for
monitoring. Monitoring may take place through ways other than one's immediate
supervisor, the relationship measured by supervisory ratios. And supervisors perform
tasks in addition to monitoring. For example, about 20 percent of supervisors' time is
devoted to providing informal training (see 1994 NES survey). They may also perform
some of the tasks that their supervisees perform, especially if the supervisor operates in the
mode of a lead worker. If the supervisory ratio captures in part efforts to train and instruct
the workforce and perform some worker tasks, it may be driven in part by factors other
than the interest in monitoring employees. More troubling, it may covary with factors
considered below in unexpected ways. For example, supervisory ratios may be higher for

16

less skilled workers, independent of work ethic, because supervisory training is
substituting for employee skill. Nonetheless, the employee-supervisory ratio is used as an
alternative measure of monitoring intensity in the robustness check.
Other measures of work practices such as the adoption of re-engineering, job
rotation, and organizational benchmarking, are included as controls to capture potentially
omitted variables that may covary with selection intensity. They capture the extent to
which an employer has more sophisticated practices of all kinds, takes management more
seriously, or differs in approaches to management that may affect the behavior of
employees. These variables have little effect on our main results. We also include detailed
industry and size dummies to control for potential variations in the costs or ability to screen
and monitor employees (e.g., scale economies) and conduct the analyses separately for
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors. The fact that the questions in our survey are
focused on front-line production employees greatly narrows the range of possible jobs
being examined and helps control for exogenous sources of variation. The percentage of
minorities and the percentage of women among employees are used as a proxy for diversity
of the workforce, which may also affect screening costs. Other potential factors affecting
monitoring costs are the use of computers on the job (possibly making tasks easier to
monitor) and union strength (possibly restricting the ability of the employer to monitor or
to take actions based on monitoring). Some of these variables, such as computer usage,
may be determined simultaneously with screening and monitoring intensity and hence may
cause endogeneity problems. To check for this, we also run regressions excluding possible
endogenous inputs to test for robustness.
The remaining elements in the model are parameters of the production functions
that are very difficult to observe, including the desired effort level e , the stochastic features
of production function captured by p and q , and workforce characteristics such as the
portion of cooperative agents in the population ρ and the level of cooperative tendency α .
As long as they vary systematically across industry, occupation, and size, however, the
detailed industry, sector, and size dummies and the restriction to production jobs should
capture the important aspects of production functions. Though various specifications are
used to check the robustness of our results, it is always important to keep the effects of
omitted variables in mind and be cautious when interpreting the results.
17

4. Estimation Results
4.1 Screening and Monitoring
Results of the analyses examining the relationship between screening for work ethic and
monitoring intensity are presented in Table 1. They are based on equation (5’), which is
presented below using variable names:
ScreenSelectivity = β 0 + β m MonitorIntensity + β k MonitorCost + β sScreenCost
+ β h WorkerCognitiveSkills + β r Controls + ε r ,
We first use employee involvement in regular work meetings as the measure of monitoring
intensity where more extensive use of work-related meetings proxy less intensive
monitoring of performance.7 The coefficients of regular work meetings are almost always
significant at 1% level across various specifications. Both the scale and significance levels
increase when computer usage, minority and union ratios are excluded (results not reported
here). These results suggest that there is a synergy between screening employees for work
ethic consistent with cooperative behavior and the use of low-monitoring work practices
that make use of such behavior. In other words, these practices are complementary. More
generally, the results are consistent with the notion that there may be a trade-off between
management approaches that rely on conscientious workers and empowered working
arrangements versus those that rely on high levels of monitoring.
For a robustness check, the bottom rows of table 1 show the results of using two
alternative measures of monitoring intensity instead of regular work meetings. The results
are very similar. The coefficients of teamwork are positive and significant at 1% level
across various specifications. In the case of the employee-supervisor ratio, its coefficients
are positive and significant in 2SLS specifications for the whole sample and the
manufacturing sector, though they are insignificant for non-manufacturing sectors or under
OLS.9 The pattern of insignificant relationships in non-manufacturing is common across
7

In the first stage regression of regular work meetings, the controls listed in the table are used as well as
women ratio, job rotation and hierarchy levels. The last two variables are not correlated with the screening
selectivity at p value 0.1.
9
Note the relevant coefficients of monitoring intensity in 2SLS specification are (at least) about five times as
large as those under OLS.

18

studies of high performance work systems (Cappelli and Neumark 2001; Lynch and Black
2004) and may reflect greater heterogeneity across non-manufacturing jobs and less clarity
in the use of concepts like teamwork there.
In the last column, we include the effects associated with selectivity on cognitive
ability. Because screening for cognitive skills is likely to be endogenous, it is regressed
first on the same set of controls as listed in the table as well as on schooling and working
hours of the four categories of employees. Employee involvement in regular work
meetings is still significant at the 1% level, although its scale is slightly reduced.10 The
large coefficient and high significance level of selectivity on cognitive skills suggest that
firms that are selective in screening for good work ethic are also selective in screening
cognitive skills. To rule out the possibility that a common underlying factor is driving the
results in both cases, we switch the positions of cognitive skill selectivity and screening
selectivity for work ethic in a 2SLS regression. Involvement in regular work meetings is no
longer significant, as predicted. This suggests screening for other attributes, such as
cognitive ability, does not produce the above results.
We also examine the ratio of minorities as a positive indicator of screening costs
(Alesina and La Ferrara 2002). It indeed appears to have negative effects on screening
selectivity, as predicted by the model. The effects of computer use both by supervisors and
production employees increases screening for work ethic. Computer use may suggest
greater operating autonomy by employees, more difficulty in monitoring (n.b., using a
computer does not mean that work output is computerized), and a greater need for more
cooperative employees. The ratio of employees represented by unions reduces this
screening in all specifications. Unionization may be a proxy for workplaces that have less
employee empowerment and therefore less need for this screening. Higher computer usage
appears to reduce the unit monitoring cost while higher union coverage increases it. These
results are consistent with our model where screening selectivity decreases with
monitoring costs once the effect of monitoring intensity is controlled. The level of
schooling as an indicator of cognitive ability, in addition to the selectivity on cognitive
skills, has positive and mostly significant effects on screening selectivity for work ethic.

10

In the OLS regression and 2SLS for the manufacture sector, the results including selectivity on cognitive
skills as an additional regressor are similar to those presented.

19

This is also consistent with our model. Months to reach job proficiency, a measure of
firm-specific skills which may affect screening selectivity through channels of
firm-specific training and longer tenures, is never significant.
For a robustness check, we also investigate whether screening predicts various
measures of low monitoring. Since monitoring and screening intensities are determined
simultaneously in the model, it should not matter which one is treated as the dependent
variable. The empirical results (available upon request) are exactly as predicted. In 2SLS
regressions using either regular meeting, teamwork, or the employee-supervisor ratio as
the dependent variable and the same set of controls, the coefficients of screening are
positive and significant in all three cases. These results are robust to various controls in the
first stage regression.

4.2 Wage, Monitoring, and Non-cognitive Skills
The results examining the relationship between wages and monitoring intensity are
presented in Table 2. They are based on equation (7’) displayed below in variable names.
Logwage = φ0 + φm MonitorIntensity + φω EmployeeBenefits + φw Controls + ε w .
The monitoring intensity is again measured by employee involvement in regular work
meetings. The R-square and the coefficients for the control variables (schooling, employee
benefits, the ratios of minority and women, union representation, and working hours per
week) are strikingly similar and stable across various specifications using OLS. The signs
are also intuitively correct. Once these important variables are controlled, screening
selectivity for cognitive skills has no significant effects on the wage level in all
specifications. Its effects are negative once selectivity on work ethic is included and in the
2SLS specification as well. Note that the coefficient of regular work meetings in 2SLS
specification is about ten times as high as those under OLS.11
In sharp contrast, screening for work ethic is always positive and significant across
specifications, even when work practice variables are included, as in the last column. The
implication is quite clear: screening for unobserved human capital associated with work
ethics is associated with higher wages. This result supports and extends the notion that
11

In the first stage regression of regular work meetings, only hierarchy level is included as control because it
is the only work practice variable that is uncorrelated with wages at p value 0.01. Both selectivity on

20

wages are higher where firms use high performance work practices because those practices
demand more from employees. What they demand, though, are competencies associated
with a strong work ethic and cooperative tendencies rather than cognitive ability. The
results are similar in all specifications when education levels and working hours by
occupations are included to control for the potential complementarities or substitution of
educational human capital between different categories of employees in the same firm.
In our model, an employee's wage is uniquely determined when the monitoring
level is chosen. Wages and monitoring are always negatively related across firms for the
same employee because both represent explicit incentives aimed to reduce shirking. So
wages should be positively related to employee involvement in regular work meetings.
Across both employee and firm, the relationship becomes more complicated because high
monitoring firms with no screening may still pay higher wages to employees to encourage
efficiency wage effects. Because of this relationship, we control for screening selectivity in
the last two columns of the wage equation. The fact that screening selectivity and
monitoring intensity are uniquely determined may explain why the coefficients and
R-squared change little across various OLS specifications.

4.3 Productivity, Screening, and Monitoring
The NES data also allow us to examine how screening and monitoring may be related to
some aspects of productivity. A question in the data about average worker productivity
asks the plant or establishment manager, “Compared to your major competitors, do you
consider your employees' productivity to be higher, lower, or the same?” About half of the
respondents consider their employees' productivity higher and the other half lower or the
same, which suggests that this subjective productivity measure may be a reliable measure.
We construct a dichotomous variable named “relative productivity,” which equals 1 if it is
higher than competitors and 0 if not. The corresponding econometric equation (8’) is
displayed below in variable names.
Pr(higher productivity) = γ 0 + γ r ScreenSelectivity + γ h CognitiveAbility + γ p Controls + ε p .

This relationship between screening and productivity is a reduced form derived in

cognitive skills and average benefits are regressed first on schooling and working hours of other categories of
employees in addition to the controls listed in the table.

21

the model. The intuition is that with better screening, workers hired are more conscientious
and thus shirk less, so the average productivity should be higher. Since the relative
employee productivity is not a choice variable but a result of many elements, we can treat
screening selectivity as an exogenous variable not correlated with the random term when
relevant elements are controlled.
In the probit regressions of various specifications shown in Table 3, the screening
selectivity of cooperative behavior is indeed positively and significantly related to a firm's
relative productivity. Average education levels of employees have positive, though often
not significant, effects on a firm's relative productivity. The variable for cognitive skills
screening is often significant at the 10% level. Firms with similar job requirements may
have employees with similar education levels, but perhaps screening for both cooperative
behavior and cognitive skills represents a less well-known approach to finding an effective
workforce by measuring difficult-to-observe human capital. The effects of working hours
per week on productivity are positive, though not significant when more work practices are
controlled. The minority ratio and the union variable tend to reduce a firm's relative
productivity, while the ratio of women has a positive, though not significant, influence.
When work practices are included as regressors, the coefficients of screening selectivity on
work ethic are reduced slightly, suggesting complementarities between them.
Comparing the results of the last two columns, we can see the positive and
significant effects of regular work meetings on relative productivity controlling for other
work practices. Teamwork (not shown in the table) also has a positive and significant
influence in these two regressions, while other control variables (including benchmarking,
reengineering, job rotation, employee-supervisor ratio, and hierarchy level) remain
insignificant. The main results are robust when we include more regressors such as a firm's
capital stock, new equipment, production costs, temporary workers, education levels of
other occupations, computer usage, etc. The results with these additional controls are
available upon request. It is worth noting, however, that this productivity measure does not
necessarily estimate costs and therefore efficiency. It is possible that the costs associated
with screening – including higher wages -- may offset any productivity gains.
The amount of sale per employee is an alternative productivity measure that has
been used before with NES97 data. For a robustness check, we also examined the effect of

22

screening selectivity on this measure. The main results can be summarized as follows
(details are available upon request). In the OLS regressions, there are positive and
significant effects of selectivity for work ethic on sales for the manufacturing sector, which
are robust to various controls. The effects are positive but not significant for the
non-manufacturing sector. This pattern is similar to the results found by other researchers
(Cappelli and Neumark 2001; Lynch and Black 2004). The effects of selectivity in
cognitive skills are never significant and sometime negative.

5. Conclusions
We analyze the relationship between screening selectivity and monitoring intensity in the
context of a principal-agent model and test the theoretical results using a national sample of
U.S. establishments. We find that more selective screening for work ethic, but not for
cognitive ability, is indeed related to less monitoring and greater use of high involvement
work practices that require cooperative employee behavior. It also leads to higher worker
productivity and higher wages and benefits. The underlying intuition is that a screening
firm hires conscientious workers who are willing to work hard with less monitoring. These
employers can then make use of practices that involve workers more and monitor them less.
Reduced monitoring costs improve firm performance and allow the firm to share rents in
the form of higher wages in order to attract and retain these good workers. Our theoretical
model also provides a useful framework to interpret many empirical results in previous
studies about work practices and their effects on productivity and worker compensation. In
future work, it would be interesting to examine in more detail the choices that employers
make with respect to the screening of job applicants.

23

References

Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of Public
Economics, August 2002, 85:207-34.
Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, and Peter Berg (2000). Manufacturing Advantage:
Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Appelbaum, Eileen, and Rosemary Batt (1994). The New American Workplace:
Transforming Work Systems in the U.S. Ithaca, New York: Cornell ILR Press.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne. “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral
Approach,” Journal of Economics Literature, Vol. XXXIX (Dec. 2001), pp
1137-1176.
Cappelli, Peter (1995). “Is the ‘Skills Gap’ Really About Attitudes?” California
Management Review Reprint Series, CMR, vol. 37, No. 4, summer 1995.
Cappelli, Peter (2001). “The National Employer Survey: Employer Data on Employment
Practices,” Industrial Relations, Vol. 40 No. 2 (October), pp.635-647.
Cappelli, Peter. “Why Do Employers Retrain At-Risk Workers? The Role of Social
Capital,” Industrial Relations, Vol. 43, No. 2, pp. 421-447, April 2004.
Cappelli, Peter and William Carter. “Computers, Work Organization, and Wage
Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper, 2000.
Cappelli, Peter and David Neumark. “Do ‘High-Performance’ Work Practices Improve
Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 2001.
Dixit, Avinash. “On Modes of Economic Governance,” Econometrica, 71(2), March 2003,
449-481.
Gibbons, Robert. “Incentives in Organizations,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(4),
1998, 115 -- 132.
Glaeser, E.L., David Laibson, J.A. Scheinkman, and C.L. Soutter (2000). “Measuring
Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Aug. 2000.
Hamilton, Barton H., Jack A. Nickerson, and Hideo Owan (2003). “Team Incentives and
Worker Heterogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity
and Participation,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, no. 3.
Heckman, James J. (1999). “Policies to Foster Human Capital,” Research in Economics,
Elsevier, vol. 54(1), pages 3-56.
Hoffer Gittel, Jody. The Southwest Airlines Way. Using the power of relationships to
achieve high performance, McGraw Hill 2002.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom (1991). “Multi-task principal-agent analyses: Linear
contracts, asset ownership and job design,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organisation, 7, pp. 24-52.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi (1997). “The Effects of
Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing
Lines,” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3. pp. 291-313.
Judge, Timothy A. and Remus Ilies. “Relationship of personality to performance
motivation: A meta-analytic review,” Journal of Applied Psychology (87) 4 August
2002, 797-807.
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear. “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of
Political Economy 100 (August 1992): 801-17.
Keller, Maryann (1989). Rude Awakening: The Rise, Fall, and Struggle for Recovery of
General Motors. New York: Morrow.
24

Kochan, Thomas A. and Saul Rubinstein. “Toward a Stakeholder Theory of the Firm: The
Saturn Partnership,” Organization Science, July, 2000.
Kreps, David (1997). “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives,” American Economic
Review, May 1997.
La Porter, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny. “Trust in Large
Organizations,” American Economic Review, May 1997.
Leonard, Jonathan S. “Carrots and Sticks: Pay, Supervision and Turnover,” Journal of
Labor Economics, Vol. 5, No. 4, Part 2, October 1987, pp. 5136-5 152.
Lynch, Lisa M. and Sandra E. Black. 1998. “Beyond the Incidence of Employer-Provided
Training,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(1), October: 64-81.
Lynch, Lisa M. and Sandra E. Black. “What's Driving the New Economy?: The Benefits of
Workplace Innovation,” Economic Journal, Vol. 114, pp. F97-F116, February 2004.
MacDuffie, John Paul (1996). “International Trends in Work Organization in the Auto
Industry: National-level vs. Company-level Perspectives.” The Comparative Political
Economy of Industrial Relations, edited by Kirsten Wever and Lowell Turner. Madison,
WI: Industrial Relations Research Association, pp. 71-113.
Morduch, Jonathan. “The Microfinance Promise,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
37, No. 4. Dec. 1999, pp. 1569-1614.
Montgomery, James D. “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an
Economic Analysis,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 5. Dec. 1991, pp.
1408-1418.
Nagin, D.S., J.B. Rebitzer, S. Sanders, and L.J. Taylor (2002). “Monitoring, Motivation,
and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field
Experiment,” American Economic Review, vol. 92 no. 4: 850-873.
Prendergast, Canice. “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Mar. 1999), pp. 7-63.
Persico, Nicolas, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. “The Effect of Adolescent
Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of Political
Economy, 112, 2004:1019-1053.
Rob, R., and P. Zemsky (2002). “Social Capital, Corporate Culture and the Incentive
Intensity,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 33 No. 2, summer 2002.
Rynes, S. L. & Cable, D.M. (2003). “Recruiting research in the 21st Century: Moving to a
higher level,” in Borman, W., Ilgen, D., & Klimoski, R. (eds.) The Complete
Handbook of Psychology, Volume 12: Industrial and Organizational Psychology.
Shavell, Steven (2002). “Law versus Morality as Regulators of Conduct,” American Law
and Economics Review, Vol. 4, No. 2, 2002, 227-257.
Weber, Max (2002). The Protestant Ethic and the “Spirit” of Capitalism. New York:
Penguin Books.
Wilk, Steffanie and Cappelli, Peter. “Understanding the determinants of employer use of
selection methods,” Personnel Psychology; March 2003.

25

Table A: Summary Statistics
Mean
(Std. Dev.)

Variable Names

Obs.

Screening Selectivity

“After you have established your applicant pool and obtained information about potential [production
or front-line job title] employees, what characteristics or attributes are most critical in making your
hiring decision?” Please rank each method (5 = Essential, 4 = Very Important, 3 = Important, 2 = Is of
Some Value, 1 = No Value).
3.57 (.65)
2741
Screening Selectivity on Cooperative Tendency
Attitude
4.40 (0.78) 2746
Previous job performance
3.99 (0.96) 2749
Communication skills
3.80 (1.03) 2749
Extra-curricular activities
2.11 (0.97) 2747
Selectivity on Cognitive Skills
2.81 (0.68)
2722
Full-time work experience
3.83 (0.93) 2751
After-school or summer work
2.55 (1.03) 2742
Industry based credentials
3.33 (1.23) 2749
Education level (years completed)
3.05 (1.00) 2746
School reputation
2.04 (0.98) 2746
Academic performance
2.52 (1.06) 2748
Technical course work
2.79 (1.14) 2742
General course work
2.38 (0.95) 2745
Work Organization and Design

What percent of non-managerial and non-supervisory employees are involved
in regularly scheduled meetings to discuss work-related issues?
Teamwork: What percent or how many of non-managerial and
non-supervisory employees are currently involved in self-managed teams?
Has your establishment participated in any benchmarking programs that
compare your practices and performances with other organizations?
Has your establishment undergone re-engineering within the past three years?
What percent or how many of non-managerial and non-supervisory employees
are currently involved in job rotation?
Hierarchy levels: How many levels are there between a front-line supervisor
and the top official in your establishment?
Employee-supervisor ratio: On average, how many employees report to each
front-line supervisor?

.57 (.43)

2898

.16 (.30)

2928

.33 (.47)

2861

.38 (.49)

2934

.20 (.31)

2935

2.6 (2.7)

2903

19 (21)

2771

.39 (.26)
.27 (.26)

2883
2829

Workforce Characteristics

What percent or how many of your permanent employees are women?
What percent or how many of your permanent employees are minorities?

26

Variable Names (cont.)
What is the average number of years of completed schooling for the following
categories of employees?
the production employees
Office/clerical/sales/customer service
Technical/technical support
supervisors
Management/professionals
How many hours per week, including overtime, do the following categories of
employees typically work?
the production employees
Office/clerical/sales/customer service
Technical/technical support
supervisors
Management/professionals

Mean
(std. dev.)

Obs.

12 (1.3)
12.64 (1.05)
14.30 (1.66)
13.31 (1.48)
15.35 (1.48)

2663
2700
2129
2415
2801

43.05 (6.02)
40.69 (3.41)
43.72 (5.33)
45.99 (5.55)
47.39 (6.36)

2740
2780
2192
2481
2878

27322
(12230)

2495

.70 (.19)

2855

.20 (.36)

2943

.50 (.50)

2804

.82 (.28)

2732

.45 (.38)

2699

Compensation and Benefits

What is the average pay for the full-time production employees?
Average employee benefits: Does your establishment contribute toward any
of the following employee benefits? (a) Pension plan, (b) Severance plan, (c)
Medical or health insurance (d) Dental care benefits, (e) Child care benefits, (f)
Family leave, (g) Life insurance, (h) Sick pay, (i) Paid vacation/holidays, (j)
Stock options or profit sharing
Union: What percent or how many of your non-managerial, non-supervisory
employees are covered by a collective-bargaining agreement?
Other Variables
Relative productivity: Compared to your major competitors, do you consider
your employees’ productivity to be higher, lower, or the same?
Computer usage (supervisors):
What percent of your managers and supervisors use computers in their jobs?
Computer usage (production employees):
What percent of your production [sales/customer service/other front line] and
non-supervisory employees use computers in their jobs?
Training expenditure: What did your establishment spend last year on formal
training programs? (in thousand)
How many weeks does it take to fill a typical [production job title] opening?
How many candidates do you interview for each [production job title]
opening?
Manufacture sector
5 size dummies and 21 industry dummies

19.07
(17.32)
3.19 (3.13)

2693

6.71 (8.29)

2557

.59 (.49)

3081
3081

27

1682

Table 1: The Relationship between Screening Selectivity for Cooperative Tendency and
Monitoring Intensity (as Measured by Regular Work Meetings)
2SLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

.0098*
(.0036)

.0014**
(.0003)

.0061**
(.002)

.0005
(.028)

.066**
(.017)

.06**
(.012)

.014
(.017)

-.0023*
(.0005)

-.0016*
(.0007)

-.0013
(.001)

-.0014**
(.0005)

-.0008
(.0006)

Union ratio

-.0002
(.0004)

-.0002
(.0005)

-.0001
(.0009)

-.0007
(.0004)

-.001**
(.0004)

Working hours per
week

.002
(.003)

.002
(.004)

.005
(.005)

.002
(.003)

.002
(.003)

Computer usage

.0009
(.0006)

.0011
(.0008)

.0004
(.001)

.0018**
(.0005)

.0007
(.0007)

Computer usage

(production employees)

.0006
(.0005)

.0001
(.0008)

.0015*
(.0008)

.0012**
(.0004)

.00005
(.0005)

Months to reach job
proficiency

.0018
(.0012)

.0035
(.0018)

-.0004
(.0017)

.0018
(.0012)

.0004
(.001)

(All
Sectors)

Manufacture

.0082**
(.0022)

.0075**
(.0026)

Schooling

.048**
(.014)

Minority ratio

Regular work
meetings

(supervisors)

Non-man.

selectivity on
cognitive skills

.31
(.19)^

Industry and size
dummies

Included

Included

Included

Included

Included

Observation

2087

1337

750

2138

1363

R-square

-

-

-

0.17

-

Teamwork#

.012**
(.003)
.023**
(.007)

.009**
(.003)
.012*
(.005)

.017^
(.009)
-.015
(.018)

.0016**
(.0004)
.0007
(.0007)

.010**
(.003)
.012**
(.004)

Employee-supervisor
ratio#

** p<.01, * p<.05, ^ p<.1.
#
The variable is used in place of regular meetings to measure monitoring intensity, while other
inputs are the same as above.

28

Table 2: The Relationship between Log Wage and Monitoring Intensity
(as Measured by Regular Work Meetings)
Regular work
meetings

OLS
.0003*
(.00015)

2SLS
.0037^
(.002)

Screening
selectivity on
cooperative
tendency

OLS

OLS
.0003*
(.00015)

OLS
.0003^
(.0002)

.041**
(.012)

.040**
(.012)

.041**
(.013)

selectivity on
cognitive skills

.014
(.0096)

-.0038
(.16)

-.0052
(.012)

-.007
(.012)

-.0025
(.013)

Schooling

.095**
(.0058)

.080**
(.011)

.093**
(.0058)

.094**
(.0058)

.093**
(.0065)

Employee benefits

.35**
(.038)

.93^
(.49)

.35**
(.037)

.34**
(.038)

.35**
(.044)

Minority ratio

-.0012**
(.0002)

-.0007^
(.0004)

-.0012**
(.0002)

-.0012**
(.0002)

-.001**
(.0003)

Ratio of women

-.0045**
(.0003)

-.0048**
(.0006)

-.0045**
(.0003)

-.0045**
(.0003)

-.0045**
(.0004)

Union ratio

.0018**
(.0002)

.0016**
(.0004)

.0018**
(.0002)

.0018**
(.0002)

.0018**
(.0002)

Working hours per
week

.018**
(.001)

.015**
(.002)

.017**
(.001)

.017**
(.001)

.017**
(.001)

Other work
practices^^
Industry and size
dummies
Observation
R-square

Included
Included

Included

Included

Included

Included

2182
0.56

1272
-

2200
0.56

2179
0.56

1728
0.57

** p<.01, * p<.05, ^ p<.1.
^^ --The other work practices include teamwork, benchmarking, re-engineering, job rotation,
hierarchy level, and employee-supervisor ratio.

29

Table 3: The Relationship between Relative Productivity and Screening
Probit (1)
.16**
(.054)

Probit (2)
.19**
(.07)

Probit (3)
.13*
(.058)

Probit (4)
.11^
(.058)

Schooling

.053*
(.025)

.07*
(.03)

.038
(.027)

.034
(.027)

Selectivity on cognitive
skills

.089^
(.051)

.038
(.068)

.098^
(.054)

.098^
(.054)

Minority ratio

-.002^
(.0011)

-.0016
(.0014)

-.0023*
(.001)

-.0012**
(.0002)

Ratio of women

.0023
(.0015)

.003
(.002)

.0013
(.0016)

.0015
(.0016)

Union ratio

-.002**
(.0002)

-.003**
(.001)

-.003**
(.0008)

-.003**
(.0008)

Working hours per week

.0086^
(.005)

.011^
(.007)

.0075
(.0053)

.007
(.005)

Screening selectivity on
cooperative tendency

Regular work meetings
Other working practices^^
Other control variables^^^
Industry and size dummies
Observation
Pseudo R square

.0026**
(.0007)

Included
2362
0.043

Included
Included
1392
0.046

Included

Included

Included
2126
0.049

Included
2115
0.053

** p<.01, * p<.05, ^ p<.1.
^^ -- The other work practices include teamwork, benchmarking, re-engineering, job rotation,
hierarchy level, and employee-supervisor ratio.
^^^ -- Other control variables include training expenditure, weeks to fill a job opening, and the
number of candidates interviewed. Only training is significant.

30

Appendix

1. The proof for proposition 1.
A screening principal's objective function is

1
max Q ≡ ρr (hp − w) + (1 − ρr )(hq − (1 − m) w) − m 2 k m − (r 2 − 1)k s
m, r
2
1
= ρrhp + (1 − ρr )(hq + m −1 (e 2 − α ) 2 ) − m − 2 (e 2 − α ) 2 − m 2 k m − (r 2 − 1)k s ,
2
−2
2
2
where the second equality holds by plugging in w = m (e − α ) . The interior first order
conditions are
1
(9)
r ∗ ∈ (1, ] : ρ h( p − q) − ρ m−1 (e 2 − α ) 2 − rks = 0,

ρ

m : −(1 − ρ r )(e 2 − α ) 2 + 2m−1 (e2 − α ) 2 − 2m3 km = 0.
∗

(10)

Solving the term m −1 (e 2 − α ) 2 from condition m* and plugging it into r*, we get
condition (5):
ρ[h( p − q) − 12 (e 2 − α ) 2 − m 3k m ]
∗
r =
.
k s − 12 ρ 2 (e 2 − α ) 2
A sufficient condition for r ∗ ≥ 0 is
(A3)

1 2 2
ρ (e − α ) 2 .
2
Solving out r from condition (9) and plugging it to (10), we get
ks >

Qm (m, r (m)) = (e 2 − α )2 [

ρ2
ks

h( p − q) − 1] + [2 −

ρ2
ks

(e 2 − α ) 2 ]m −1 (e 2 − α ) 2 − 2m3km = 0.

This is exactly condition (6), which uniquely determines m∗ since its second derivative

ρ2

(e 2 − α ) 2 ]m −2 (e 2 − α ) 2 − 6m 2 k m < 0
ks
is strictly negative under assumption (A3).
This in turn implies that r ∗ is uniquely determined by condition (5), which
obviously decreases in m∗ when all exogenous parameters ( ρ , α , h, e2 , ks , km , p, q ) are
Qmm = −[2 −

controlled. Conditional on m∗ and other parameters, r ∗ increases in the cognitive ability
h and in the absolute effect of employee shirking h( p − q ) .
−1

It is easy to check that m∗ < mn∗ . Plug mn∗ = ekm 4 into (10) we get
1

−(1 − ρ r )(e 2 − α ) 2 + 2e −1km4 [(e 2 − α ) 2 − e 4 ] < 0 . Since the second derivative of (10) w.r.t.
m is strictly negative, m∗ < mn∗ must be true. That is, screening principals indeed adopt
lower monitoring intensity than non-screening principals. The optimal wage is
w∗ = m∗−2 (e 2 − α )2 by condition (2).
Perfect screening is a special case of this solution where principals choose the
maximum screening intensity such that r = 1/ ρ and only cooperative type agents are hired.
Plugging r ∗ =

1

ρ

1

−1

into the first order conditions we get ms∗ = (e 2 − α ) 2 km 4 from (10), and

31

ks

ρ

2

3

1

≤ h( p − q) − (e 2 − α ) 2 km4 from (5). When
ks

(11)

ρ
∗

is true, we get r ≤

1

ρ

2

3

1

> h( p − q) − (e 2 − α ) 2 k m4

from (5). That is, m∗ < ms∗ if (11) holds, while m∗ = ms∗ otherwise.

This means Q(ms∗ , r (ms∗ )) ≤ Q(m∗ , r (m∗ )) ≡ Q∗ must be true when (11) is true. Since
Qn∗ < Q(ms∗ , r (ms∗ )) = Qs* under assumption (A2), it follows that Q∗ > Qn∗ must also hold.
ks

ρ

To guarantee r ∗ > 1 , (9) must be positive when r = 1 is plugged in. That is,
< h( p − q) − m1∗ (e2 − α ) 2 should hold, where m1∗ ≡ m∗ (r = 1) . But we know m1∗ < mn∗ ,

which means
(12)

ks

ρ

< h( p − q) − mn∗ (e2 − α ) 2 or

ks

ρ

< h( p − q) − (1 −

α
2

3

1

1

) 2 (e 2 − α ) 2 k m4

e
is a sufficient condition for r > 1 . Since ρ < 1 , both (11) and (12) can be true.
∗

2. The proof for lemma 1.
∗1
Note that a selfish agent gets utility w 2 (1 − m∗ ) + Q∗ − Qn∗ if he is hired by a screening
∗1

principal, and wn 2 − e 2 if hired by a non-screening principal. He prefers to work for a
∗1

∗1

∗1

screening principal when Q∗ − Qn∗ ≥ wn 2 − w 2 + ( w 2 m∗ − e 2 ) holds. And this is indeed
∗1

true: condition (2) implies w 2 m∗ = (e 2 − α ) < e 2 ; I c ≥ wn∗ implies Q∗ − Qn∗ ≥ wn∗ − w∗
∗1

∗1

∗1

∗ 12

and hence Q∗ − Qn∗ ≥ wn 2 − w 2 , given that wn∗ − w∗ ≥ wn 2 − w

holds for any w∗ ≥ 0.25 .

Though we do not have an analytical form for I c ≥ wn∗ , we can find a sufficient
condition for it. The same cooperative type agent, if he works for a principal with perfect
screening, gets income I s = ws∗ + Qs∗ − Qn∗ . Since m∗ < ms∗ under (11) and
w∗ = m∗−2 (e 2 − α )2 , it is true that w∗ > ws∗ = ms∗−2 (e2 − α )2 . We also know Q∗ > Qs∗ from
the above proposition. Since I s ≥ wn∗ holds when ks ≤

2αρ 2 12
km is true, it follows
1− ρ 2

immediately that I c > I s ≥ wn∗ holds as well.

32

