                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DISCRETIONARY POLICY AND MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA

                                            Robert G. King

                                         Working Paper 12076
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12076


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Boston University, National Bureau of Economic Research, and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. This
paper is prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly. It builds on work with
Alexander Wolman, who also helped me develop the example. I have also benefitted from conversations
with Alberto Alesina, Russ Cooper, Huberto Ennis, Ed Green, Borys Grochulski, Per Krusell, Leo Martinez,
and Ned Prescott. The views expressed herein are the author’s and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Robert G. King. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Discretionary Policy and Multiple Equilibria
Robert G. King
NBER Working Paper No. 12076
March 2006
JEL No. E5, E6

                                           ABSTRACT

Discretionary policymaking can foster strategic complementarities between private sector decisions,
thus leading to multiple equilibria. This article studies a simple example, originating with Kydland
and Prescott, of a government which must decide whether to build a dam to prevent adverse effects
on floods on the incomes of residents of a floodplain. In this example, it is socially inefficient to
build the dam and for people to live on the floodplain, with this outcome being the unique
equilibrium under policy commitment. Under discretion, there are two equilibria. First, if agents
believe that few of their fellow citizens will move to the floodplain, then they know that the
government will choose not to build the dam and there is therefore no incentive for any individual
to locate on the floodplain. Second, if agents believe that there will be many floodplain residents,
then they know that the government will choose to build the dam and even small benefits of living
on the floodplain will lead them to choose that location. In this second equilibrium, all individuals
are worse off.

Robert G. King
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
rking@bu.edu
1       Introduction
Since the seminal work of Kydland and Prescott (1977), it has been understood
that policymaking under discretion can lead to a substantially worse outcome than
policymaking under commitment. Many economists believe that discretionary poli-
cymaking is important for understanding central issues in monetary policy1 and fiscal
policy.2 Although there are now many diﬀerent models of discretionary policymaking,
there are two common and essential aspects in all models: (i) private agents make
current choices that aﬀect the evolution of state variables on the basis of beliefs about
future policy, and (ii) future policymakers take these state variables as historically
determined when choosing their optimal actions. Further, within the models of this
large literature, there is typically a cost arising from the fact that the discretionary
policymaker cannot manage expectations, so that the resulting equilibrium is ineﬃ-
cient relative to that arising with a committed policymaker.
    Another potential impact of discretion, however, is that more than one equilibrium
may result from the central interaction between private sector choice of state variables,
private sector beliefs about future policy, and future policy reaction to state variables.
Some of these discretionary equilibria are better than others in terms of the welfare of
the members of the society. An economy may get stuck in a relatively bad equilibrium,
so that there can be even greater costs of policy discretion.
    Recent work on discretionary monetary policy by King and Wolman (2004) shows
how dynamic multiple equilibria can arise in a simple “plain vanilla” New Keynesian
macroeconomic model of monopolistic competition and sticky prices of the variety
that is now standard in macroeconomic research and policy analysis. In that con-
text, a discretionary monetary authority adopts a policy rule that fosters strategic
complementarity between the actions of pricesetters. In turn, that strategic com-
plementarity makes for dynamic multiple equilibria, as in a large literature on the
boundary of game theory and macroeconomics concerning coordination games in ag-
gregate economies.3 In the terminology of Cooper and John (1988), the standard
    1
     For example, a discretionary monetary policymaker may produce a positive rate of inflation in
an economy while a committed policymaker would produce a zero rate of inflation (see Kydland and
Prescott 1977 and Barro and Gordon 1983).
   2
     For example, a discretionary fiscal policymaker may eliminate private incentives for socially
beneficial accumulation by taxing all capital income every period (see Fischer 1980), while a com-
mitted fiscal policy may provide ample incentives for accumulation by not taxing capital at all (see
Chamley 1986).
   3
     Chari, Christiano, and Eichenbaum (2000) describe “expectation trap equilibria” within a mon-
etary policy setting. In these situations, a monetary authority optimally responds to the beliefs of
the private sector in ways that are self-confirming so that there is a thematic resemblance to the
discussion of the main text. However, the expectation trap equilibria studied by these authors are
members of a set of “sustainable plan equilibria” in which great latitude is given to expectation
formation and, in essence, a summary of beliefs operates as a state variable. For this class of
equilibria to exist, it is necessary that there be no known endpoint to the economy. By contrast,
the equilibria described in King and Wolman (2004) are multiple Markov-perfect equilibria in the


                                                 2
New Keynesian model can give rise to a “coordination failure.”
    The objective of this article is to construct a very simple and transparent real
model in which dynamic multiple equilibria are a consequence of discretionary poli-
cymaking for the same economic reasons as in the monetary policy literature. The
model is inspired by a brief discussion in Kydland and Prescott (1977) about the
interaction of individual location decisions and policy response to disasters such as
floods:

      "The issues [of time inconsistency arise] in many well-known problems of pub-
      lic policy. For example, suppose the socially desirable outcome is not to have
      houses built in a particular floodplain but, given that they are there, to take
      certain costly flood-control measures. If the government’s policy were not to
      build the dams and levees needed for flood protection and agents knew this was
      the case, even if houses were built there, rational agents would not live in the
      flood plains. But the rational agent knows that, if he and others build houses
      there, the government will take the necessary flood-control measures. Conse-
      quently, in the absence of a law prohibiting the construction of houses in the
      floodplain, houses are built there, and the army corps of engineers subsequently
      builds the dams and levees."



      Kydland and Prescott, 1977, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsis-
      tency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85: 477


    The essence of the situation just described is that there is a strategic interaction
between the private sector and the government. Accordingly, following much recent
literature on policymaking under discretion and commitment, we will make use of
game-theoretic constructs to discuss the interaction between private location decisions
and the government dam-building decision.
    In their analysis, Kydland and Prescott were concerned with understanding the
nature of a single discretionary equilibrium and why it would be worse than a single
commitment equilibrium. By contrast, this article shows how policy discretion fosters
strategic complementarity among private sector decisionmakers in ways that lead to
multiple equilibria. In the example studied below, however, the mechanisms are
exactly those highlighted in the quotation from their work. An individual knows that
the discretionary government will choose not to build a dam if there are only a small
number of residents on the floodplain, so that one equilibrium involves the eﬃcient
outcome in which no individuals live on the plain and no dam is built. Yet, an
individual also knows that the discretionary government will choose to build a dam if
language of game theory, arising even when there is a fixed endpoint to the dynamic game (as in
the example in this article, where the game is essentially static).

                                              3
there are a large number of floodplain residents, he thus finds it in his interest to locate
on the floodplain if a dam is built. Hence, there is another equilibrium that involves a
socially ineﬃcient building of a dam and location of individuals on the floodplain. In
terms of game theory, it is well understood that multiple equilibria arise when there
is suﬃcient strategic complementarity in a coordination game (Schelling 1960 and
Cooper 1999). In the example studied in this article, the strategic complementarity is
that an individual’s rewards to locating on the plain are higher when other individuals
choose to locate there. But the strategic complementarity is present in this setting
only when policymaking is discretionary.


2         The model
There are two locations of economic activity: the floodplain and elsewhere. There
are two sets of actors: a government and a private sector. To highlight aspects of the
interactions between the government and the private sector, we begin by studying a
situation in which there is just one member of the private sector (in Section 3) and
then move to the more realistic case in which there are many individuals (in Section
4).
    The government and the members of the private sector each have a single action.
The private sector must decide to live on the floodplain (call this action p = 1) or
elsewhere (p = 0). The government must decide whether to build a dam (d = 1)
or not (d = 0). Despite the fact public and private decisionmakers take diﬀerent
actions (d and p, respectively), the government’s objective is to maximize the welfare
of its citizens so that there is no intrinsic conflict between the public sector and
private sector. Further, if the government builds the dam, it finances construction
via lump-sum taxation, with each member of the private sector paying the same level
of taxes.4
    Individuals derive utility from their location and their consumption of goods.
Their utility function takes the form

                                                u(c + bp)                                           (1)

with b > 0. That is, if an individual lives on the floodplain, then it is as if his
consumption is raised by an amount, b. Consumption is constrained by after-tax
income, which can take on several diﬀerent values depending on the actions of the
government and private sector. The dependence of after-tax income on private and
public actions is displayed in Figure 1. The reference level of income is y. If the
government builds a dam at cost ψ and finances it with lump-sum taxation, then
after-tax income is y − ψ. If the government does not build a dam and individuals
choose to live on the plain then income is f , which is assumed to be substantially less
than y because of floods.
    4
        The Appendix considers the sensitivity of the core results to some alternative financing rules.

                                                     4
     Next, consider the utility level that a single individual receives as it depends on
his location decision and the dam-building decision of the government. The various
possibilities are shown in Figure 2. We make the following assumptions on the relative
sizes of y, b, f, and ψ.
     First, we assume that the best situation–the socially optimal situation–is one
where individuals do not live on the floodplain and the dam is not built, which requires
a pair of restrictions on the parameters of the model. First, it requires that y > f + b,
which is the idea that eﬀective income is lower when one lives on the plain. Second,
it requires that y > y + b − ψ or, equivalently, that ψ > b: the dam’s cost is higher
than the value of living on the floodplain.
     Second, we assume that the dam is productive in the sense that y − ψ > f . That
is, if all individuals are constrained to live on the plain, then there is an economic
benefit to building a dam to avoid the low output, f , which arises because of floods.
     These assumptions mean that it is easy to determine the optimal choice for an
individual. First, if he knows that the government will not build the dam, then it
is best for him not to locate on the floodplain since y > f + b. Second, if he knows
that the government will build the dam, then it is best for him to locate on the
floodplain because there are positive benefits from that location choice (b > 0 implies
that b + y − ψ > y − ψ).
     Similarly, the optimal choice for the government is easy to describe. As discussed
above, the government seeks to maximize the welfare of the individual. If the gov-
ernment knows that the private agent will not locate on the plain, then it is best not
to build a dam since it is costly. If the government knows that the private agent will
locate on the plain, then it is best to build the dam since it is a productive way of
avoiding losses due to floods (y − ψ > f ).


3     A two person game
We start by exploring the strategic interactions between a single individual and the
government, considering three diﬀerent cases. First, we assume that the private sector
and the government act simultaneously. Second, we suppose that the government acts
first, which corresponds to policymaking under commitment. Third, we suppose that
the private individual acts first, which corresponds to policymaking under discretion.

3.1    Simultaneous actions
Nash (1951) proposed a definition of equilibrium in games such as the following: a
pair of actions (p, d) is an equilibrium if p is the private sector’s best response to the
action, d, by the government and if d is the government’s best response to the private




                                            5
sectors’s action, p.5
    There are, therefore, two Nash equilibria when the private individual and the
government move simultaneously. One is that the individual does not locate on the
plain and no dam is built by the government (p = 0, d = 0). The other is that the
individual locates on the plain and a dam is built by the government (p = 1, d = 1).
Each of these outcomes is an equilibrium in the Nash sense since it is optimal for (a)
the individual to choose p = 0 if d = 0 and to choose p = 1 if d = 1, and (b) the
government to choose d = 0 if p = 0 and d = 1 if p = 1. One can verify the first
of these equilibria by looking at Figure 2. For example, starting at the welfare level
corresponding to d = 0, p = 0, one can see that the individual gets lower welfare
if he chooses p = 1 (since f < y), and that the government’s outcome is worse if it
chooses d = 1 (since y − ψ < y). Proceeding similarly, one can also confirm that both
diagonal elements are equilibria and that the oﬀ-diagonal elements are not.
    The two equilibria yield diﬀerent welfare levels for the individual: the benefit from
living on the floodplain is not as large as the cost of building the dam, so that the
p = 0, d = 0 equilibrium is unambiguously better than the p = 1, d = 1 equilibrium.
In terms of the literature on game theory, this is an example of a coordination game,
and at least since since Schilling (1960), it has been known that coordination games
can display more than one equilibrium.

3.2     A dominant government
There is symmetry between the individual and the government in the situation just
discussed, with each agent deciding on an optimal action taking as given the action
of the other. An alternative situation is that the government is dominant, choosing
its best action knowing how the individual will respond to government intervention.
In our case, the government looks at the various scenarios and recognizes that the
individual will respond with p = 0 if the government action is d = 0 and that the
individual will respond with p = 1 if the government action is d = 1. Since welfare is
higher when d = 0 and p = 0 than when d = 1 and p = 1, the government will choose
not to build the dam.
    This situation can be described in other ways. One is to say that the government
has a first mover advantage, selecting its action and seeing a subsequent response
from the private sector, which stresses the timing of actions. The second is to say
that the government can credibly commit to take the action d = 0 even if the private
sector chooses p = 1, which stresses aspects of feasible government strategies. Either
of these perspectives limits the equilibrium solely to the optimal one.
   5
    Attention is restricted here to individuals choosing oneaction or the other. Mixed strategies in
which individuals choose one or the other with a specified probability are not considered.




                                                 6
3.3         A dominant individual
We next consider a setting in which the private sector is dominant. In the current
setting, the individual knows that if he chooses p = 0 then the government will
choose d = 0. He also knows that if he chooses p = 1 then the government will choose
d = 1. Since the individual’s welfare is highest with p = 0 and d = 0, he will choose
that action. Hence, a dominant individual will also bring about a socially optimal
outcome. That is, the fact that the government cannot commit does not lead to
multiple equilibria or to ineﬃciency when there is a single dominant individual.


4         Many individuals and one government
A more realistic situation is that there are many similar private agents and only one
government. We study this setting under the assumption that all individuals are
identical in their preferences and opportunities, restricting our attention to analysis
of symmetric equilibria (those in which all individuals choose the same action).
    Each individual makes his location action (p = 0 or p = 1), taking as given the
location decisions of all other individuals: we denote the action taken by all others
as p; the restriction to symmetric equilibria is that p is also 0 or 1.6

4.1         A committed government
Suppose that the government can commit to the action d = 0. Then, in view of
Figure 2, the individual agent will choose p = 0. Further, the individual does not
really care what other individuals are doing; it is enough for him to know that the
government will not be building the dam. The individual will not want to live on the
floodplain if there is no dam.

4.2         A discretionary government
Matters are more complicated when there is a discretionary government. Based on
our prior discussion and assuming that the government policy is not influenced by
the actions of an individual agent but only by those of the average agent, the optimal
decision for the government takes the form

                                        d=0      if p = 0 and                      (2)

                                          d = 1 if p = 1.                          (3)
That is, a dam is constructed if people choose to live on the floodplain, but not
otherwise. This is precisely the same behavior by the discretionary government as in
Section 3.
    6
        Equilibria that are not symmetric are studied in the Appendix.


                                                   7
    However, the situation for the individual agent is quite diﬀerent now. He is playing
a simultaneous game with his fellow agents in which the choice variable is location.
Although it continues to be the case that it is the actions of the government that are
important for the individual’s location decisions, it is now the behavior of all other
agents that determines how the government acts. The individual has lost his power
relative to the case studied in Section 3.
    We can again use Figure 2 to determine how the individual will make his location
decision. We can represent this as

                          p = 0 if p = 0 because d = 0, and                           (4)

                            p = 1 if p = 1 because d = 1,                             (5)
stressing that governmental response depends on the aggregate private sector action.
Hence, there are two symmetric equilibria under policy discretion. In one, no indi-
vidual chooses to locate on the floodplain and the dam is not built. In the other, all
individuals choose to locate on the floodplain and the dam is built. As in Section 3,
the equilibrium with floodplain location and dambuilding results in lower utility.
    Of course, it would be desirable for individuals to coordinate their actions and for
each person to choose p = 0. But, the p = 1, d = 1 example is one that involves a
“coordination failure” in the sense of Cooper and John (1988). As in the monetary
policy analysis of King and Wolman (2004), it is strategic complementarity that leads
to coordination failure, making it optimal for any single individual to align his location
action with those of his fellow citizens. Further, it is discretionary policy that leads
to this strategic complementarity, as was also true in the monetary policy case.


5     Discussion and conclusions
Working with an example discussed by Kydland and Prescott (1977), this article
provides a simple model economy in which there is a single, eﬃcient equilibrium under
commitment and multiple equilibria under discretionary policymaking. In particular,
there are two equilibria that can arise, and one is clearly worse than the other.
    As Kydland and Prescott (1977) suggest, it would be desirable for the government
to pass a law to restrict individual location choices. If no one was allowed to live
on the floodplain, then it would not matter whether a dam would be built by the
discretionary government if people did live there. Thus, the model economy displays
the property–stressed in the literature on the Samaritan’s dilemma that begins with
Buchanan (1975)–that limitations on individual choice may be warranted in settings
where policymakers lack the ability to commit their future actions.
    The analysis has focused on a government that maximizes the welfare of the
agent, as is natural when all agents are the same. Yet, the tendency would also arise
in more concretely political environments. For example, if agents are allowed to vote
on whether a dam should be built after their location decisions, then it is clear that

                                            8
there would be unanimous support for the dam if p = 1 and unanimous opposition
if p = 0. If individuals were allowed to vote on a floodplain prohibition law (of the
form suggested by Kydland and Prescott) before location decisions, then there would
be unanimous support for that rule, even though it limited individual choice. That
is, the detailed timing of opportunities for political decisionmaking would be relevant
for outcomes in this economy.
     We now understand that there is a potential for a multiplicity of equilibrium
outcomes in many settings in economic analysis as diverse as monetary policy and
flood control. For positive studies of discretionary policymaking, this means that
there may be previously unstudied equilibrium outcomes. It is possible, for example,
that an extension of the analysis of King and Wolman (2004) might be used to study
“inflation scares,” as put forward by Goodfriend (1993), in which informational events
induce endogenous switches between low-inflation and high-inflation equilibria. In
terms of the design of institutions for policymaking in discretionary environments, it
is necessary to guard against adverse equilibrium outcomes.




                                          9
A      Government decision-making
The focus of the main text is on a situation in which there are many private agents
and a government that acts in a discretionary manner (taking its dambuilding action
after the private sector’s location decision). However, the text restricts attention to
situations in which there are symmetric equilibria (those with 0 < p < 1) so that it is
relatively simple to describe government decisionmaking: it simply acts to maximizes
welfare as if there was a single agent. Further, the government is restricted to financing
the dam (if it builds one) via lump-sum taxes that are common across all agents.
    The purpose of this Appendix is to explore how the dam-building decision for a
discretionary government is altered when an intermediate fraction of agents (0 < p <
1) that chooses to live on the plain and when there are other financing schemes. In
all settings, there is a continuum of agents indexed by i, with 0 ≤ i ≤ 1 that are
making the location decision between the plain and elsewhere (which we will call the
hill in this Appendix).

A.1     The basic model with lump-sum taxation
In this subsection, we maintain the text assumption that receive a tax bill equal to dψ.
(Each agent pays a lump-sum tax equal to government expenditure irrespective of his
location decision.) In the main text, attention is restricted to symmetric equilibria
so that p = 0 or p = 1, but we now relax that assumption.
    Since we are studying discretionary equilibria, we assume that the government
takes p as given and chooses the optimal d. Since agents are heterogeneous by location,
we assume here that the government maximizes average utility, pu(cp + b) + (1 −
p)u(ch ), where cp and ch are the amounts of consumption by plain and hill residents,
respectively. In particular, if d = 0, then the welfare of private agents living on the
hill is u(y) and that of those living on the plain is u(f + b) so that average utility is

                                pu(f + b) + (1 − p)u(y).

By contrast, if d = 1, then average utility is

                           pu(y + b − ψ) + (1 − p)u(y − ψ).

    To understand the optimal choice of the government, consider the function ∆(p),
defined as the average utility with a dam less the average utility without a dam. It
is clear that ∆ is linear in p. It is also clear that ∆(0) = u(y − ψ) − u(y) < 0, and
that ∆(1) = u(y + b − ψ) − u(f + b) > 0, so that there is a single value, pe, such that
∆(ep) = 0.
    Hence, for all p < pe, then, it is optimal for the government not to build the dam
and for all p > pe, it is optimal for the government to build it.



                                           10
    Further, suppose that individual i takes d, p as given and chooses optimally. Then,
his optimal strategy is
                                  p = 0 if p < pe
                                  p = (0, 1) if p = pe
                                  p = 1 if p > pe.
If p = pe then agents can be viewed as playing mixed strategies, selecting a probability
of living on the plain of p = pe. Alternatively, some agents can simply choose to live
on the plain while others don’t. But, in any event, consideration of nonsymmetric
equilibria indicates that there is a third equilibrium possiblity not considered earlier.
Since individuals are indiﬀerent to location when p = pe and the government is indif-
ferent about whether to build the dam or not, then there is a third equilibrium at
which p = pe and we are not able to say whether the dam is built. This particular
equilibrium seems less interesting, as it is “unstable” in a particular sense: if p = pe±ε,
for a small number ε then it is no longer optimal for an individual to choose the action
required by this equilibrium. It is for this reason that we ignore such equilibria in the
main text.
    The consideration of nonsymmetric equilibria also makes it clear that the Nash
equilibria p = 0, d = 0 and p = 1, d = 1 are stable with respect to changes in behavior
by small fractions of the population. If p = ε, the government would continue to
choose d = 0, and if p = 1 − ε, the government would continue to choose d = 1.

A.2     Taxation just on floodplain residents
Suppose, alternatively, that it is possible to tax only residents of the floodplain, but
not the other residents of the community. This fiscal restriction can be understood
in two ways. A direct interpretation is that it is just a particular posited fiscal policy.
A more subtle implication is that the government chooses this taxation so as to
maximize social welfare (as in the next subsection) subject to the requirement that
it must not lower the welfare of any agent and the recognition that individuals can
always generate welfare of u(y) by staying on the hill.
    In this situation, then, the government maximizes the welfare of floodplain resi-
dents:
                                        ψ
                           du(y + b − d ) + (1 − d)u(f + b).
                                        p
From the standpoint of these residents, the cost of the dam is now higher because there
is a smaller base of individuals subject to the lump-sum tax. Hence, the government
will build the dam if
                                           ψ
                                   y + b − > f + b,
                                           p
or if
                                            ψ
                                     p>         = pb
                                          y−f

                                            11
and it will not if p < pb. (The value of pb is positive because y > f and it is less than 1
because y − f > ψ, which is the condition that the dam is productive if discussed in
the main text.) Hence, the government’s decision rule is again to build a dam if there
are many floodplain residents and to not build it if there are few. However, relative
to the prior case in A1, the “switch point” for the government has changed.
    Importantly, the individual private agent’s location decision is substantially changed
by this alternative tax regime. If he remains on the hill, he gets u(y) while if he moves
to the plain he gets something less, irrespective of whether the dam is built. Hence,
no rational agent will ever move to the floodplain.
    Hence, under discretion with location-specific lump-sum taxes, the only Nash
equilibrium is the eﬃcient one in which pb = 0 and d = 0. That is, the change in the
structure of taxation has eliminated a “fiscal externality” that is partly responsible
for the results in the main text.

A.3      Endogenous taxation
We now consider a discretionary government that chooses the levels of lump-sum
taxation so as to maximize the utility of the average agent in the economy, taking
as given that there is a fraction of agents, p, that lives on the plain. As above, this
average utility is
                               pu(cp + b) + (1 − p)u(ch ),
where cp and ch are the amounts of consumption goods that the government allocates
to residents of the plain and hill, respectively. The resource constraint of the economy
takes the form

                 pcp + (1 − p)(ch ) ≤ (1 − p)y + p{dy + (1 − d)f − dψ}.

That is, the total amount of consumption must be less than the income earned by
hill and plain residents, net of any cost of dam building.
    A Pareto-optimal allocation mandates that “full” consumption be equated across
plain and hill residents7 :
                                     (cp + b) = ch .
Hence, the amount of consumption available for hill residents is given by

                             ch = pb + y − ψ if d = 1 and
                             ch = pb + (1 − p)y + pf if d = 0

Accordingly, the government will maximize consumption and welfare by choosing to
build the dam if p > pb and not to build the dam if p < pb.
   7
    Eﬀectively, floodplain residents have consumption equal to c + b, with c being market consump-
tion and b being the consumption value of living on the floodplain.



                                               12
   The associated taxes by location are

                                    Tp = y − ch − b
                                    Th = y − ch

with the amounts of consumption, ch , depending on the dam-building decision in
ways specified above.
     Confronted with this government fiscal policy and dam-building decision rule, the
individual’s behavior is as in the basic model of A1 with lump-sum taxation but with
pb replacing pe: individuals find it desirable to locate on the plain if p > pb and to locate
on the hill if p < pb. Hence, the equilibria are the same as in the main text.

A.4     Comparing the fiscal regimes
Looking across the three fiscal regimes, we can see that the results of the main text are
broadly sustained, except when the government is required to levy location-specific
taxes in ways that fully discourage location on the plain. In terms of the discussion
of Kydland and Prescott (1977) quoted in the main text, the critical point is that
the fiscal policy cannot be equivalent to passing a law “prohibiting construction of
houses in the floodplain.” That is, the fiscal regime must not fully punish individuals
for the action of locating to the floodplain.




                                             13
References
 [1] Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary
     Policy in a Natural Rate Model.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (4): 589—610.

 [2] Buchanan, James.1975. “The Samaritan’s Dilemma.” in Altruism, Morality and
     Economic Theory, Edmund S. Phelps, ed., Russell Sage Foundation, 71—85.

 [3] Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal Taxation of Labor and Capital Income in
     General Equilibrium with Infinite Lives.” Econometrica 54 (3): 607—22.

 [4] Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum. 1998. “Expecta-
     tion Traps and Discretion.” Journal of Economic Theory 81 (2): 462—92.

 [5] Cooper, Russell, and Andrew John. 1988. “Coordinating Coordination Failures
     in Keynesian Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103 (3): 441—63.

 [6] Cooper, Rusell. 1999. Coordination Games: Complementarities and Macroeco-
     nomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

 [7] Fischer, Stanley.1980. “Dynamic inconsistency, cooperation and the benevolent
     dissembling government.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 2: 93—
     107.

 [8] Goodfriend, Marvin. 1993. “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem:
     1979—92.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79 (Winter):
     1—24.

 [9] King, Robert G. and Alexander L. Wolman. 2004. “Monetary Discretion, Pric-
     ing Complementarity, and Dynamic Multiple Equilibria.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 119 (4): 1513—53.

[10] Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather Than Discre-
     tion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” Journal of Political Economy 85 (3):
     473—91.

[11] Lindbeck, Assar, and Jorgen Weibull. 1993. “A Model of Political Equilibrium
     in a Representative Democracy.” Journal of Public Economy 51 (2): 195—209.

[12] Nash, John. 1951. “Non-Cooperative Games.” Annals of Mathematics 54: 286—
     95.

[13] Schelling, Thomas. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
     University Press.




                                         14
Figure 1 Dependence of Income on Individual and Government Actions

                                        Government Action
                                 d=0                             d=1




                           p=0     y                           y − ψ
       Individual Action




                           p=1     f                            y − ψ




Notes: The possible government actions are to build a dam (d=1) or not (d=0). The
possible individual actions are to locate on the ﬂoodplain (p=1) or not (p=0). The income
resulting from these actions is given by the entry in the relevant cell of the matrix. For
example, if the individual locates on the plain and the government does not build the
dam, then the individual receives income “f.”
Figure 2 Dependence of Welfare on Individual and Government
         Actions

                                          Government Action
                                   d=0                              d=1




                           p=0     u(y)                     u (y − ψ )
       Individual Action




                                 u ( f + b)              u (y + b − ψ )
                           p=1




Notes: The possible government actions are to build a dam (d=1) or not (d=0). The
possible individual actions are to locate on the ﬂoodplain (p=1) or not (p=0). The utility
resulting from these actions is given by the entry in the relevant cell of the matrix. For
example, if the individual locates on the plain and the government does not build the
dam, then the individual receives income “f” and utility u(f+b), with “b” measuring the
beneﬁts to living on the ﬂoodplain.
The model assumes that the dam is costly (>0); that there are beneﬁts to living on
the plain (b>0); that there are costs of living on the plain if there is no dam (y>f+b);
and that the dam is productive if individuals must live on the plain (y+b->f+b). These
assumptions imply that the diagonal elements of the matrix B are dominant.
