                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RECENT CHINESE BUYOUT ACTIVITY AND THE
                        IMPLICATIONS FOR GLOBAL ARCHITECTURE

                                            Agata Antkiewicz
                                             John Whalley

                                          Working Paper 12072
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12072


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Agata Antkiewicz and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Recent Chinese Buyout Activity and the Implications for Global Architecture
Agata Antkiewicz and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 12072
March 2006
JEL No. F02, F20, F21, O24

                                           ABSTRACT

We discuss recent cases of Chinese buyout activity in the OECD (especially in the US and the EU)
in resource and manufacturing sectors. While most of the buyout attempts have been unsuccessful,
they can serve as a catalyst for a wider discussion on the implications for global arrangements over
cross border acquisitions. Three specific issues are discussed. The first is the subsidization of
purchase raised in the OECD in response to the advancing of low- or no-interest loans by the
Chinese Central Bank to companies investing abroad. The second is the transparency of entities
involved in the buyout attempt. Most Chinese companies have close ties to the multiple levels of
government and are not subject to the standard reporting requirements as required of OECD
companies. The third involves national security concerns in the OECD and the possibility of
acquiring sensitive technology by Chinese companies when they purchase companies abroad. These
issues have not been addressed in the existing OECD/WTO investment policy initiatives and have
yet to be discussed in the global fora.
Agata Antkiewicz
Centre for International Governance Innovation
aantkiewicz@cigionline.org

John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca
1. Introduction

       This paper discusses the recent wave of (both actual and proposed) buyouts by

Chinese companies of entities outside China. While the majority of these have not

resulted in completed transactions, we discuss whether these can be a catalyst for a wider

discussion of the implications for global arrangements over cross border acquisitions.

Chinese outward foreign direct investment (FDI) for some years has been relatively small

(in the US$3-4 billion range in 2004) and heavily concentrated on both greenfield and

joint venture activity, much of it occurring in Hong Kong. In the last year, a change

which has occurred is both a focus on direct acquisition and the emergence of potentially

large transactions, some in the US$15-20 billion range, and with a focus well beyond

Hong Kong. Examples include: the Lenovo buyout of IBM's PC business, CNOOC's

(China National Offshore Oil Company) bid for Unocal, prospective bids by MinMetals

for Noranda, the Haier Group bid for Maytag, and others. No direct World Trade

Organization (WTO) issues are raised by these, but questions of subsidization, lack of

transparency, and national security have all been raised. National security issues

regarding foreign acquisitions are not new and go back to the Exon-Florio provisions of

the American Defence Production Act of 1998 following concerns in the US in the late

1980's over Japanese buyouts. However, issues of subsidization of foreign acquisitions

through low interest loans from central banks and the transparency of organizational form

of acquiring entities (State-Owned Enterprises, (SOEs)) are new.

       The overarching feature that we stress and which goes well beyond China is the

apparent absence of globally agreed disciplines covering not only cross border

                                                                                        2
acquisitions, but more broadly all cross border factor flows. This situation stands in

contrast to the goods and services flows covered by the WTO. Both the failed multilateral

agreement on investment (MAI) and WTO competition policy negotiations did not touch

directly on the newer issues in recent debate on Chinese buyouts, and neither do earlier

bilateral trade and investment treaties.

       At first glance this upsurge of new outward Chinese FDI strikes outside observers

as odd. China is after all, still a relatively capital scarce economy with a large pool of low

wage labour, and development policy there remains focused on attracting inward

platform FDI to combine with low wage labour to fuel further export and GDP growth.

To begin exporting large amounts of capital through large foreign acquisitions when this

broad stance of development policy towards inward FDI remains unchanged seemingly

calls for an explanation.

       A number of factors underlie this recent upsurge in Chinese cross border

acquisition activity. One is large accumulated Central Bank reserves in China (close to

US$700 billion), and a seeming change in policy stance by the Central Bank of

advancing low interest loans to SOEs for foreign acquisitions rather than continued

accumulation of US treasury notes. Chinese concerns over security for supply of resource

inputs (especially oil) for Chinese manufacturing enterprises also motivate the change in

activity. And for private manufacturing groups in China, the use of foreign acquisitions

as a way of obtaining distribution networks in the Organisation of Economic Co-

operation and Development (OECD) for domestic manufacturing production (insourcing

for want of a better term) seems to be a factor. The picture is one of macro imbalances
                                                                                            3
combining with pragmatic niche driven foreign acquisition activity in which factors

behind both Chinese SOEs and private groups, and resource and manufacturing

acquisitions differ.

       With both Chinese trade surpluses and inward FDI continuing to grow, and most

likely outward Chinese FDI growing correspondingly, broader systemic implications are

likely to factor in discussion of buyout situations. Mundell (1957) years ago noted the

formal equivalence between goods flows and factor flows suggesting an equivalent

organizational form for GATT/WTO for goods flows. Given the recent failures first of

the MAI negotiation in the OECD, and then of the competition policy negotiations in the

WTO, no global rules apply to interventions by governments regulating these forms of

factor flow. Issues of subsidization, mutually agreed bindings on barriers to acquisitions,

and transparency of organizational form of acquiring firms are thus newly raised.

       We discuss existing policy initiatives both in the OECD and the WTO with

respect to investment and competition policy in light of the new issues raised by Chinese

acquisitions. Thus far, central banks around the world have not engaged in extending low

interest loans for foreign acquisitions, but the policy structure in China with large

communally owned production units (by national, provincial and municipal governments)

makes this logical from a Chinese standpoint.

       A issue is whether other countries should now seek to link approval of individual

transactions to negotiations (or renegotiations) of bilateral investment treaties. A broader

approach is to seek a global regulatory framework covering purchases by prospective

foreign parent entities, a matter rarely touched on by previous WTO and OECD
                                                                           4
investment discussions which have largely focused on translating existing system of trade

rules (National Treatment and MFN) into investment rules.




                                                                                       5
2. Chinese Outward FDI and Factors Behind It

        Existing literature discussing FDI in China is dominated by evaluation of the

impact of FDI inflows on the Chinese economy, and specifically how central they are to

continued growth performance.1 FDI inflows in recent years have been running at US$60

billion/year and exports from foreign invested enterprises now account for half of

manufactured exports, which in turn equal 80% of value added in manufacturing. If a

downturn in inward FDI occurred in China, it is feared this could adversely impact

Chinese growth performance.

        Until recently, Chinese outward FDI was relatively small, and largely greenfield

or joint venture, with much of it focused on inward flows from Hong Kong.2 But the

recent widely publicized proposed buyouts of North American companies, have turned

attention to China as a foreign investor. Chinese FDI is global but has been concentrated

outside of the OECD. In 2003, 80% was in Asia, 14.3% in Latin America, 1.7% in North

America, 1.5% each in Europe and Africa, and 1.4% in Oceania.3 The top five

destinations for Chinese investment in 2003 were Hong Kong, the Cayman Islands, the

Virgin Islands, the United States, and Macao, followed by Australia, the Republic of

Korea and Singapore and was concentrated in three sectors: information technology,

computers and software (33% in 2003), distribution, wholesale and retail (20%), and



1 See for example: Graham, Wada (2001), Liu, Burridge, Sinclair (2002), Berthélemy, Démurger (2000),
  Ng, Tuan (2001); Tian, Lin, Lo (2004).
2 Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation (CAITEC) and Welsh
  Development Agency (WDA) (2005), Chinese Enterprises' Expansion Into European and North
  American Markets
3 CAITEC, WDA (2005).
                                                                                                  6
mining (18%).4 In 2004, Chinese outward investment was only US$3.62 billion, with

only 5% of FDI flowing into China, despite the growth rate of outward FDI that had been

twice that of inward FDI in prior years (in 2004, 27% and 13% respectively, year on

year).

         Existing literature discussing both the motivation for and strategies used in

Chinese outward FDI5 emphasize access to resources, foreign distribution systems,

foreign technology, markets abroad, and the strategic aims and perceived needs for

diversification of individual enterprises. These reasons for enterprises investing abroad

are not substantially different from those of other countries.

         A recent joint study undertaken by the Chinese Academy of International Trade

and Economic Cooperation (CAITEC) and the Welsh Development Agency (WDA) used

a questionnaire to investigate key factors involved in Chinese outward FDI and found

that the most influential to the decision were: market expansion, implementation of long-

term development strategies for firms, access to technology, learning advanced

management methods, avoiding trade barriers, taking advantage of foreign preferential

investment policies, achieving cost reductions, acquisition of material inputs (resources),

and transferring excess production capacity abroad.6 Other studies point to non-economic

reasons for Chinese enterprises investing abroad, such as the possibility of gaining

residency rights and other benefits in the host country for managerial staff (such as health


4 CAITEC, WDA (2005).
5 See for example: Hong and Sun (2004), Deng (2004 and 2003), Wall (1997), Wong and Chan (2003),
  Yang (2003), Young, Huang and McDermott (1996), Wu and Chen (2001), UNCTAD (2003), Wang
  (2002) and others.
6 CAITEC, WDA (2005).
                                                                                              7
services, social security, and access to education). The use of overseas investments as a

way to circumvent official Chinese restrictions on access to foreign exchange and foreign

capital markets is also raised as potential factor.7

       The decision by Chinese companies to buy foreign companies is also often linked

to an intent to relocate manufacturing activity to China to benefit from lower labour costs

while keeping existing distribution networks in the host country of the acquired

business.8 Recent widely publicized Chinese bids for large firms in the OECD are also

portrayed in the media as involving a 'prestige factor', viewed as an incentive for Chinese

companies to go abroad to either buy a recognizable foreign brand (Lenovo's takeover of

IBM’s PC business) or build their own brand's awareness by establishing manufacturing

plants in the target country (such as Haier's factory in South Carolina, US).

       In 2003, SOEs accounted for only 43% of total Chinese investments abroad with

limited liability, shareholding and private companies taken together accounting for

another 43%.9 With recent large scale acquisition activity these proportions seems poised

to change. Chinese government policy is now to use outward oriented investments to

secure access to resources and raw materials (especially iron ore, coal, oil and natural

gas), acquire new technology for transfer back to China, expand Chinese export markets,

strengthen international relationships with and gain more influence in other countries.

       Chinese outward FDI thus also reflects official Chinese government policy to



7 Deng (2004).
8 Such as recently with Nanjing and MG Rover.
9 CAITEC, WDA (2005)
                                                                                          8
encourage domestic enterprises to invest abroad. This is to be supported by the use of low

interest loans made available to Chinese SOEs and financed by China's large and growing

foreign reserves. These reserves were around US$15 billion in 1998 and today stand at

close to US$700 billion reflecting both Chinese trade surpluses in recent years and

inward foreign investment. With concerns in China over security of supply of resource

inputs, and the impact of recent falls in the US dollar on the US treasuries in the reserve

portfolio, deploying Chinese reserves in this way is seen as a reasonable policy. The

government regulatory approval process for overseas investment projects have also been

significantly simplified in the recent years10, further fuelling outward FDI flows.11

Chinese companies are now supported by low interest loans if their overseas activity

involves, among others, resource exploration, acquiring foreign advanced technology,

developing global competitiveness of the company and expanding its markets.12

        The changes taking place in Chinese outward oriented foreign investment are well

illustrated by recent takeover attempts by Chinese companies. We summarize them in

Table 1, and then discuss each in more detail. The circumstances of each episode vary,

and firm information on the terms of the arrangements entered into in each case is not




10 For example, the threshold for seeking state approval for a planned foreign investment has been
   increased from US$1 million to US$20 million. Investments not bigger than US$30 million need to be
   approved only by the provincial government. See http://news.sina.com.cn/c/2004-12-
   03/08404420072s.shtml
11 “Provisions on matters related to the examination and approval of establishment of enterprises for
   overseas investment” announced by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce and “Interim measures on the
   administration of examination and approval of overseas investment” by State Development and Reform
   Commission (SDRC).
12 “Notice on the policy of giving credit support to the state encouraged key overseas investment projects”
   announced by the State Development and Reform Commission (SDRC) and the China Import and
   Export Bank in 2004.
                                                                                                         9
always readily available, but the factors involved in each case seem clear.




2.1. Resource Company Situations


CNPC/Yukos

       The involvement of China's National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) in the

Russian oil company Yukos, following its tax problems, illustrates well how Chinese

concerns with security of resource supplies are fuelling foreign acquisitions of resource

companies. In September 2004, facing financial problems due to back taxes, Yukos

announced that it was suspending close to 60% of its total oil exports to China due to

high shipping costs.13 CNPC then entered into talks with Yukos about restarting rail

deliveries of crude oil to China. In December 2004, Russia's Energy Minister V.

Khristenko indicated that CNPC might take a 20% stake in Yukos's former oil production




13 People's Daily Online, September 22, 2004, CNPC seeks to resume Yukos oil shipments,
   http://english.people.com.cn/200409/22/eng20040922_157934.html
                                                                                      10
unit, Yuganskneftegas, as part of a new strategic partnership to be entered into by the

Russian and Chinese governments in the energy sector.14 Later, in February 2005, news

agencies reported that a Chinese bank group led by China Export-Import Bank (EXIM

Bank) had agreed to lend US$6 billion to Rosneft (the new owner of Yuganskneftegas).

The loan was believed to be a pre-payment for future crude oil deliveries from Rosneft

estimated at 50 million tones over a five year period.15 Even though the Russian Foreign

Ministry downplayed Chinese involvement in the Yuganskneftegas take-over the next

day, the involvement of CNPC in Yukos activities has continued. To illustrate, Yukos

and CNPC lobbied for a new pipeline from Angarsk in Siberia to a Chinese refinery site

in Daqing, although it now appears that Russia is more likely to build a pipeline to their

Nakhodka port on the Russian Pacific and not ship directly to China.




MinMetals/Noranda

       Activity of Chinese SOEs on the resource acquisition front has been a factor in

news reports linking China's MinMetals Corporation (a Chinese SOE) to Noranda,

Canada's largest mining company. In September 2004, China MinMetals Corporation

announced it had entered into exclusive negotiations to purchase Noranda Inc. (the

leading Canadian copper and zinc miner). Their offer was reported to comprise cash



14 BBC News, Chinese may get Yukos oil stake, December 20, 2004 http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-
   /2/hi/business/4134769.stm
15 Carl Mortished, Yukos deal backed by $6bn loan from China, Times Online, February 2, 2005
   http://business.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,17549-1466798,00.html
                                                                                             11
(about US$5 billion) and the distribution to shareholders of some of Noranda holdings

(i.e. Noranda's aluminium business).16 In March 2005, the talks broke down when

Noranda bought 41% share of its subsidiary, Falconbridge, to increase its market

capitalization.

        It was believed that MinMetals would no longer be able to afford to bid for a joint

Noranda-Flaconbridge company. Instead, MinMetals and Falconbridge pledged to

discuss a possible strategic alliance. The proposed buyout spurred much discussion in

Canadian media of China's human rights and fair trade record as well as strategic aspects

of foreign ownership of Canadian resources. David Kilgour, an independent MP, stated

that because MinMetals was an SOE the takeover would be, in effect, a nationalization of

a private Canadian company by a branch of the Chinese government.17 In June 2005, the

Canadian government introduced a bill that would allow the federal government to block

any foreign takeover of a Canadian company on national security grounds giving the

government the right to review buy-outs even if the value was less than C$250 million

(the then current threshold). The industry minister said the changes were not a result of

Chinese interest in Canadian natural resource companies.18




16 http://news.moneycentral.msn.com September 24, 2004.
17 The Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2005, accessed through http://www.post-gazette.com
18 The Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2005, accessed through http://www.post-gazette.com
                                                                                          12
CNOOC/Unocal

       China's National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) unsolicited cash bid of

US$18.5 billion for the American oil firm, Unocal, is a further illustration both of foreign

resource acquisition activity and the political response in larger OECD countries to such

bids. The CNOOC offer topped an earlier (cash and shares) Chevron bid for Unocal by

US$2 billion, and in July Chevron raised its offer to US$17.1 billion and won the backing

of Unocal's Board. At the onset of August, CNOOC withdrew its bid for Unocal due to

strong political opposition in the US.

       The CNOOC bid spurred concerns in the US over national security issues

connected to foreign buyouts and also started discussion of government-supported

activities of Chinese firms in the US. The House of Representatives voted in favour of a

resolution stating that allowing CNOOC to buy Unocal would “threaten to impair the

national security of the United States”.19 American commentary also suggested that

CNOOC's bid was unfair because $13 billion out of the US$18.5 billion offer for Unocal

came directly from low- or no-interest loans from the Chinese government (via CNOOC's

state owned parent company and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China).

Chevron's vice-chairman, Peter Robertson, called for the bid to be referred to the WTO




19 Steve Lohr, The Big Tug of War Over Unocal, The New York Times, July 6, 2005,
   http://www.nytimes.com
                                                                                         13
on the grounds that China was buying “a critical resource like energy with free money”.20

CNOOC's response was to call for a review of the bid by the Committee of Foreign

Investments in the US (CFIUS) arguing the controversy over the bid was purely political.

CNOOC's representatives pointed out that 70% of Unocal's oil and gas reserves were

located in Asia, and that only 1% of American consumption was secured by Unocal's

American production.21

       Several American commentators argued that as long as there was a worldwide

market for oil, controlling oil and gas reserves was not vital for national security.22 Other

analysts emphasised that China's foreign reserves were held mostly in US treasury bills,

suggesting that if the Chinese stopped buying these, interest rates in the US could rise

which could then increase inflation and decrease consumer spending.23 But it was also

argued this could happen if the Chinese decided to retaliate against any politically driven

blockage of Chinese takeovers. In addition to treating oil as a national security product,

concerns were also expressed over Chinese access to industrial technology that could be

used for military purposes. The issue was Unocal's underwater terrain-mapping

technology which, it was argued, could also be used for military submarine navigation.




20 Dow Jones Newswires, Chevron Executive Calls for WTO Review of CNOOC Unocal Bid, July 1,
   2005, http://money.cnn.com
21 BBC News, China Calls for Calm on Oil Deal, June 28, 2005, http://newsvote.bbc.co.uk
22 Steve Lohr, Unocal Bid Opens Up New Issues of Security, The New York Times, July 13, 2005,
   http://www.nytimes.com
23 Buttonwood, China Syndrome, The Economist, http://economist.com and Steve Lohr, The Big Tug of
   War Over Unocal
                                                                                              14
CNPC/PetroKazakhstan

        A further resource related acquisition involves the China National Petroleum

Corporation (CNPC) buyout of the Canadian-listed company PetroKazakhstan

(PetroKaz) for US$4.2 billion. When the bid was announced on August 22, 2005, it had

already been approved by the PetroKazakhstan Board of Directors and recommended to

shareholders.24 The Chinese bid was subsequently challenged by the Indian Oil and

Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) who were also interested in PetroKaz. ONGC claimed

that CNPC was given unfair chance to revise their bid after ONGC bid had been

submitted.25

        The CNPC bid raised a series of legal issues since under Kazakh law the state

may exercise its rights to block any sale of assets in the country.26 Also, Lukoil (Russia's

biggest oil company) filed a claim with an arbitration court in Stockholm arguing that a

shareholders agreement gave them the right to buy PetroKazakhstan's interest in an

existing petroleum venture (the Turgai project) if there were any changes in the control

over PetroKaz.27 In Canada, Lukoil filed a claim with the Alberta Court requesting the

arrangement to be deferred until the Stockholm Arbitration Institute makes its decision.

The Canadian court has approved the deal and CNPC bought PetroKaz on October 26th

for US$55 per share or US$4.2 billion total. The CNPC offer was backed by the Kazakh


24 PetroKazakhstan Inc. Press Release, PetroKazakhstan Announces Sale to CNPC International Ltd. For
   Approximately US$4.18 Billion, August 22, 2005, http://www.petrokazakhstan.com/news
25 The Hindu. Business, India Alleges Foul Play in PetroKazakhstan Bid, October 18, 2005,
   http://www.thehindu.com
26 EIU ViewsWire, Kazakhstan Energy: Turning to the East, August 17, 2005, http://www.viewswire.com
27 Bloomberg. 2005. Lukoil Files in Stockholm to Stop Kazakh Venture Sale (Update 3), October 5.
   accessed through www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000080&sid=aoVIm7DNQB9k&refer=asia#
                                                                                                 15
government who would pay US$1.4 billion for a 33% stake in PetroKaz.28




2.2. Manufacturing Company Situations


Lenovo/IBM

       The acquisition of IBM's PC hardware division by the Chinese Lenovo Group (the

leader in PC sales in China) illustrates the foreign acquisition activities of Chinese

manufacturing based groups. In December 2004, Lenovo agreed to pay US$1.75 billion

for the IBM PC unit (including US$0.5 billion of the unit's debt assumed by Lenovo),

with the sale giving IBM US$650 million in cash, US$600 million in securities and an

18.9% stake in Lenovo. The arrangement makes Lenovo the world's third-largest PC

maker behind Dell and Hewlett-Packard. Lenovo will be permitted to use the IBM brand

for five years and IBM will support Lenovo with marketing and corporate sales.29

       In January 2005, CFIUS discussed concerns that the deal could compromise

national security and decided to review the merger. Concerns raised included the

possibility of industrial espionage and the transfer of sensitive technology from IBM to

Lenovo.30 In March 2005, CFIUS ruled that the acquisition posed no threat to national

security and the sale was completed in May.



28 BBC News, CNPC Secures PetroKazakhstan Bid, October 26, 2005, http://news.bbc.co.uk
29 Michael       Kanellos,    IBM        sells       PC     group   to     Lenovo,       News.com
   http://news.com.com/IBM+sells+PC+group+to+Lenovo/2100-1042_3-5482284.html
30 Jeffrey    Burt,   IBM-Lenovo      deal     raises   concerns, eWeek,    January    31,  2005,
   http://www.eweek.com/print_article2/0,1217,a=143565,00.asp
                                                                                              16
Haier/Maytag

        The bid by the Chinese private group Haier for the US appliance producer Maytag

reflects potential Chinese insourcing and access to OECD distribution networks. In June

2005, Haier Group (a major Chinese fridge and washing-machine manufacturer)

announced it was interested in purchasing Maytag. The Chinese offer of US$1.28 billion

started a bidding war with US Ripplewood and Whirpool who in turn offered to pay

US$1.13 billion and US$1.3 billion respectively. Whirpool's offer of US$17 per share

included cash and stock options and was higher than Ripplewood's $14 per share and

Haier's $16 (cash only).31 Haier's bid was made subject to a review of Maytag's

confidential records, and on July 20, Haier announced it was withdrawing its bid. Some

analysts suggest that Haier dropped out of the bidding due to difficulties in integrating

Maytag's business with their own32. Maytag was eventually bought by Whirlpool in

August of 2005.




SAIC and Nanjing/MG Rover

        Further Chinese FDI acquisition activities have involved two bids made by rival



31 Andrew Ross Sorkin, Timothy L. O'Brien, Whirlpool Makes Unsolicited Bid for Maytag, Creating 3-
   Way Race, The New York Times, July 18, 2005, http://www.nytimes.com
32 Eric Bosshard, FTN Midwest Securities, cited in China's Haier out of Hoover Race, BBC News, July
   20, 2005, http://news.bbc.co.uk
                                                                                                17
Chinese SOEs for control of the UK car group MG Rover. In spring 2005, offers to buy

MG Rover came from two Chinese companies: Shanghai Automotive Industry

Corporation (SAIC) and Nanjing Automobile Corporation. Rover had been placed in

receivership following bankruptcy, and negotiations involved both the receiver and the

UK government since local employment issues were raised. Earlier in the year, after a

first failed attempt to take over Rover's assets, SAIC bought the rights to sell two Rover

models in China. It was believed that each of the two bids would result in the relocation

of some of Rover's activity to China, but each also proposed to keep part of the

production in the UK, specifically MG sports cars and high value saloons. SAIC planned

to relocate engine design and production to China while Nanjing would move Rover's

small- and medium-sized cars production lines. Rover was later sold to Nanjing

Automotive Corporation for an undisclosed sum.




2.3. Other Recent Chinese Foreign Mergers and Acquisitions

       Additional Chinese merger and acquisition (M&A) activities further illustrate the

trend of growing Chinese involvement in global FDI. These vary in size, form, and extent

of Chinese participation. These are typically smaller, but are diverse by activity and

country.

       By way of illustration, in 2004, Chinese TCL International Holding Ltd. (TCL)

bought a majority stake in French Thomson television and DVD business, and Schneider

Electronics (a bankrupt German television manufacturer,         8.2 million). TCL also

                                                                                       18
initiated a mobile telephone acquisition from Alcatel but this failed due to rising losses

and tough market conditions. In 2004, China National Bluestar launched an unsuccessful

bid to buy South Korean Ssangyong Motors (the value of the bid estimated at US$600

million). In February 2004, Shanghai Baosteel Group announced a US$1.4 billion joint-

venture steel mill in Brazil with Companhia Vale do Rio Doce. In October 2004,

Yanzhou Coal Mining Co. agreed to buy Australian Southland Coal Mine for US$23.4

million. Later, in December 2004, Huaneng Group (power producer) agreed to pay

US$226.9 million for half of OzGen (the Australian subsidiary of American InterGen).

        In March 2005, Beijing PetroChina Co. Ltd. and Enbridge Inc. announced a

planned partnership to build a new pipeline from Alberta's oil-sands to the Canadian

West Coast where the oil would be shipped to Chinese ports (valued at US$2-2.5 billion).

In May, Sinopec (China Petroleum & Chemical Corp.) paid CDN$150 million for a part

of another oil-sand project in Alberta.33 In April 2005, Harbin Measuring & Cutting Tool

Group bought a German measuring equipment manufacturer for                     9.5 million. In April

2005, CNOOC purchased a 17% stake in MEG Energy Corp. (CDN$150 million), a

Calgary, Alberta, energy firm with an oil-sands project. In June 2005, Huffy Corp. (a US

bicycle maker) covered its debts issuing new shares and offering them to its creditor –

Sinosure Group, who now possesses a 30% stake and has the option of acquiring a further

21% over the next five years.

        This list of Chinese FDI activities is by no means complete; the examples merely




33 The Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2005, accessed through http://www.post-gazette.com
                                                                                                 19
show that China is deepening its involvement in mergers and acquisitions abroad in many

fields and the value of transactions (either proposed or actual) is increasing.




                                                                                    20
3.    Systemic          Considerations               Prompted             by   China's

Buyouts

       Proposed or actual buyouts of OECD companies by Chinese SOEs and private

groups have inevitably prompted discussion outside of China of a suitable policy

response. It is acknowledged that competitive and open capital markets imply no special

issues should arise if purchasers of companies in the OECD are located in China as

against elsewhere. Alternatively, concerns over national security considerations,

subsidization, lack of transparency, combined with the absence of clear international

rules over cross border acquisitions has caused unease in the OECD.

       Concerns focus on alleged fairness of transactions (whether subsidization is

involved), the transparency of corporate organization and form on the buying side, and

alleged national security considerations. The first two concerns appear to be new to a

discussion of cross border acquisitions, and also seem far reaching in their implications.

The preoccupation with national security has arisen previously with acquisitions

originating from other countries outside of China, for example Japanese investments in

the US. These issues have also not been central to recent efforts to move towards

multilaterally negotiated international rules in the investment and competition policy (the

Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI) and WTO competition policy negotiations),

and neither are they covered by existing bilateral investment treaties.




                                                                                        21
3.1. Subsidization

        A central issue raised by recent Chinese buyouts, regardless of their outcome, is

that of subsidization of purchase; whether and how subsidies are involved, and whether

their presence justifies a policy response. This issue was recently raised by the Chief

Executive Officer of Chevron in connection with the CNOOC bid for Unocal, who in

turn suggested that there may be reasons to consider a WTO action in connection with

subsidization.34 The issue of subsidizing low- or no-interest loans made by China's

Central Bank to SOEs for foreign acquisitions is in question. WTO disciplines do not

apply as there are no issues raised by buyouts regarding barriers to goods trade35; the

issue instead concerns subsidization of cross border acquisitions, a matter not addressed

by WTO arrangements.

        Thus, if a central bank (in this case the Chinese Central Bank) makes low interest

loans to state owned enterprises for the acquisition of companies abroad there are no

internationally agreed disciplines restraining them. Such instances have not seemingly

arisen in the past since it is both the size of Chinese reserves and the closeness of the

Chinese state (through SOEs) to the Central Bank that has resulted in these loans. This

policy direction may thus appear sensible and logical to Chinese eyes, but to those versed

in international trade law, trade remedy, and subsidization, it raises the issue of whether

international disciplines should now be negotiated restraining their use in this way. The


34 CNN Money, Chevron Executive Calls for WTO Review of CNOOC Unocal Bid, July 1, 2005,
   http://money.cnn.com
35 This puts on one side, for now, limited elements of the WTO, such as Trade Related Investment
   Measures (TRIMs) which do discipline the ways in which approvals of cross border acquisitions can be
   related to trade performance.
                                                                                                    22
allegation is unfairness of acquisition activity, just as subsidization of production or

exports targets unfairness of trade which the WTO deals through disciplines in the GATT

1994.

        The obvious analogues are a ban on the use of export subsidies in Article 16 of

GATT 1994 (but with conditional use allowed in agriculture), and the allowed use of

countervailing duties only where both subsidization and injury are established by

domestic tribunal process (with constraints on transparency of process) under Article 6 of

GATT 1994.

        The WTO GATT ban on export subsidies on the goods side is usually rationalized

by the global efficiency considerations involved in removing distortions of trade,

including both those that restrain trade (tariffs) and those that promote trade (export

subsidies). An additional argument usually made is that the GATT negotiating process in

1947 was envisaged as converting all existing interventions in trade into tariff form,

thereby allowing tariffs as the sole negotiable instrument for bindings and tariff

reductions in subsequent negotiations. In the case of capital flows and foreign

acquisitions, similar global efficiency arguments follow given the equivalence between

goods and factor flows, but as no tariff equivalent (a single negotiable barrier instrument)

applies the second of these arguments appears less relevant.

        The analogous arguments to these used to justify countervailing duties as

measures to offset subsidization of goods flows seem more difficult to make in the

foreign acquisition case. Generalized arguments in favour of trade remedy laws often

centre on concerns over predatory pricing by foreign suppliers in domestic markets,
                                                                                23
acknowledgement of the seeming unfairness of preferential foreign suppliers treatment,

and arguments that without a trade remedy safety net in place domestic political

coalitions of home producers would be even less willing to accept the outcomes of

internationally agreed negotiations which lower tariff barriers.

       In discussing their application to subsidization of cross border acquisition, we

note that a preponderance of the arguments made in favour of trade remedy laws are

discounted by academic economists. Many argue the illogicality on national (as distinct

from narrower producer) interest grounds of limiting the opportunities available to buy

goods from abroad more cheaply if they are being dumped or subsidized into local

markets. They often dispute the presence of predatory pricing since new entrants would

return to domestic markets and undercut any foreign competitors if they attempted to

raise prices above competitive levels after engaging in pricing behaviour to drive out

domestic competition. Also, many dispute arguments applying notions of fairness to

pricing behaviour, arguing that fairness considerations more appropriately apply to the

evaluation of market outcomes on distributional grounds, such as who gains and who

loses in income or economic welfare, not to the setting of prices per se.

       Applied to cross border investment and acquisition issues, it is difficult to assert

arguments of predation since asset acquisitions are one time transactions. Indeed,

concerning national (and shareholder) interests, the argument would seem to be that

foreign subsidization of acquisitions is welcomed since domestic sellers of assets will

typically receive a higher price. Also, generalized arguments of fairness would receive a

similar treatment to those made on the goods side. And arguments about safety nets and
                                                                                        24
the political acceptability of negotiated liberalization affecting other instruments would

seem not to apply since liberalization of other instruments does not arise.

        In short, generalized arguments about fairness and subsidization of foreign

acquisitions of domestic firms will likely continue to be made as Chinese buyouts occur;

however, but these seem to apply largely to the management of acquired firms whose

managerial positions may suffer. While the subsidy issue could be a lead issue for a new

international negotiation covering global barriers to factors flows, in dealing with issues

of foreign acquisitions, new arguments rather than analogies to dumping and

subsidization of goods flows would seemingly need to surface.




3.2. Transparency

        A second issue at stake is the transparency of structure and organizational form of

the entities involved.36 The concern in the OECD is that many Chinese SOEs accrue

losses and do not comply with codes of corporate governance and transparency to which

OECD companies largely adhere. Acquiring firms may experience financial difficulties

causing later adjustment problems, and be motivated by politically appointed

management seeking non profit motives.

        Understanding in Western literature of how Chinese SOEs operate is not that well

developed and there are many diverse forms such enterprises take, with national,


36 And not the transparency of how asset transactions occur in these cases (such as any insider trading in
   stock purchase.
                                                                                                       25
provincial and municipal governments involved, and also joint ventures. Recently,

Whalley and Zhang (2005) have suggested a model of Chinese SOEs as entities with

politically appointed management whose losses are typically recapitalized by the banking

system and who often operate so as to maximize size rather than profit. This is largely

attributed to the personal networking benefits that accrue to management from size. As

such, a concern for OECD policy makers is the involvement of large viable OECD

companies with entities whose financial security is intertwined with domestic political

structure in China. The fear underscores possible bankruptcies, adjustment costs, and

disruption from shifting political tides in China.

       The precise form that ownership and corporate control over collectively-owned

and controlled enterprises in China takes is both complicated and puzzling. The

complexity of organizational forms that Chinese SOEs assume can make it difficult to

distinguish between a privately and publicly-owned company. Lenovo (the Chinese

computer manufacturer) who received much media attention with their successful

purchase of IBM's PC business serves as an example. Lenovo was originally established

in 1984 and then incorporated in Hong Kong four years later. As of 1994, it has been

listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and since 1995 it has also been trading in the

US through the American Depositary Receipt Level I Programme. These listing

arrangements can be taken to suggest that Lenovo is a privately-owned company.

However, the ownership structure of Lenovo's stock implies that a 42.5% controlling

stake is held by Legend Holdings who in turn are controlled by the Chinese Academy of

Natural Sciences (who own 65% of stock) which, in turn, assume further agency control

                                                                                     26
through its financing and appointment structure.37

        Recent literature on Chinese SOEs38 estimates that, as of 2001, of the 1,134 listed

companies in China, 61.4% are under local government control, 12.6% are under central

government control, 3.4% are collectively controlled and 12.8% are privately owned

(5.2% are unaccounted for).39 Privately-owned companies are still a minority among

listed companies, but their share is steadily growing. In 1999, according to Broadman

(2001), Chinese SOEs accounted for 63% of gross value added of all enterprises, and

70% of employment in the industrial sector.

        Hence, allowing large OECD entities to come under control of Chinese SOEs

which themselves are potentially financially insecure and opaque in management

structure and accountability raises OECD concerns. The policy issue at stake is whether

firms engaged in international acquisitions should also subjected to internationally agreed

standards of governance and accountability, much like listing requirements on the New

York and other stock exchanges. Many of the Chinese SOEs involved in these

transactions have no listing requirements to meet.

        An additional question is whether existing codes of conduct relating to corporate

governance provide sufficient resolution. The central code is represented by the OECD

Principles of Corporate Governance originally developed in 1998 and revised in 2004.

The principles aim to “assist OECD and non-OECD governments in their efforts to



37       Investor Fact Sheet available through www.pc.ibm.com/ww/lenovo/investor_factsheet.html
38 Bigsten, Liu and Zheng (2002), Cull and Xu (2000 and 2003).
39 Fan and Wang (2004) and Tan, Wang and Zhang (2005) cited in Liu (2005).
                                                                                                  27
evaluate and improve the legal, institutional and regulatory framework for corporate

governance in their countries, and to provide guidance and suggestions for stock

exchanges, investors, corporations, and other parties that have a role in the process of

developing good corporate governance”.40 These principles characterize transparency as

the timely and accurate disclosure of all information relating to a corporation, including

financial and operating results of companies (balance sheets, profit and loss statements,

cash flow statements), objectives, major share ownership and voting rights, the selection

process and remuneration policy of the board and key executives. It also includes any

foreseeable risk factors, the content of any internal corporate governance code and human

resources policies, and information on related party41 transactions that may impact the

performance of the company are all to be disclosed. Observance of these guidelines is

however at the discretion of national regulators.

        Most stock exchanges in the world adopt similar requirements for publicly listed

companies. Most are rigid and detailed, especially in relation to accounting statements

and audits. For instance, the London Stock Exchange requires at least three-year record

of independent revenue earning business and a normal, commercial based relationship

with any 30% or more shareholder such that the listed company is capable of operating

and making decisions independently of the shareholder at all times.42 Hong Kong Stock

Exchange requirements are at least HK$50 million profit in the last three years and



40 OECD (2004), OECD Principles of Corporate Governance available through www.oecd.org.
41 A related party is defined includes entities that control or are under common control with the company,
   significant shareholders, members of their families and key management personnel.
42 London Stock Exchange Listing Rules accessed through www.globalfinanceonline.com/london-stock-
   exchange-listing-rules.html.
                                                                                                       28
require that a company's accounts be prepared in accordance with Hong Kong or

International Financial Reporting Standards or generally accepted accounting principles

in the US.43 The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) listing standards require aggregate

three years pretax earnings of US$10 million as per domestic listing standards or US$100

million as per worldwide standards.44 NYSE rules also stress the importance of

independent directors and an audit committee. The issue is whether these requirements

and any additional standards should be set for foreign acquisitions by non-listed entities

in light of concerns over the Chinese buyout situation.




3.3. National Security

       Most countries exhibit laws and regulations that restrict foreign investments in

industries considered sensitive to national security or sovereignty. Some regulations

provide state authorities the right to review proposed foreign investment. Industries in

question usually include: telecommunications, air transport, public utilities, research,

production and trade in arms, ammunition, and explosives. Some countries also restrict

and review foreign investments due to their potential impact on public safety and health,

public order, national economy or fledgling national industries. Chinese buyouts

seemingly raise no particular security concerns.




43 Hong Kong Stock Exchange Basic Listing Requirements for Equities accessible through
   www.hkex.com.hk/issuer/listhk/equities.htm.
44 New      York      Stock        Exchange     Listing     Standards accessible through
   www.nyse.com/Frameset.html?displayPage=/listed/1022540125610.html.
                                                                                       29
        In the 1980s, similar concerns were raised over US acquisitions by Japanese

companies. As a result, in 1988 the American Congress approved the Exon-Florio

Provision of the Defence Production Act which gave the President the authority to block

any foreign acquisitions, mergers, or takeovers of American companies deemed

threatening to US national security. The legislation did not define national security

leaving this term to be broadly interpreted and administered by the Committee on Foreign

Investment in the United States (CFIUS).45

        The Exon-Florio provision, amended in 1993 (called the Byrd Amendment),

required that CFIUS investigate proposed foreign acquisitions if the acquiring company

was controlled by or acted on behalf of a foreign government.46 The considerations

which guide CFIUS include among others: how the potential foreign acquisition might

affect the technological leadership of the US in areas related to national security,

domestic production needed for national defence projects, capacity and capability of

domestic industries related to national security, and weapons sales to countries supporting

terrorism.

        CFIUS proceedings are confidential and official information on the reviews is

whitheld. According to Jackson (2005), CFIUS has investigated 25 cases out of 1,500

notifications. 13 transactions were withdrawn upon notice of a full CFIUS review, twelve

were sent to the President for final decision and only one was prohibited. The prohibited



45 Jackson J.K. (2005), The Exon-Florio National Security Test for Foreign Investments, Congressional
   Research Service Report for Congress, Order Code RS22197, July 15.
46 Department of Treasury, Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States, Exon-Florio
   Provision, http://www.treas.gov/offices/international-affairs/exon-florio/
                                                                                                  30
takeover involved Mamco Manufacturing Company (aerospace parts manufacturer) and

the China National Aero-Technology Import and Export Corporation (CATIC) who acted

as a purchasing agent for the Chinese Ministry of Defence. CATIC was ordered to sell

Mamco by President Reagan in 1990.

        National security concerns where a proposed foreign acquisition involves key

natural resources or technology with a military usage potential have been largely centred

on the US (rather than the EU) and have also largely attracted media attention in

connection with the recent wave of Chinese buyouts. Among the recent proposed Chinese

buyouts the key cases which generated national security concerns are Lenovo's IBM PC

takeover and CNOOC's unsuccessful bid for Unocal. The MinMetals potential bid for

Noranda in Canada generated a new requirement for government approval of foreign

acquisitions on national security grounds. The Lenovo case generated concerns over the

possible transfer of sensitive technology and possible corporate espionage issues and was

evaluated both by members of the CFIUS and the Departments of Justice and Homeland

Security.47 The transaction was subsequently reviewed positively by CFIUS and

approved as non-threatening to national security. A similar case was raised in 2003, when

the CFIUS refused to approve a merger of Global Crossing's telecommunications

business and the Hong Kong-based Hutchison-Whampoa on security grounds.48

        Concerns again arose over national security with CNOOC in connection with the


47 See Michael Singer, Security Objections to IBM-Lenovo Deal?, eSecurity, January 24, 2005,
   http://www.esecurityplanet.com/trends/article.php/3463471 accessed August 30, 2005
48 The Hutchinson-Whampoa bid was subsequently withdrawn and Global Crossing was then taken over
   by the Singapore Technologies Telemedia (STT). STT's offer did not raise national security concerns as
   Singapore was regarded as a US ally.
                                                                                                      31
threat to the national supply of oil and underwater terrain-mapping technology which

could be used for military purposes. Facing the investigation and strong political

opposition CNOOC withdrew its bid for Unocal.

        Similarly, concerns over national security were raised in Canada when MinMetals

negotiated Noranda's takeover but had more to do with the efficiency of the Canadian

economy and possible political pressure from the Chinese government versus an

immediate threat to the national resource supply.49




3.4. Multilateral Negotiations and Foreign Acquisitions

        It is relevant to any discussion of possible new initiatives in the global trade

negotiations (prompted by the Chinese buyout situation) to assess prior negotiating

efforts on investment and related foreign acquisitions to see if the central issues raised by

the Chinese situation have received attention.

        The first of these is the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI).50 The MAI

negotiations were launched at the Annual Meeting of the OECD Council at the

Ministerial level in May 1995 and expected to lead to a proposed international treaty

covering all aspects of investment. The key objectives were to establish a multilateral

framework for international investment with liberalization of investment regimes,


49 Anne Golden, Do Our Foreign Investment Laws Still Have Legs?, Globe and Mail, December 1, 2004,
   accessed through http://www.conferenceboard.ca/press/2005/OpEds/041201_FDI_Op-ed.asp, accessed
   August 30, 2005.
50 Unless otherwise specified, this section is based on MAI documentation available through OECD
   website http://www1.oecd.org/daf/mai
                                                                                               32
investment protection, effective dispute settlement procedures, and to enhance

international co-operation with respect to investment and the development of world-wide

rules on foreign direct investment.

       According to the draft text, government-owned or controlled entities were

considered investors along with other natural or legal persons (Part II, paragraph 1), and

no explicit objectives were stated for restraints of government actions towards cross

border acquisitions. The agreement was to be comprehensive, focused on all forms of

investment including enterprises and individuals, to apply to all sectors and to all levels

of government, and to centre on the key WTO principles of national treatment and non-

discrimination/most favoured nation (MFN). It was also intended to avoid conflict with

other multilateral agreements such as General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS),

Agreement on Trade Related Investment Measures (TRIMs), and Agreement on Trade

Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) under WTO.

       Issues of subsidization, transparency, and national security discussed here were

not raised in the draft text of the MAI. The 1998 Draft Agreement, however, contained

many provisions regarding the treatment of investors and investments, such as MFN,

national treatment, temporary entry and stay rules for investors and key personnel,

employment and performance requirements, rules covering monopolies, privatization,

and state enterprises, recognition and authorization procedures, clauses on intellectual

property, corporate practices, labour and environment, investment protection (including

expropriation and compensation, transfers, subrogation and others), dispute settlement

mechanism on state-state level and investor-state level, exceptions and safeguards,
                                                                                        33
financial services, and taxation.

       Transparency in the MAI was characterized as transparency of the rule regime and

did not cover transparency of actors involved in conducting investment. The exceptions

and safeguards section contained only general provisions on the protection of national

interests relating to times of war, production of arms and disclosure of sensitive

information. Subsidization of state-owned companies involved in overseas investment

was not explicitly discussed. Negotiations ended in December 1998 after conflicts

occurred within the OECD over national sovereignty and protection of national cultural

industries and opposition from civil society groups, Non-Governmental Organizations

(NGOs) and developing countries. In 2001, discussions on a MAI resumed in the WTO's

Working Group on the Relationship between Trade and Investment. A WTO agreement

was to only cover FDI excluding portfolio investment and other short term capital

flows51, and as of yet, no formal negotiations on a MAI have been launched in the

WTO.52

       Additional negotiations which are potentially related to issues covering Chinese

cross border acquisitions involves competition policy. Elements of competition policy

discussions can be found in various parts of the WTO including the GATT 1994, TRIPs

and the GATS.

       In 1980, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)



51 Singh (2001)
52 See for example: Hoekman and Saggi (1999), Singh (2001), Braunstein and Epstein (1999), Walter
   (2001), Kurtz (2002), Hoekman and Saggi (2000).
                                                                                              34
adopted a Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of

Restrictive Business Procedures; however, a full scale discussion of competition policy

and its relations to trade was not raised in the WTO until the mid-1990s. This occurred in

1996 at the Singapore Ministerial where a Working Group on Trade and Competition

Policy (WGTCP) was established to “study issues raised by Members relating to the

interaction between trade and competition policy, including anticompetitive practices in

order to identify any areas that may merit further consideration in the WTO

framework”.53 In contrast to the MAI, there have been no official negotiations on a

Multilateral Agreement on Competition Policy (MAC).54

        There were five pillars on which the case for MAC was first built in the WTO.55

The need to harmonize different national competition laws (especially in mergers review

procedures), promoting market access for imports, preventing abuse of anti-dumping

procedures, preventing abuse of intellectual property rights, and cross-border cartels.56

Subsequent discussions within the Working Group on Trade and Competition Policy

revealed a gap not only between the OECD and the developing countries on most of these

issues but also among the developed countries. Faced with a lack of consensus, the WTO

Working Group limited further discussion to: 'hard core' cartels, principles of non-




53 WT/MIN(96)/DEC
54 Bilal and Olarreaga (1998), Tarullo (2000), Woolcock (2003), Hoekman and Mavroidis (2003),
   Bhattacharjea (2004), Evenett (2005)
55 Bhattacharjea (2004).
56 The discussion involved the difficulty in the extraterritorial application of national competition policy
   laws in regards to damages caused by cross-border cartels in the domestic markets. A multilateral
   agreement on competition policy that would include anti-cartel laws was hoped to help in solving this
   problem.
                                                                                                        35
discrimination, transparency57 and procedural fairness, voluntary co-operation between

countries, and capacity building in developing countries.58 Again the issues of

subsidization, transparency and national security raised by the Chinese buyouts case did

not arise.




3.5. Bilateral Investment Treaties

        Independent of the multilateral negotiations on MAI and MAC, countries are

committed to further disciplines through bilateral investment treaties and the issue here is

how these relate to Chinese buyouts. The first Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) was

signed in 1959 between Germany and Pakistan, and since that time, the number of

concluded BITs has increased steadily. There are currently 2,392 BITs in existence

(about 30% of these have not been ratified and have not entered into force).59

        BITs usually typically cover scope and definition of investment, reciprocal

promotion and protection of investments, rules governing the establishment and

admission of investments, national and MFN treatment, expropriation and compensation,

transfer of funds and dispute settlement mechanism on both state-state and investor-state




57 WTO defines the concept of transparency as having two component parts: publication of the relevant
   regulations by governments and notification to the WTO.
58 WTO (2001), Declaration, Ministerial Conference, Doha, WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1, http://www.wto.org
59 UNCTAD (2005), Recent developments in international investment agreements Research Note August
   30, 2005, UNCTAD/WEB/ITE/IIT/2005/1. UNCTAD provides a comprehensive database of more than
   1,800 BITs' texts. See http://www.unctadxi.org/templates/DocSearch____779.aspx
                                                                                                  36
level60. They do not cover the key issues discussed here: subsidization, transparency of

actors involved in investment or national security issues.

        UNCTAD sources indicate that China has signed approx. to 120 BITs since the

first BIT concluded with Sweden in March 1982. With 69 BITs concluded between 1990

and 1999, China is currently ranked the second most common signatory country in the

world with Germany being the first.61 Most of China's BITs are with other developing

economies and about one third of these have not yet entered into force.




60 For a discussion of BITs see for example Peterson (2004), Neumayer (2004), Guzman (2004).
61 See www.unctad.org/iia
                                                                                               37
4. Concluding Remarks

        In light of recent Chinese proposed purchases of OECD companies, we argue

whether there should be globally negotiated rules covering cross border acquisitions,

perhaps similar to those governing international goods and services trade under WTO and

GATT.

        The recent growth of Chinese outward FDI is related not only to growing Chinese

foreign reserves due to trade surpluses and inward FDI, but also to recent changes in

official Chinese policy, now encouraging domestic companies to invest abroad. The

approval process for foreign investment has been simplified and companies (especially

state-owned enterprises) investing abroad in projects related to securing domestic energy

demand, acquiring advanced technology and new markets, are given credit support at

preferential interest rates.

        The recent, widely publicized, cases of Chinese buyout attempts of companies in

other countries suggest that the main motives for outward FDI are access to resources

(CNOOC, CNPC and Minmetals cases), new technology (Lenovo case) and distribution

networks in the target country (Lenovo, Haier and Nanjing cases). The Chinese bids we

document comprised mostly of cash (between US$1.3 billion and 17.5 billion with the

higher end offers being in the oil industry) and most are also based on low interest loans

from the Chinese state controlled banks.

        Subsidization of attempted foreign acquisitions may be argued as an unfair

business practice, but simple analogies between goods and factors flows seemingly do

                                                                                       38
not fully support the need for a new international negotiation covering global factor

flows. The issue of transparency of entities involved, especially the opaqueness and

financial insecurity of Chinese SOEs, raises concerns whether they are able to manage

the purchased businesses in such a way that it sustains the security and stability of local

workforce, avoids the disruption of local markets and does not fuel suspicion of

corruption. Whether they should be subjected to internationally agreed corporate

disclosure standards, comply with standard accountability requirements, and be the

subject of restraint where potential adjustment issues are posed by financial weakness are

issues. China's emergence as a global investor may serve not only as a catalyst for a

wider discussion covering not only cross border acquisitions, but also more broadly for

cross border flows of factors.

       The paper also highlights the discussion of Chinese buyouts and national security

concerns involving the transfer of sensitive technologies, efficiency of the economy in

the target country and finally the security of resource supply. These issues are most often

subject to domestic regulations including an approval process and are heavily dependent

on political reasoning.

        It can be argued that the Chinese FDI should not be treated differently that those

of any other country and that Chinese companies cannot be subject to any special rules

otherwise not applicable to other entities; however, the closeness of the Chinese

government and Chinese companies as well as financial structure of the Chinese

economy, prompt questions on fairness and transparency of transactions. Given China's

surging economic growth, trade surpluses, accumulation of foreign reserves, and changes
                                                                                        39
in the official policy stance one can expect growing involvement of Chinese companies

abroad. The Chinese buyout attempts can thus serve as a catalyst to a broader, systemic

discussion on global factor flows rules and policy response to governmental interventions

in cross border acquisitions.




                                                                                      40
5. References

1997. Joint NGO Statement on the Multilateral Agreement on Investment,
  www.protglob.hss.uts.edu.au/archive/issue1/lib7mai.htm
BBC News. 2004. Chinese may get Yukos oil stake, December 20. news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-
  /2/hi/business/4134769.stm
BBC News. 2005. China Calls for Calm on Oil Deal, June 28. newsvote.bbc.co.uk
BBC News. 2005. China's Haier out of Hoover Race, BBC News, July 20. news.bbc.co.uk
BBC News. 2005. CNPC Secures PetroKazakhstan Bid, October 26. http://news.bbc.co.uk
Berthélemy J-C., Démurger S. 2000. Foreign Direct Investment and Economic Growth:
   Theory and Application to China, Review of Development Economics, Vol. 4, No. 2,
   June.
Bhattacharjea A. 2004. Trade and Competition Policy, Indian Council for Research on
   International Economic Relations, Working Paper no. 146, November.
Bigsten A., Liu X., Zheng J. 2002. Efficiency, Technical Progress, and Best Practice in
   Chinese State Enterprises, China Economic Quarterly, vol. 1.
Bilal S., Olarreaga M. 1998. Competition Policy and the WTO: Is There a Need for a
   Multilateral Agreement?, European Institute of Public Administration, Working Paper
   no. 98/W/02, September.
Bloomberg. 2005. Lukoil Files in Stockholm to Stop Kazakh Venture Sale (Update 3),
   October 5. www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=10000080&sid=aoVIm7DNQB9k&refer=asia#
Braunstein E., Epstein G. 1999. Towards a New MAI, in J. Michie and J.G. Smith (eds.)
   Global Instability and World Economic Governance, NY: Routledge Press.
Broadman H.G. (2001), The Business(es) of the Chinese State, The World Economy, vol.
   24.
Burt J. 2005. IBM-Lenovo deal raises concerns, eWeek, January 31.
  www.eweek.com/print_article2/0,1217,a=143565,00.asp
Chinese Academy of International Trade and Economic Cooperation and Welsh
  Development Agency. 2005. Chinese Enterprises' Expansion Into European and North
  American Markets.
CNN Money. 2005. Chevron Executive Calls for WTO Review of CNOOC Unocal Bid,
  July 1. money.cnn.com
Cull R., Xu L.C. (2000), Bureaucrats, State Banks, and the Efficiency of Credit
  Allocation: The Experience of Chinese State Owned Enterprises, Journal of
  Comparative Economics, vol. 28.
Cull R., Xu L.C. (2003), Who Gets Credit? The Behavior Bureaucrats and State Banks in
  Allocating Credit to Chinese State Owned Enterprises, Journal of Development
       Economics, vol. 71.
Deng P. 2003. Foreign Investment by Multinationals from Emerging Countries: the Case
  of China, Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, vol. 10, no. 2.
Deng P. 2004. Outward Investment by Chinese MNCs: Motivations and Implications,
  Business Horizons 47/3, May-June.
Dow Jones Newswires. 2005. Chevron Executive Calls for WTO Review of CNOOC

                                                                                    41
  Unocal Bid, July 1. money.cnn.com
EIU ViewsWire. 2005. Kazakhstan Energy: Turning to the East, August 17.
  www.viewswire.com
Evenett S.J. 2005. What Can We Really Learn from the Competition Provisions of
  Preferential Trade Agreements? Mimeo.
Golden A. 2004. Do Our Foreign Investment Laws Still Have Legs?, Globe and Mail,
  December 1. www.conferenceboard.ca/press/2005/OpEds/041201_FDI_Op-ed.asp
Graham E.M., Wada E. 2001. Foreign Direct Investment in China: Effects on Growth and
  Economic Performance, Institute for International Economics.
Guzman A.T. 2004. Competing for Capital: The Diffusion of Bilateral Investment
  Treaties, 1960-2000, University of California, Berkeley, Boalt Working Paper in
  Public Law no. 124.
Hindu The. 2005. India Alleges Foul Play in PetroKazakhstan Bid, October 18.
  http://www.thehindu.com
Hoekman B., Mavroidis P.C. 2003. Economic Development, Competition Policy and the
   WTO, Journal of World Trade vol. 37, February.
Hoekman B., Saggi K. 1999. Multilateral Disciplines for Investment-Related Policies?
   Global Regionalism Conference, Insituto Affari Internazionali, Rome, February.
Hoekman B., Saggi K. 2000. Assessing the Case for Extending WTO Disciplines on
   Investment-Related Policies, Journal of Economic Integration, vol. 15, no. 4,
   December.
Hong E., Sun L. 2004. Go Overseas via Direct Investment: Internationalization Strategy
   of Chinese Corporations in a Comparative Prism, Centre for Financial and
   Management Studies, SOAS, University of London, January.
Jackson J.K. (2005), The Exon-Florio National Security Test for Foreign Investments,
   Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, Order Code RS22197, July 15.
Kanellos    M.    2004.    IBM     sells   PC      group    to    Lenovo,    News.com
  news.com.com/IBM+sells+PC+group+to+Lenovo/2100-1042_3-5482284.html
Kurtz J. 2002. A General Investment Agreement in the WTO? Lessons from Chapter 11
   of NAFTA and the OECD Multilateral Agreement on Investment, University of
   Pennsylvania, Journal of International Economic Law, vol. 23, no. 4, Winter.
Liu Q. 2005. Corporate Governance in China: Current Practices, Economic Effects, and
   Institutional Determinants, presented at CESifo Economic Studies Conference on
   Understanding the Chinese Economy, June.
Liu X., Burridge P., Sinclair P.J.N. 2002. Relationships Between Economic Growth,
   Foreign Direct Investment and Trade: Evidence from China, Applied Economics, vol.
   34, no. 11. July.
Lohr S. 2005. The Big Tug of War Over Unocal, The New York Times, July 6.
  www.nytimes.com
Lohr S. 2005b. Unocal Bid Opens Up New Issues of Security, The New York Times,
  July 13. www.nytimes.com
Mortished C. 2005. Yukos deal backed by $6bn loan from China, Times Online,
  February 2. business.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,17549-1466798,00.html
MSN Money. 2004. Brascan Corporation, Noranda and China Minmetals Enter Into
  Exclusive Negotiations, September 24. news.moneycentral.msn.com
                                                                           42
Mundell R.A. 1957. International Trade and Factor Mobility, American Economic
   Review, vol. 47, no. 3, June. Accessed through www.jstor.org
Neumayer E. 2004. Own Interest and Foreign Need: Are Bilateral Investment Treaty
   Programmes Similar to Aid Allocation? Mimeo.
Ng L.F.Y., Tuan C. 2001. FDI Promotion Policy in China: Governance and
   Effectiveness, The World Economy, vol. 24, iss. 8, August.
OECD 2004. OECD Principles of Corporate Governance. www.oecd.org.
People's Daily Online. 2004. CNPC Seeks to Resume Yukos Oil Shipments, September
   22. english.people.com.cn/200409/22/eng20040922_157934.html
Peterson L.E. 2004. Bilateral Investment Treaties and Development Policy-Making,
   International Institute for Sustainable Development, November.
PetroKazakhstan Inc. 2005. Press Release, PetroKazakhstan Announces Sale to CNPC
   International Ltd. For Approximately US$4.18 Billion, August 22.
   www.petrokazakhstan.com/news
Singer M. 2005. Security Objections to IBM-Lenovo Deal?, eSecurity, January 24.
   www.esecurityplanet.com/trends/article.php/3463471
Singh A. 2001. Foreign Direct Investment and International Agreements: a South
   Perspective, South Centre, Occasional Paper no. 6, October.
Sorkin A.R., O'Brien T.L. 2005. Whirlpool Makes Unsolicited Bid for Maytag, Creating
   3-Way Race, The New York Times, July 18. http://www.nytimes.com
State Development and Reform Commission, China Import and Export Bank. 2004.
   Notice on the policy of giving credit support to the state encouraged key overseas
   investment projects” accessed through http://wzs.ndrc.gov.cn/jwtz/cyzn/t20050714_35625.htm
Tarullo D.K. 2000. Norms and Institutions in Global Competition Policy, The American
   Journal of International Law, vol. 94, no. 3, July. Accessed through www.jstor.org
The Economist. 2005. Buttonwood, China Syndrome, June 28. http://economist.com
The Wall Street Journal. 2005. Canada Welcomes China's Resource Investment, July 15.
Tian X., Lin S., Lo V.I. 2004. Foreign Direct Investment and Economic Performance in
   Transition Economies: Evidence from China. Post - Communist Economies.
   Abingdon: vol.16, iss. 4, December
UNCTAD.         2003.      China:     an      Emerging       FDI       Outward       Investor,
   UNCTAD/PRESS/EB/2003/08, December.
UNCTAD. 2005. Recent Developments in International Investment Agreements.
   Research Note, UNCTAD/WEB/ITE/IIT/2005/1, August 30.
Vallianatos M. and others 1998. License to Loot: the MAI and How to Stop It,
   Washington DC: Friends of Earth.
Wall D. 1997. Outflows of Capital from China, OECD Development Centre, Working
   Paper no. 123, March.
Walter A. 2001. NGOs, Business and International Investment Rules: MAI, Seattle and
   Beyond. Global Governance vol. 7, no. 1.
Wang M.Y. 2003. The Motivations Behind China's Government-Initiated Industrial
   Investment Overseas, International Review of Asia and the Pacific, vol. 75, no. 2,
   Summer.
Whalley J., Zhang 2005. Modelling Behavioural Responses of SOEs to Trade

                                                                                           43
  Liberalization (mimeo)
Wong J., Chan S. 2003. China's Outward Direct Investment: Expanding Worldwide,
  China: an International Journal, vol. 1, iss. 2, September.
Woolcock S. 2003. International Competition Policy and the World Trade Organization,
  Paper prepared for the LSE Commonwealth Business Council Trade Forum in South
  Africa, accessed through www.lse.ac.uk
WTO. 1996. Declaration, Ministerial Conference, Singapore, WT/MIN(96)/DEC.
WTO. 2001. Declaration, Ministerial Conference, Doha, WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1.
Wu H.L., Chen C.H. 2001. An Assessment of outward Foreign Direct Investment from
  China's Transitional Economy, Europe-Asia Studies, vol. 53, no. 8, December.
  accessed through www.jstor.org
Yang D. 2003. Foreign Direct Investment from Developing Countries: a Case Study of
  China's Outward Investment, Centre for Strategic Economic Studies, Victoria
  University, Melbourne, September.
Young S., Huang C.H., McDermott M. 1996. Internationalization and Competitive
  Catch-up Processes: Case Study Evidence on Chinese Multinational Enterprises,
  Management International Review, vol. 36, iss. 4.



Internet Sources:
www.unctad.org/iia
www.unctadxi.org/templates/DocSearch____779.aspx
www1.oecd.org/daf/mai
www.globalfinanceonline.com/london-stock-exchange-listing-rules.html
www.hkex.com.hk/issuer/listhk/equities.htm.
www.nyse.com/Frameset.html?displayPage=/listed/1022540125610.html.
www.pc.ibm.com/ww/lenovo/investor_factsheet.html
http://news.sina.com.cn/c/2004-12-03/08404420072s.shtml
http://www.treas.gov/offices/international-affairs/exon-florio/




                                                                                 44
