NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENVIRONMENTAL INVESTMENT AND POLICY WITH
DISTORTIONARY TAXES AND ENDOGENOUS GROWTH
Don Fullerton
Seung-Rae Kim
Working Paper 12070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12070
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

We are grateful for financial support to the first author from Japan’s Economic and Social Research Institute
(ESRI), and to the second author from the Joseph L. Fisher Dissertation Fellowship of Resources for the
Future (RFF). We are also grateful for comments on earlier drafts from David Bradford, David Kendrick,
Sjak Smulders, Pete Wilcoxen, Rob Williams, and Anastasios Xepapadeas. This paper is part of the NBER’s
research program in Public Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Don Fullerton and Seung-Rae Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Environmental Investment and Policy with Distortionary Taxes and Endogenous Growth
Don Fullerton and Seung-Rae Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 12070
March 2006
JEL No. O41, Q20, H41, H23
ABSTRACT
Recent studies consider public R&D spending that affects abatement knowledge and endogenous
growth, distortionary taxes that affect physical and human capital formation, pollution taxes that
affect environmental degradation, and regeneration that restores natural capital. Our model combines
all of those elements. We show how the combination affects results from each prior model, focusing
on two parameters that represent the need for distorting taxes, and the productivity of abatement
knowledge relative to pollution. First, either of these two extensions can reverse the prior finding
that pollution tax revenue is more than enough to pay for public abatement R&D. Second, tax
distortions and externalities substantially alter prior findings that the ratio of public to private capital
is based only on output elasticities. Third, our dynamic model affects prior static findings about how
other public spending "crowds out" provision of the environmental public good. Fourth, we show
whether a greater need for public spending leads to greater increases in the distorting tax or pollution
tax. Fifth, while prior research is optimistic that environmental regulation can boost economic
growth, we show how it may increase or decrease the growth rate
Don Fullerton
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dfullert@eco.utexas.edu
Seung-Rae Kim
Korea Institute of Public Finance
79-6 Garak-Dong Songpa-Gu
Seoul, 138-774, Korea
srkim@kipf.re.kr

even if it raises welfare.

To ensure that economic growth and environmental preservation are compatible
and socially optimal, it is crucial to understand the simultaneous dynamic interactions
among public spending needs, distortionary taxes, pollution taxes, abatement R&D,
technological progress, pollution externalities, ecological regeneration, private
economic activities, welfare, and growth. How can environmental investment and tax
policies contribute to the productivity of private factors of production and to
sustainable economic growth? So far, existing research has used a number of different
models to address different questions that each focus on a particular interaction among
only some of the policies and outcomes just listed.
Existing endogenous growth models have physical capital, human capital, and
fixed inputs such as raw labor, but environmental models add other inputs supplied by
nature. Bovenberg and Smulders (1995, 1996) extend the model of Lucas (1988) by
incorporating two stocks that are “public” inputs to production: the environment and
abatement knowledge.1 They consider a pollution tax, but not other distorting taxes.
Bovenberg and de Mooij (1997) and Hettich (1998) consider both a pollution tax
and a distorting tax on private income, but not those two “public” capital stocks. The
former paper includes public infrastructure, and the latter has human capital, but
neither considers the dynamics of investment in abatement or environmental quality.
Yet these papers can ask what is the optimal tax mix, where the pollution tax affects
externalities on production and the income tax affects private capital formation.2 They
also ask whether a tightening of pollution standards can boost long run growth.
In this paper, we combine various elements from prior models to construct a
single endogenous growth model that we then use to answer more of their questions in
a way that is more complete and comparable than in prior papers. We show how the
added features of our model change and in some cases reverse previous answers. We
focus on five questions, first noting how prior papers address them.
1

Other models with nature as an input to production include Tahvonen and Kuuluvainen (1991),
Gradus and Smulders (1993), van Ewijk and van Wijnbergen (1995), Smulders and Gradus (1996),
Elbasha and Roe (1996), Mohtadi (1996), Xepapadeas (1997), and Bovenverg and de Mooij (1997).
2

An income tax distorts intertemporal choices. It leads in neoclassical growth models to a lower long
run level of income and in endogenous growth models to a lower long-run growth rate. See Rebelo
(1991), Rebelo and Stokey (1995), Jones et al (1993), and Jones and Manuelli (1997). Taxes on capital
income or total income reduce the rate of saving and growth, while taxes on labor income or
consumption have only level effects, not growth effects.

-1-

As in Bovenberg and Smulders (1995, 1996), our model has three assets: private
capital, accumulated either from physical investment or human capital formation;
abatement knowledge, accumulated from public R&D spending; and environmental
quality, modeled as a stock of a renewable resource that is depleted by pollution but
augmented by ecological regeneration. This natural capital stock provides a nonrival
public input to production and nonrival benefits in utility, so pollution has negative
external effects on both.

Firms choose inputs of physical capital and “effective

pollution”, which is the product of actual pollution and public abatement knowledge.
Thus, while some pollution is essential to production, it can be reduced either by
public spending on abatement or by public policies to control emissions.
We extend Bovenberg and Smulders in two important ways, summarized by two
additional parameters. First, we add a distortionary income tax that must be used to
pay for government transfer spending that is a fixed fraction of private income, ϕ.3
Second, we suppose that “effective pollution” is the product of abatement knowledge
and actual pollution taken to the exponent ε, a parameter that allows for differential
productivity of actual pollution relative to abatement knowledge.4 We show how
either of these two generalizations can reverse their conclusions.
We use all of these model features together to derive some results analytically,
and then to show seven nonlinear equations for seven important endogenous variables.
These equations cannot be used to find closed form solutions, and so we show some
other important results using numerical analysis for the case of global warming.
We are now in a position to describe the five major questions we address, the
findings of prior models, and how our extensions affect the answers.
(1) Are pollution tax revenues always enough to pay for optimal public spending
on abatement R&D? Bovenberg and Smulders (1995) say “yes,” using their model
described above with private capital, abatement knowledge, and natural capital. Here,
we show analytically that this conclusion can be reversed when a distorting income tax
is needed to pay for transfers (ϕ > 0). It can also be reversed if effective pollution is
3

Since Bovenberg and de Mooij (1997) and Hettich (1998) consider a both a distorting tax and a
pollution tax with endogenous growth, we note that relative to their models, we add two dynamic
considerations: abatement knowledge accumulates from R&D spending, while natural capital is
depleted by pollution and augmented by natural regeneration. We also address additional questions.

4

Bovenberg and de Mooij (1997) consider effective pollution as current abatement spending times
pollution to an exponent. We employ their idea but use the stock of abatement knowledge.

-2-

augmented more by abatement than by actual pollution (where pollution has exponent
ε < 1). With either generalization, pollution tax revenue may fall short of optimal
abatement spending, which then requires a higher distorting income tax.
(2) What is the optimal public capital relative to private capital? Barro (1990)
and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992, 1995) consider public “infrastructure” and find
that the answer is based on the ratio of pure output elasticities. This ratio is 0.315
using our parameters (where our public capital is “abatement knowledge” instead of
“infrastructure”).

Relative to their model we add tax distortions and pollution

externalities, and we find that the optimal ratio almost doubles (to 0.619).
(3) Is government’s provision of the environmental public good “crowded out”
by the need to provide non-environmental public goods? Metcalf (2003) and Gaube
(2005) ask this question in static models where a labor tax distorts labor supply, and
they show conditions under which increased non-environmental spending will raise
environmental quality. Relative to their models, we add the dynamics of endogenous
growth and a tax on capital income. In our numerical model, all increases in required
government spending necessitate increases to both the income tax and pollution tax,
both of which reduce output and pollution. The result is more natural capital.
(4) Does greater need for public revenue mean larger increases in the income tax
or pollution tax? This is not the well-researched “double dividend hypothesis”, which
is about tax reform. With endogenous growth, for example, Bovenberg and de Mooij
(1997) and Hettich (1998) show effects of a revenue-neutral reform to raise the
pollution tax and reduce the distorting tax. They look at non-optimal paths (since we
already know effects on welfare of a change from the optimum!). Here, we look not at
tax reforms but only at optimal growth paths. For all increases in required public
spending, we find that both tax rates rise. The income tax rises relatively more than
the pollution tax for initial increases in public spending, but subsequent spending hikes
lead to greater relative increases in the pollution tax.
(5) When does an environmental tax raise economic growth, or welfare, or both?
Environmental policy normally has costs in models with exogenous growth, but
Bovenberg and Smulders (1995, 1996) and Hettich (1998) show how it can boost
growth in models with endogenous growth. Here, we show how that optimistic view
must be tempered by either of our two generalizations. With sufficient need for

-3-

distortionary taxation (ϕ high enough) or with abatement more effective than actual
pollution (ε low enough), then a higher pollution tax may reduce growth even while it
raises welfare. We also show analytically the conditions under which it has the
opposite effects, raising growth but reducing welfare.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 sets up the model and
describes the balanced-growth equilibrium path.

Section 2 discusses optimal

corrective government policies in steady state, with some numerical applications, and
it examines growth and welfare effects of a tighter environmental policy in a secondbest world. Section 3 contains some concluding remarks.

1. The Model
This section presents a simple model with endogenous determination of
pollution and environmental quality as well as accumulation of private capital and
pollution abatement knowledge.

The economy produces a single final good.

Individual household utility depends on consumption of the final good and on the
quality of the environment. This environmental quality is a stock that acts as a
nonrival consumption good but also as a public input to production.
The economy has three assets. The first is private capital, including both
physical and human capital. The second is public abatement knowledge, a nonrival
R&D good. Either of these first two assets can be accumulated by devoting to it some
fraction of output.5 The third asset is environmental quality, also called natural capital.
It can be augmented only by reductions in pollution − either by reducing production or
by investing in public abatement knowledge.

1.1. Model Assumptions
As in Tahvonen and Kuuluvainen (1991), the renewable natural resource, N, is
“environmental quality,” modeled as growing and depleting according to:
N& = E ( N ) − P ,

where

E' ≡ ∂E/∂N ≶ 0

5

and

E" ≡ ∂2E/∂N2 < 0,

(1)

We also solved a two-sector model in which one sector produces final goods and the other produces
new abatement knowledge, but the extra sector adds complexity with no qualitative effect on results.

-4-

where a dot over any variable represents the change over time. Environmental quality
is augmented by E(N), ecological growth through regeneration processes, and it is
reduced by pollution, P, the extractive use of natural resources in production (e.g.,
using up clean air or water). As shown in Figure 1, regeneration E(N) might initially
increase with a larger N (that is, E' > 0), but it eventually peaks and declines (E' < 0)
as the environment approaches its natural state [where P=E(N)=0]. Thus, natural
capital accumulation features diminishing returns (E" < 0). On a sustainable steadystate path where N& = 0 , equation (1) implies that P = E(N). Thus, E(N) represents

the absorption capacity of the environment.6

Figure 1: Regeneration of the Environment
E(N), P

E(N)

P*

N*

N

Besides the nonrival stock of natural capital (N), the economy has a stock of
nonrival knowledge about abatement (H), and a private, rival stock of both physical

‘Sustainable development’ ( N& = 0 ) requires that pollution P is constant in the long run and does not
exceed the maximum absorption capacity. Due to the concavity of E(N), two levels of N may have
N& = 0 . One has low N with E' > 0, and the other has high N with E' < 0. With a constant level of
pollution P, only the latter equilibrium is stable, so this study focuses on that case. For more details,
see Neher (1990), Tahvonen and Kuuluvainen (1991), and Bovenberg and Smulders (1995, 1996).

6

-5-

and other human capital (K). Economic activity is described by a production function
and uses of output:
Y = A(N) F( K, Z ) = C + K& + δ K K + qH H& + qH δ H H ,
where

ε

Z ≡ HP.

(2a)
(2b)

Production depends on A(N), the positive ‘production externality’ from the natural
environment. Cleaner air or water may improve health and productivity of workers,
just as climate change may affect crop yields. Then F( ) exhibits constant returns
with respect to the two rival inputs (K and Z, discussed shortly).7 Production is nondecreasing in all arguments together. It exhibits diminishing returns with respect to
each factor alone, while all inputs are essential.8 Eq. (2a) also shows the overall
resource constraint of the economy. This single sector produces a flow of final output
that can be consumed (C), invested in new private capital ( K& ), used by government to
generate new public knowledge about pollution abatement techniques ( H& ), or used
for reinvestment to offset depreciation of the two man-made capital stocks ( δ K K +
qH δ H H ). Here, qH denotes the shadow price of abatement knowledge relative to

private capital (i.e., the price at which the output of R&D could be sold).
In eq. (2b), Z is “effective pollution,” an input that can be provided either by
actual pollution (P) or through the stock of available public abatement knowledge (H).
Thus, the same output can be achieved with less actual pollution if the firm has access
to more abatement knowledge.

The exponent ε denotes a pollution-conversion

parameter: a higher ε makes pollution more effective, or equivalently, makes
abatement relatively less effective.9

7

Basically, endogenous growth requires non-diminishing returns to the economy’s overall reproducible
resources as measured at the aggregate level.
8

Without loss of generality, the model ignores population growth. All variables can be interpreted as
expressed per ‘raw’ labor unit. Also, since we normalize the size of population to unity, individual
consumption represents aggregate consumption.
This pollution-conversion parameter (ε) reflects mainly country-specific production structure or
endowment conditions, and so we do not impose any prior restrictions on it. Indeed, we show how the
difference between the productivities of man-made input H and natural input P plays a crucial role in
determining optimal environmental and fiscal policy. The studies by Bovenberg and Smulders (1995,
1996) do not consider this possibility but just assume Z = HP and ε = 1.
9

-6-

1.2. The Decentralized Economy
In a decentralized economy with perfect competition, each identical and
spatially-homogeneous firm maximizes the firm’s value by its choices of investment
in private capital K and pollution P (ignoring the production externality from the
way P affects N). In equilibrium, all identical firms have the same pollution
emissions, which yields the economy-wide

N

(which could be measured as a

concentration level such as micrograms per cubic foot, µg / ft3).
We define r as the normal required return to capital, gross of tax and gross of
depreciation. This capital includes both physical and human capital, so rK includes
most income in the economy. Then pure profits can be defined as Π = Y – τPP – rK,
where τP denotes a tax on actual pollution (or price of pollution permits). This profit
may be attributed to some fixed, non-reproducible factor that is left implicit in the
model (such as raw labor). We ignore any tax on these pure profits, which would be
nondistortionary, and instead model a distortionary “income tax” τK on the normal
return to physical and human capital.
The value of a representative firm is the present value V of all future
∞
‘dividends’ D, where V = e− rt D(Y , K& , P)dt , and D (Y , K& , P) = Y − K& − τ P is a

∫0

P

stream of instantaneous dividends at each time t (consistent with Bovenberg and de
Mooij, 1997). These definitions imply D = Π + rK – K& , so these ‘dividends’ are not
just part of profits, like corporate dividends. The owners of the firm receive both pure
profits and normal income rK. Net of new investment, this flow is available for
consumption, and so the present value of this flow is what owners would maximize.
Firms set the marginal product of each private input equal to its price.10 Given
the total amount of natural capital, N, and public abatement knowledge, H, the
firm’s optimal allocation of inputs at any moment in time is governed by:

∂Y
∂F
= A( N )
=r
∂K
∂K

(3a)

∂Y
∂F
= A( N )
H ε Pε −1 = τ P .
∂P
∂Z

(3b)

10

In the absence of adjustment costs, the maximization of the present value (V) of future returns is
equivalent to the maximization of income in each period.

-7-

Thus, given available abatement techniques H, firms equate the marginal product of
pollution to the marginal cost of pollution.
The representative household utility or social welfare W is:
∞

W = ∫ e−θ tU (C , N )dt ,
0

where U (C , N ) =

(CN φ )1−1/ σ
1 − 1/ σ

∂U / ∂C > 0, ∂ 2U / ∂C 2 < 0, ∂U / ∂N ≥ 0 ,

(4a)

when σ ≠ 1; and = ln C + φ ln N when σ = 1. (4b)

In eq. (4a), consumption and environmental amenities contribute to utility, where θ is
the pure rate of time preference. Eq. (4b) is a specific instantaneous utility function,
where σ is the intertemporal substitution elasticity, and φ reflects environmental
preferences (or ‘consumption externality’ associated with the environment).11
Households own private capital, receive income from factor rentals (rK), and pay
tax at rate τK on it. Also, they earn profits and obtain lump-sum transfers (G) from
government. These income sources are used for consumption or for gross investment
in private capital. Hence, the household’s flow budget constraint is given by:
C + K& + δ K K = (1 − τK) r K + Π + G.

(4c)

The representative household chooses its consumption path and the allocation of
its private capital in order to maximize lifetime utility (4a) subject to its budget (4c),
taking tax rates as given.

Ignoring environmental quality in the individual’s

maximization problem, as it is a nonrival public good, this optimization yields the
modified Keynes-Ramsey rule (optimal savings rule) with the growth rate g:

θ −(

∂U&
∂C

)/

∂U
∂C

= (1 − τ K )r − δ K

or g ≡


1 N& 
= σ  (1 − τ K )r − θ − δ K + φ (1 − )  .
σ N
C

C&

11

(5)

Preferences must be restricted to ensure the optimum is a balanced-growth path. Growth is balanced
in the optimum only if the utility function has a special form like eq. (4b), as discussed in King et al.
(1988). This specification implies that the elasticity of marginal utility is constant [(∂2U/∂C2)C/(∂U/∂C)
= −1/σ], and that the share of amenities in utility is constant [(∂U/∂N)N/((∂U/∂C) C) = φ].

-8-

This equation represents the trade-off between consumption and investment, and
it reveals that postponement of consumption must be rewarded by a net return that
compensates for the pure rate of time preference and the change over time in the
marginal value of consumption (including the change in amenities).12
The government in our economy is assumed to raise revenues by adopting a
positive income tax rate, τ K , and a positive pollution tax, τ P .13 Tax revenues are used
to finance government expenditures on public investment ( qH H& + qH δ H H ) and lumpsum transfers to households (G). Further, we suppose that government fixes the ratio
of the lump-sum transfer payments relative to factor income, ϕ ≡ G / rK .

This

parameter is used below as a measure of the extent to which distorting taxes are
necessary. Assuming a balanced budget at any moment, the budget constraint of
government can be written as:

τ K rK + τ P P = qH H& + qH δ H H + G , or (dividing by rK),

(6a)

τK + τ P P / rK = ζ + ϕ ,

(6b)

where ζ ≡ ( qH H& + qH δ H H ) / rK is the ratio of gross public investment in abatement

knowledge to private capital income, and τ P P / rK represents the ratio of pollution
tax revenue to private factor income.14
In our model, the sustainable balanced-growth equilibrium path is characterized
as a path where environmental quality and pollution remain constant and all other
economic variables grow at a common endogenous growth rate g:
N& = P& = q& H = 0 ,

(7a)

Y& K& H& C& G& τ&P
= =
= = =
= g,
Y K H C G τP

(7b)

With sustainable balanced growth ( N& = 0 ), this equation simplifies to C& / C = σ [ (1 − τ K ) r − θ − δ K ] .
As is typical of endogenous growth models, we require some inequality constraints for the growth rate
to be positive [(1−τK) r −δK > θ ] and for utility to be bounded, which corresponds to the transversality
condition [θ − g (1−1/σ) = (1−τK) r −δK − g > 0].
12

13

In the long-run equilibrium, N and P are constant while K is growing. Therefore, on a balancedgrowth path, the marginal value of pollution, τP, must increase at the growth rate g. See below.
Below we define α ≡ (∂Y/∂Z)(Z/Y), the output elasticity with respect to Z. From the firm’s firstorder conditions, eqs. (3a) and (3b), the ratio of pollution tax revenue to private capital income is
τPP/rK = αε/(1- α), which is a constant in our economy.
14

-9-

where g depends on preferences, technology, ecology, and policy. Due to condition
(7b), the ratio between every pair of growing variables is also a constant. If ϕ is a
positive constant, then transfer payments G also grow at the common growth rate.
For balanced growth to be feasible and sustainable, the production function must
meet the following necessary conditions: (i) allocative variables such as C/Y or G/Y
are constant, (ii) the production function features constant returns with respect to the
growing man-made inputs K and H, and (iii) the output elasticities of inputs in the
production function remain constant over time, and their substitution elasticities are
smaller than or equal to unity.15
However, the nonrival nature of both abatement knowledge capital (H) and the
environmental quality (N) gives rise to externalities, so the decentralized solution in
this economy is not optimal. The next section explores policy rules that make the
decentralized economy move along the socially optimal path.

2. Policies for Sustainable Development
2.1. The Optimal Corrective Government Policies
For the market economy described above, a benevolent government can
intervene to ensure the optimal provision of the two public goods N and H. In this
case, where lump-sum taxation is not available, it is important to know how the public
investment in abatement knowledge is financed and what becomes of the taxes
collected. Government must take as given the decentralized optimizing behavior of
firms and households, eqs. (3) - (5), the ecological constraint, eq. (1), and government
budget constraint, eq. (6), while affecting the allocation of resources among the three
types of capital (K, H, and N) through its policy variables ( τ K , τ P , and H ). Then,
in this second-best world, it must act to satisfy the following arbitrage condition:
(1 − τ K )r − δ K =

1 ∂F ε q& H
1  ∂U ∂U
∂A  ∂E τ&P
,
A
P +
−δH = 
/
+F
+
+
qH ∂Z
qH
∂N  ∂N τ P
τ P  ∂N ∂C

15

(8)

For details on the necessary conditions for balanced endogenous growth, see Rebelo (1991),
Bovenberg and Smulders (1995), Smulders and Gradus (1996), Mino (1996), and Greiner and Hanusch
(1998) among others.

-10-

which says that investments in the three types of capital are traded off against each
other and also against household savings in eq. (5).16 The first equality in eq. (8) says
that the net return on private investments [ (1 − τ K )r − δ K ] should match the return on
investment in abatement knowledge (consisting of the current return in production and
a capital gain).17 The second equality says that environmental quality N should also
earn the same rate of return. The return on environmental quality in eq. (8) consists of
(i) its contribution to utility (the consumption externality), (ii) its contribution to total
factor productivity (the production externality), (iii) its contribution to ecological
processes (marginal absorption capacity), and (iv) a scarcity rent (capital gain).
The Hotelling rule states that if the natural resource is exhaustible, the rate of its
price increase ( τ&P / τ P ) should equal the rate of return on private capital. Hence, eq.
(8) can be interpreted as a generalized Hotelling rule for a renewable natural resource
with those nonrival benefits, in the presence of distortionary taxation.
Now, as is usual in this literature, assume Cobb-Douglas production technology
F ( K , Z ) = K 1−α Z α , where α ≡ (∂Y / ∂Z ) ⋅ Z / Y is the aggregate output elasticity with
respect to effective pollution Z (and hence also to abatement knowledge stock H).18
Also, posit a simple relationship A( N ) = N γ , where γ is a parameter that reflects the
extent of the production externality from the stock of natural capital.
16

The benevolent government can control accumulation of the three assets optimally. As in Bovenberg
and Smulders (1995, 1996), we denote by λK, λH, and λN the (current value) co-state variables
associated with private capital (K), abatement knowledge (H), and natural capital (N). Then, letting
λK (=∂U/∂C) be the numeraire, qH is the shadow price of abatement knowledge relative to private
capital (λH /λK), and τP is the shadow price of environmental quality relative to private capital (λN /λK).
From the first-order dynamic conditions for the optimal path, we then derive the canonical forms for H
ε
and N: λK A[∂F / ∂Z ]P − λH δ H = θλH − λ&H and ∂U / ∂N + λK F ∂A / ∂N + λN ∂E / ∂N = θλN − λ&N ,
respectively. Using the above associated definitions and comparing these canonical conditions with the
decentralized path in Section 1, we arrive at eq. (8): H and N should earn the same net rate of return
as K, which commonly corresponds to θ − λ&K / λK in eq. (5). That is, they must satisfy the
intertemporal arbitrage conditions governing the law of motion of the co-state variables.
The wedge between social and private returns on K (due to τK) leads to a shortfall of the balanced
growth rate compared to a first-best world. For similar optimality conditions with distortionary taxes
and public spending, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995, pp.152-7) or Glomm and Ravikumar (1999).
17

18

As usual, the Cobb-Douglas form is adopted here for balanced growth to be feasible, since K and H
grow at the same rate and, therefore, the output elasticities with respect to these inputs are “constant”
(see Bovenberg and Smulders, 1995, p.377; Rebelo, 1991, p.508). Due to the constant returns to scale
assumption for F( ), the aggregate output elasticity for private capital is 1−α. We also assume ε ≤ 1
so that profits are not negative (a condition analogous to one in Bovenberg and de Mooij, 1997, p.214).
This condition guarantees that the production function does not exhibit increasing returns with respect
to private inputs P and K. In this case, pollution P also decreases in τP ceteris paribus.

-11-

To investigate the optimal structure for fiscal policy, it’s interesting to explore
whether pollution tax revenues are enough to finance public R&D spending on new
abatement knowledge. Bovenberg and Smulders (1995, p.380) find that the ratio
qH H& / τ P P is equal to g/r, which must be less than one. Thus, pollution tax revenue
is always more than enough to pay for this R&D. In our model, on the equilibrium
balanced-growth path, we use eq. (3b) and the first equality of eq. (8) to show:19

qH H&  1  
g
=  

τ P P  ε   (1 − τ K )r − δ K + δ H 

(9a)

(which reduces to g/r in their case with no depreciation, no income tax, and ε = 1).
We add a distorting income tax, τK, which reduces the denominator and thus raises the
ratio of optimal public R&D spending to pollution tax revenues. If τK is large enough,
it could reverse the conclusion of Bovenberg and Smulders. Furthermore, we consider
the possibility that ε < 1, which means that abatement is relatively more effective,
equilibrium pollution is less, and thus again pollution tax revenue could fall short of
environmental R&D spending. The transversality condition implies g < (1−τK) r −δK,
or, utility is bounded. Thus the relative size of pollution tax revenue and R&D
expenditure is ambiguous in our model with the possibility that ε < 1. If ε is low
enough, in (9a), then it also could reverse Bovenberg and Smulders.
Thus, pollution tax revenue may not be enough to pay for public abatement
R&D, either because τK > 0 or ε < 1 (or both). In this case, the additional needed
revenue must come from raising τK above ϕ ≡ G/rK. Since τK =ϕ is just enough for
government to pay mandatory transfers G, the additional tax needed can be measured
by τK −ϕ, the extent to which τK exceeds the level necessary to pay for G:20

g +δH
 α 
−ε 

 1 − α   (1 − τ K )r − δ K + δ H


τK −ϕ = 

≶ 0

(9b)

All parameters on the right hand side of (9b) help determine whether pollution tax
revenue falls short of abatement spending in a way that requires more income tax.
On the equilibrium balanced-growth path, from eq. (7) we know q& = 0 and H& = gH . Then,
ε
plugging this into the first equality of eq. (8) and using A[ ∂F / ∂Z ] H ε P = τ P P from eq. (3b) yields
(1 − τ K ) r − δ K = (τ P P / q H H& )( g / ε ) − δ H .

19

H

20

Substituting eq. (9a) into eq. (6b) and using τPP/rK = αε/(1- α) and H& = gH yields eq. (9b).

-12-

Next, the long-run growth rate of all variables can be determined using eqs. (1) (8) above. To reformulate the whole dynamic system of the economy into a more
simplified framework, define three new “fundamental” variables that are constant on
the balanced-growth path: h ≡ H / K , c ≡ C / K , and τ ≡ τ P / K . Appendix A derives
conditions for the optimal balanced-growth equilibrium values (h*, c*, N*, τ*, g*, r*,
and τK*), governed by the government budget constraint in eq. (6), the dynamic
equilibrium conditions in eq. (7), and the inter-asset arbitrage conditions in eq. (8):21

h* = E ( N * )

1−αε

α

−γ

N* α

1

 τ * α


 αε 

( abatement knowledge)

(10a)

αε
 1

−(
+ τ K * − ϕ ) / h*  r * + δ H − δ K
c* = 
(consumption) (10b)
1 − α 1 − α

αε


*
−
−
+ τ K * − ϕ ) / h*  r * − σ (θ + δ K ) + δ H = 0
(1
)
(
σ
τ
( savings − investment ) (10c)
K

1−α



φ
1
γ
α (1 − ε )
− ϕ )  r* + (1 −
)c* − E ′( N * ) = 0 ( natural capital ) (10d)
−
− * *
*
*
1−α
 τ N 1−α

τ N
g * = σ (1 − τ K * )r * − θ − δ K 
r* =

1−α

αε

( growth rate)

τ *E( N * )

 α  * δH −δK
.
/h +
r*
 1−α 

τ K* = 1− 

(10e)

( production efficiency )

(10f)

(tax efficiency )

(10g)

Note that eqs. (10) represent seven equations in seven unknowns (h*, c*, N*, τ*,
g*, r*, and τK*). They are not linear in those unknowns, however, and so closed-form
solutions are not available. Instead, we first offer interpretations and discussion of
how these equations can be used to characterize optimal policy instruments, and
second, we later provide numerical solutions.
Eqs. (10a) and (10b) determine the optimal equilibrium abatement knowledge (h
≡ H/K) and consumption (c ≡ C/K) relative to private capital. With a wedge between
the private and social returns to private capital, eq. (10c) uses the modified KeynesRamsey rule describing the optimal savings-investment path for private capital. Then
eq. (10d) shows the socially-optimal choice for natural capital (N), where the marginal
21

Without loss of generality, we now assume that qH is normalized to unity in the steady-state.

-13-

benefit equals its marginal cost. From eq. (5) and eq. (7), note that eq. (10e) allows us
to solve for the equilibrium growth rate g as one of the endogenous variables of the
system. Then eq. (10f) shows the equilibrium gross-of-tax return to private capital,
determined by the product of the pollution tax relative to private capital ( τ ≡ τ P / K )
times the absorption capacity of the environment (P=E(N)) along the balanced-growth
path. Finally, eq. (10g) determines τK using the arbitrage condition between private
capital and abatement knowledge capital. Social optimality requires that government
set the levels of corrective policy instruments, τ and τK, according to eqs. (10).
The growth rate g* is not just from eq. (10e), because the other endogenous
variables in that equation depend on all parameters in the entire system. Thus, the
optimal long-run equilibrium growth path of the economy depends critically not just
on the intertemporal substitution elasticity (σ) and the pure rate of time preference (θ),
but also on the necessary income tax distortion (ϕ ≡ G / rK ), the environmental
preference parameter (φ), the environmental production externality parameter (γ), the
production elasticity of abatement knowledge (α), the pollution-conversion parameter
(ε), the depreciation rates for man-made capitals (δK and δH), and the ecological
components behind the absorption capacity function E(N).
In particular, eqs. (10b-d) reveal that the extent to which government spending
requires distortionary taxation, ϕ, has critical effects on the optimal configurations of
the corrective policy instruments (τK*, h*, and τ*). That is, the levels of the optimal
corrective government polices must be quite different from those in the Bovenberg
and Smulders (1995, 1996) first-best world where ϕ = 0.
How exactly does the need for more distortionary revenue (ϕ) affect the optimal
use of pollution tax (τP) relative to income tax (τK)? To see directly how the key
parameters affect the second-best optimal government policy rules, we would need
closed-form solutions for the system of seven equations with seven unknowns. With
no explicit analytical solutions, however, we next proceed numerically. We select
initial parameter values that roughly reflect the case of global warming, and then we
alter each key parameter to conduct a numerical sensitivity analysis.22

22

These simulations were performed using the GAMS/MINOS5 algorithm (Brooke et al., 1992).

-14-

2.2. A Numerical Simulation for the Case of Global Warming
In choosing “central” parameter values, we rely primarily on values that are
frequently used in the relevant literature. The parameters chosen from Barro and Salai-Martin (1995) and Bovenverg and Smulders (1995, 1996) are: α = 0.24, σ = 0.67,

δK = 0.08, δH = 0.05, and θ = 0.03. The absorption capacity function E(N) is
specified by the form β N (1 − N ) , where N ∈ (0.5, 1), and the embedded ecological
parameter β is chosen as 0.04 from Nordhaus (1994, Chapter 3) to ensure a steady
state with positive ratios (e.g., C/Y).23 The parameter ϕ is set to 0.25, to account for
the revenue required for non-productive government spending (transfer payments).
Remaining parameters are chosen so that the model can reproduce plausible growth
rates for the U.S. economy. The central values for those variables are chosen as γ =
0.77, φ = 0.70, and ε = 0.75, but each is also varied to test the sensitivity of results.
In Table 1, Row A uses those “central” parameter values and shows the outcome
for optimal policy rates in the normalized U.S. economy. On the balanced-growth
equilibrium path, the value of τ ≡ τP/K is the ratio of two growing variables and is
14.50 for this normalized economy (calibrated to the US). The optimal environmental
investment ratio H/K is 0.619 in this table. From a similar model in Barro (1990), we
might infer that this ratio should be α /(1 − α ) , based on the ‘pure’ output elasticity, a
ratio that is only 0.315 using our parameters.24 Note, however, that Barro’s conjecture
ignores distortionary taxation and environmental externalities. As shown below, our
model with no tax distortions yields H/K = 0.401, much closer to Barro’s 0.315. The
remaining difference reflects a “premium for environmental sustainability” (the social
value of environmental quality attributable to φ and γ). This premium disappears as
both of these externality parameters approach zero.25

23

For the case of global warming, we define environmental quality N as the difference between the
catastrophic stock level of GHG concentration ( S ) and its current accumulation level ( S = ∫ t∞ Pt dt ).
The carrying capacity is normalized to unity. The economy here is also assumed to be above the point
of maximum sustainable yield (which occurs at N =0.5).
−

24

In his simple model with public investment and endogenous growth, Barro does not consider the
environment or abatement R&D exactly. But our H corresponds to his production function input of
government-provided nonrival public services, such as from infrastructure.
Start with our central case, but where ϕ = 0.00 and ε = 1.00. Then, as the externalities φ and γ
approach zero, we find that H/K approaches 0.315, and the sustainability premium disappears.
25

-15-

Table 1. Sensitivity of Optimal Steady-State Values to Key Parameters

A. Central case
B. General parameters
1. Intertemporal substitution (σ)
a. Low (0.33)
b. Central case (0.67)
c. High (0.90)
2. Time preference rate (θ)
a. Lowered 20 percent (0.024)
b. Central case (0.03)
c. Raised 20 percent (0.036)
3. Other Government Spending (ϕ)
a. No transfers (0.0)
b. Central case (0.25)
c. High transfers (0.35)
C. Environment-related parameters
1. Environmental preference (φ)
a. Low concern (0.3)
b. Central case (0.7)
c. High concern (1.5)
2. Environmental productivity (γ)
a. Low externality (0.3)
b. Central case (0.77)
c. High externality (1.2)
3. Ecological capacity factor (β)
a. Lowered 20 percent (0.032)
b. Central case (0.04)
c. Raised 20 percent (0.048)
4. Pollution-conversion factor (ε)
a. Lowered 20 percent (0.6)
b. Central case (0.75)
c. Raised 20 percent (0.9)

τ

τK

N

H/K

C/K

g

14.50

0.358

0.898

0.619

0.064

0.0238

6.79
14.50
17.70

0.235
0.358
0.377

0.751
0.898
0.917

0.505
0.619
0.645

0.110
0.064
0.057

0.0178
0.0238
0.0212

16.97
14.50
13.17

0.372
0.358
0.345

0.913
0.898
0.884

0.638
0.619
0.604

0.059
0.064
0.069

0.0242
0.0238
0.0225

8.63
14.50
22.64

0.068
0.358
0.502

0.827
0.898
0.934

0.401
0.619
0.854

0.022
0.064
0.086

0.0554
0.0238
0.0047

12.90
14.50
16.38

0.355
0.358
0.360

0.880
0.898
0.911

0.615
0.619
0.623

0.066
0.064
0.062

0.0248
0.0238
0.0225

11.08
14.50
20.12

0.340
0.358
0.373

0.843
0.898
0.932

0.586
0.619
0.647

0.077
0.064
0.056

0.0351
0.0238
0.0162

21.84
14.50
11.32

0.371
0.358
0.349

0.921
0.898
0.883

0.644
0.619
0.604

0.057
0.064
0.069

0.0169
0.0238
0.0284

14.07
14.50
15.04

0.364
0.358
0.352

0.893
0.898
0.901

0.615
0.619
0.624

0.076
0.064
0.053

0.0295
0.0238
0.0181

We now turn to sensitivity analysis. In panel B of Table 1 we consider the usual
non-environmental parameters, just to confirm that results from our model are
consistent with those of previous models. As seen in rows B1a to B1c, a society with
a higher intertemporal substitution elasticity (σ) optimally invests more in productive
assets, since it is flexible enough to put off consumption to a later date. Thus K rises,
and C/K falls. To invest more in other assets like abatement knowledge (H) and
improved environmental quality (N), the government raises its R&D and its pollution
levy (τ). In the case of extremely low σ, the income tax could fall below the rate
needed to pay for lump-sum transfers (τK < ϕ = 0.25). Then the pollution tax can pay
for all abatement R&D and still help finance transfers.

-16-

Next, rows B2a to B2c show that an increase in the pure rate of time preference
(θ) reduces optimum steady-state investment in knowledge (H),

environmental

quality (N), and private capital. The lower K raises C/K. An impatient society
invests less in productive assets, thereby leading to a lower long-run growth rate.
Required other government spending, ϕ, is a non-environmental parameter with
important implications for environmental policy. Using static second-best models with
labor taxes, Metcalf (2003) and Gaube (2005) ask if increases in other public goods
crowd out provision of the environmental public good. Because more public spending
leads to higher labor taxes and pollution taxes, they find that it can improve the
environment.26 Our results are consistent with these studies of environmental taxation
in second-best, but we extend the model to a dynamic setting. Rows B3a to B3c
indicate that an increase in ϕ (from 0.0 to 0.35) raises optimal values of both the tax
on capital income and the tax on pollution. It lowers the optimal long-run growth rate
g (from .0554 to .0047), but it improves the environment N (from .827 to .934).27
In our dynamic model, higher public spending raises both tax rates and thus has
two effects that both increase environmental quality. First, the higher τP reduces
pollution directly. Second, the higher τK makes the accumulation of private capital
more costly relative to other types of capital such as abatement knowledge or natural
capital. The government increases abatement knowledge by its R&D spending, which
also improves the environment. These increases in taxes on pollution and income lead
to better environmental quality but a lower stock of private capital, and to a higher
ratio of consumption to private capital (due to both increased transfer payments and
decreased private capital). Which tax rate increases relatively more? Initial increases
in ϕ (from 0.0 to 0.25) raise τK

proportionately more than τ, while further

increases (to 0.35) raise τ more than τK.

26

Metcalf (2003) looks at a marginal change in spending that requires more distortionary tax, whereas
Gaube (2005) finds that environmental quality is higher in second best with distorting taxes than in first
best with a lump sum tax (provided that marginal revenue from the pollution tax is positive).
27

To facilitate a direct comparison to the model of Bovenberg and Smulders (1995), we also calculate
results for their first-best case where lump-sum taxes are available (that is, our central case but with τK
= 0, ϕ = 0, and ε = 1). Compared to our central case, the pollution tax is lower (τ = 9.42) and
environmental quality is lower (N = 0.851). Again, distortionary taxation is good for the environment,
even if it is not necessarily good for growth or welfare.

-17-

We now vary parameters that specifically relate to the environment.

If

consumers care more about the environment (as φ increases from 0.3 to 1.5 in rows
C1a to C1c), then the optimal abatement knowledge intensity of production (H/K) and
natural capital stock (N) both increase at the expense of consumption. The same
outcomes occur with an increase in γ, the productivity of the environment (rising
from 0.3 to 1.2 in rows C2a to C2c). The higher φ or γ calls for more ambitious
environmental policy and slower economic growth in the optimum steady-state.
A higher ecological parameter, β, raises marginal absorption capacity through
the assumption that E ( N ) = β N (1 − N ). It thus affects how the economy and the
environment interact. The results in rows C3a to C3c indicate that an increased β
(from 0.032 to 0.048) makes it easier for the economy to pollute without depleting
natural capital, and thus to achieve a higher sustainable growth rate (from 0.0169 to
0.0284) with less stringent environmental and tax policies (τ decreases from 21.84 to
11.32, while τK falls from 0.371 to 0.349).
Finally, consider our added pollution-conversion parameter, ε. Higher ε makes
pollution more effective, so firms want to use more pollution. As shown in rows C4a
to C4c, the government responds optimally with a higher pollution tax (τ), more
abatement (H/K), and better environment (N), all at the expense of consumption and
growth.28 As implied by eq. (9b), however, an increase in ε (from 0.6 to 0.9) leads to
a decrease in τK (from 0.364 to 0.352). The important result here is how the welfare
maximizing ‘mix’ of environmental and capital taxes depends on this parameter. For
a given pollution tax rate, a higher ε makes pollution more productive and raises the
pollution tax base (αεY). Since the pollution tax becomes a more efficient instrument
to raise revenue, the optimal τ is higher and τK is lower. Thus, ε plays a critical role
when integrating environmental taxes with distortionary income taxes.

2.3. Growth and Welfare Implications of Tighter Environmental Policies
How are growth and welfare affected by a tighter environmental policy in the
presence of externalities and distortionary taxation? Early models with exogenous

28

Conversely, relative to Bovenberg and Smulders (1995) with ε = 1, our central case with ε = 0.75
implies that abatement R&D is relatively more effective, so government doesn’t need to provide as
much of it. The optimal τ and N are lower, but consumption and growth are higher.

-18-

technological progress found that pollution control raises abatement costs and thus
hurts short-run growth (and long-run levels).29 Later models with endogenous growth
allow environmental policy to have permanent effects on the growth rate, even in the
long-run (e.g., Bovenberg and Smulders, 1996; Hettich, 1998). If pollution taxes are
sub-optimally low, for example, then pollution is excessive. Natural capital is then
under-accumulated, which affects production.
That recent endogenous growth literature has argued that a tighter environmental
policy can have positive effects on growth in the long-run. In this section, however,
we show that this view may be too optimistic. With our introduction of distortionary
taxes and ε ≠ 1, we show how a higher pollution tax may reduce growth, even if it
does maximize welfare. To see this, suppose our economy is on the optimal balanced
growth path, so dW/dτ = 0. We then derive an expression for dg/dτ and show that
the sign could be positive or negative, so that a tighter pollution policy might still raise
or lower growth. That is, maximizing welfare is not the same as maximizing growth.
To investigate the growth effects of tighter environmental policy, substitute eq.
(10f) into (10e) and totally differentiate g with respect to τ. The long-run growth
rate then reacts to changes in pollution taxation as:
dg
 dτ
= −σ  K
dτ
 dτ

1−α

E ( N ) (1 − η ENη Nτ ) ,
 r + σ (1 − τ K )
αε


(11)

where η EN ( ≡ −(dE / dN )( N / E ) ) is the elasticity of the absorption capacity of the
environment with respect to natural capital, and η Nτ ( ≡ (dN / dτ )(τ / N ) ) is the
elasticity of natural capital with respect to the pollution tax.30
The first term on the right-hand side in eq. (11) represents the marginal ‘taxreplacement effect’. On the normal side of the Laffer curve, raising the pollution tax
rate can mean a lower capital tax (dτK/dτ < 0). Since r and σ are positive, the
whole first term is positive. Thus, substitution of environmental taxes for income
taxes ceteris paribus stimulates economic growth through less taxation of capital. The
second term reflects the ‘productivity effect’ of a higher τ. In this model, a tighter
29

Among others, see Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1990), Nordhaus (1994), and Goulder (1995).

The elasticity η EN is not constant along E(N), and it depends critically on the shape of that curve, but
note that ∂E / ∂N < 0 from our assumption of dynamically stable equilibrium (as in footnote 6 above).

30

-19-

environmental policy is sure to stimulate growth as long as it has a positive
productivity effect. Each component is known to be positive except for the last
component: if ηEN ·ηNτ > 1, then the whole second term is negative, and it could
swamp the first term such that a higher τ reduces growth.
Yet eq. (11) holds only at the optimum. Therefore, we now show more generally
that environmental policy can have opposite effects on growth and welfare. Consider
a balanced path that may not be optimal (ignoring transitional dynamics).31 In
Appendix B, we derive the following general relationship:
φ
dW K (0) ( C(0) N )
=
dτ
θ − g (1 −1/ σ )

−1/ σ

∂W dg
 1−α
 α (1 − ε )

E( N ) N φ 
+ ϕ  [1 + (φ −ηEN )ηNτ ] +
, (12)

∂g dτ
 αε
 1 − α


where K(0) is the initial capital stock, and C(0) is initial consumption.
The long first term of eq. (12) has several parts, but the component
[α(1−ε)/(1−α) + φ] is zero in the special case of the previous literature where ε = 1
and φ = 0. In this case, then, the whole long first term is zero. In the second term,
Appendix B shows that ∂W/∂g is positive, which means that the effect of a tax
change on welfare on the left hand side, dW/dτ, always has the same sign as the effect
on growth, dg/dτ (for a formal proof, see Greiner and Hanusch, 1998, p.258). In
other words, while Bovenberg and Smulders (1996) do consider transitional dynamics,
their model with no transitional dynamics would imply that maximizing growth
always means maximizing welfare, and vice versa.
More generally, the total effect depends on the sign of the long first term in (12).
With the assumption that [θ − g(1−1/σ)] > 0, the first ratio is positive. Suppose also,
for the moment, that [1+ (φ − η EN )η Nτ ] > 0. Then the whole long first term is positive
with either of the generalizations allowed in this paper, namely ε < 1 or ϕ > 0.
This case is shown in Figure 2a. At the growth-maximizing tax rate where
dg/dτ = 0, the positive first term in (12) means that dW/dτ is positive – and the curve
for W is still rising. In other words, if government spending requires distortionary
taxation, then pollution taxes negatively affect growth, even at the welfare optimum.
31

For analytical tractability, we ignore transitional dynamics off the balanced growth path. As shown
by Futagami and Mino (1995), transitional dynamics also mean that a policy may have opposite effects
on growth and welfare. The advantage of limiting the analysis to balanced growth paths is that we can
show analytically how these two targets may have different responses to a tighter environmental policy
in the long run. For a similar analysis on income taxation, see Greiner and Hanusch (1998).

-20-

Figure 2: Optimal Environmental Policy
g, W

W
g

τ

τ(gmax) τ(Wmax)
(a) τ(gmax) is less than τ(Wmax)
g, W

W
g

τ

τ(Wmax) τ(gmax)
(b) τ(gmax) is greater than τ(Wmax)

Figure 2b shows the opposite case where the long first term in (12) is negative.
This case could arise, for example, if ϕ = G/rK is negative, meaning that government
collects a lump sum tax.32 It could also arise if the last component of the long first
term is negative, that is, if [1+ (φ − η EN )η Nτ ] < 0. This possibility would require that
the environmental preference φ is small relative to the absorption elasticity η EN .
Still, the long first term in (12) would have to be sufficiently negative to swamp the
partial effect in the last term to see the case in Figure 2b where an increase in τ could
increase growth while reducing welfare.
In general, maximizing growth is not equivalent to maximizing welfare, and the
first term in eq. (12) reveals the difference.
32

The key parameters affecting this

A lower bound on ϕ is given by the condition that private consumption is positive.

-21-

difference are the size of tax distortions (ϕ), the productivity of pollution (ε), the
environmental externality in utility ( φ ), plus the elasticities ηEN and ηNτ . At the
growth-maximizing policy where dg/dτ = 0, welfare still increases with τ if the first
term is positive (due to ε < 1, ϕ > 0, or both).

Using our central case parameters

where ε = 0.75 and ϕ = 0.25, we find that the growth maximizing pollution tax is
10.20, much less than the welfare maximizing rate of 14.50.

3. Conclusions
This paper develops a model of endogenous growth, distortionary taxation, and
environmental quality. We incorporate private capital accumulation, abatement
knowledge as a productive asset, and the natural environment as a renewable resource.
These three assets evolve by the endogenous flows of private savings or human capital
formation, public R&D investment, pollution, and ecological regeneration. Each of
these features has appeared before, but we describe how results from our combined
model differ from results of each prior model. In particular, we focus on parameters
representing public spending that requires distorting taxes (ϕ) and the productivity of
abatement knowledge relative to pollution (ε).
Our model does not include all possible features, however, and so future research
could consider other extensions as well. First, we look only at long run balanced
growth paths, whereas results might differ during transitions from one path to another
(Bovenberg and Smulders, 1996). Second, we add a distorting income tax, but results
might differ for other distorting taxes on consumption or wages (Hettich, 1998).
Third, we consider public abatement spending, but the government could also or
instead provide incentives for private abatement R&D (Smulders and Gradus, 1996).
Still, using our model, we provide new answers to five primary questions. First,
while prior research finds that pollution tax revenues are always enough to pay for
optimal public spending on abatement, our extensions can reverse that conclusion.
Second, while prior research finds that the optimal public capital relative to private
capital depends on output elasticities, we show how the addition of tax distortions and
externalities substantially change that answer. Third, while prior static models ask
whether other public goods “crowd out” provision of the environmental public good,
we address this question in a dynamic model. Fourth, we ask whether greater need for
-22-

public revenue means larger increases in the distorting income tax or in the pollution
tax. Initial increases in the income tax are larger, but we find that further public
spending implies larger relative increases in the pollution tax. Fifth, while others find
that a higher pollution tax can raise economic growth, we look near the welfare
maximum and find that a higher pollution tax might raise or lower growth.

Appendix A: The Equilibrium Dynamics of the Economy
From eqs. (3), (4), and (6), the growth rates of the two man-made capital stocks
are then: H& / H = [αε /(1 − α ) + τ K − ϕ ]rK / H − δ H and K& / K = [1/(1 − α ) − (αε /(1 − α ) + τ K
−ϕ )]r − C / K − δ K . Using eq. (8), the growth rate of τP is: τ&P / τ P = −(τ P N / K ) −1
[φ C / K + γ /(1 − α ) r ] − ∂E ( N ) / ∂N + (1 − τ K ) r − δ K . Then, using the definition of the
three new “fundamental” variables (i.e., h ≡ H / K, c ≡ C / K, and τ ≡ τP / K) that are
constant along the balanced-growth path, we can reformulate the whole (transitional)
dynamic system of the economy in terms of h, c, N, τ and qH as:
h&

H&

K&

1 
 αε
+ τ K − ϕ )(1 + 1/ h) −
 r + c + δK − δH
h
H K
1−α 
 1−α
c& C& K&
αε
1 

(≡ − ) =  σ (1 − τ K ) + (
+τ K −ϕ) −
 r + c − σ (θ + δ K ) + δ H
c C K
1−α
1−α 

(≡

−

) = (

+ φ (σ − 1)

E( N ) − P

( A.1)

( A.2)

N

N& = E ( N ) − P

( A.3)

1
τ& τ&P K&
αε
φ
∂E ( N )
 1 γ

(≡
− ) = −
+1−
+(
− ϕ )  r + (1 −
)c −
1−α 1−α
τ τ&P K  τ N 1 − α
τN
∂N


( A.4)

q& H
qH



= −

1

 qH

where


α
) / h + (1 − τ K )  r + δ H − δ K
1−α


(

r = (1 − α )(

( A.5)

τ 1−αε 1−γαε 1−ααε
τ 1−−αε1 1−γαε 1−ααε
and P = (
) N
h
)
N
h .
αε
αε
−αε

As implied in eq. (7), the steady-state equilibrium for the dynamic system in eqs.
(A.1) - (A.5) above can readily be found by setting the five time-derivatives to zero
(i.e., h& = c& = N& = τ& = q& H = 0 ). The absence of non-convexities guarantees the
existence of the equilibrium dynamic path. Letting (h* , c* , N * , τ * ) be the optimal

-23-

balanced-growth equilibrium values of (h, c, N , τ ) , governed by the inter-asset
arbitrage conditions in eq. (8), we finally arrive at the eqs. (10a) - (10g) in the text.

Appendix B: Derivation of Effects on Welfare and Growth
To calculate the welfare effects of a tighter environmental policy starting at time
t = 0, first compute utility in eq. (4a) on the initial, sub-optimal balanced-growth path:

( C (0) N )
W(g) =

φ 1−1/ σ

1 − 1/ σ

=

1
, if σ ≠ 1; and
θ − g (1 − 1/ σ )

( ln C (0) + φ ln N )θ + g ,
θ2

(B.1)

if σ = 1,

where C(0) is the initial consumption level. With θ −g (1−1/σ) = (1−τK) r −δK − g,
we assume this value is positive, so that utility in eq. (4a) remains bounded. Also,
differentiating eq. (B.1) with respect to g, we can see that ∂W/∂g > 0.
Substituting eqs. (10f) and (10g) into the growth rate for C, H, and K on the
balanced-growth path yields:
 α (1 − ε )

 1−α
1 
C (0) = K (0) 
E ( N )τ +  − 1 g + θ  ,
+ϕ 
 αε
σ

 1 − α


(B.2)

where K(0) is the level of private capital stock at t = 0. Finally, insert eq. (B.2) into
eq. (B.1), and totally differentiate W(⋅) with respect to τ to obtain eq. (12) in the text.

References
Barro, R., 1990, Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth,
Journal of Political Economy 98(5), s103-25.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1992, Public Finance in Models of Endogenous
Growth, Review of Economic Studies 59(4), 645-61.
Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Bovenberg, A. and R. de Mooij, 1997, Environmental Tax Reform and Endogenous
Growth, Journal of Public Economics 63(2), 207-37.

-24-

Bovenberg, A. and S. Smulders, 1995, Environmental Quality and Pollutionaugmenting Technical Change in a Two-sector Endogenous Growth Model,
Journal of Public Economics 57(3), 369-91.
Bovenberg, A. and S. Smulders, 1996, Transitional Impacts of Environmental Policy
in an Endogenous Growth Model, International Economic Review 37(4), 861-93.
Brooke, A., D. Kendrick, and A. Meeraus, 1992, GAMS: A User’s Guide, The
Scientific Press, South San Francisco, CA.
Elbasha, E. and T. Roe, 1996, On Endogenous Growth: The Implications of
Environmental Extenalities, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 31(2), 240-68.
Futagami, K. and K. Mino, 1995, Public Capital and Patterns of Growth in the
Presence of Threshold Externalities, Journal of Economics 61(2), 123-46.
Gaube, T., 2005, Second-Best Pollution Taxation and Environmental Quality,
Frontiers of Economic Analysis & Policy 1(1), Article 1.
Glomm, G. and B. Ravikumar, 1999, Competitive Equilibrium and Public Investment
Plans, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 23(8), 1207-24.
Goulder, L., 1995, Effects of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with Prior Tax Distortions:
An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Analysis, Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29(3), 271-97.
Gradus, R. and S. Smulders, 1993, The Trade-off between Environmental Care and
Long-Term Growth – Pollution in Three Prototype Growth Models, Journal of
Economics 58(1), 25-51.
Greiner, A. and H. Hanusch, 1998, Growth and Welfare Effects of Fiscal Policy in an
Endogenous Growth Model with Public Investment, International Tax and
Public Finance 5(3), 249-61.
Hettich, F., 1998, Growth Effects of a Revenue-neutral Environmental Tax Reform,
Journal of Economics 67(3), 287-316.
Jones, L. and R. Manuelli, 1997, The Sources of Growth, Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 21(1), 75-114.
Jones, L., R. Manuelli, and P. Rossi, 1993, Optimal Taxation in Models of
Endogenous Growth, Journal of Political Economy 101(3), 485-517.
Jorgenson, D. and P. Wilcoxen, 1990, Environmental Regulation and U.S. Economic
Growth, Rand Journal of Economics 21(2), 314-40.
King, R., C. Plosser, and S. Rebelo, 1988, Production, Growth and Business Cycles, I:
The Basic Neoclassical Model, Journal of Monetary Economics 21(2), 195-232.
Lucas, R., 1988, On the Mechanics of Economic Development, Journal of Monetary
Economics 22(1), 3-42.
-25-

Metcalf, G. E., 2003, Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation: Pigou,
Taxation and Pollution, Journal of Public Economics 87(2), 313-22.
Mino, K., 1996, Analysis of a Two-sector Model of Endogenous Growth with Capital
Income Taxation, International Economic Review 37(1), 227-51.
Mohtadi, H, 1996, Environment, Growth, and Optimal Policy Design, Journal of
Public Economics 63(1), 119-40.
Neher, P. A., 1990, Natural Resource Economics: Conservation and Exploitation,
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Nordhaus, W., 1994, Managing the Global Common, the Economics of Climate
Change, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Rebelo, S., 1991, Long-run Policy Analysis and Long-run Growth, Journal of
Political Economy 99(3), 500-21.
Rebelo, S. and N. Stokey, 1995, Growth Effects of Flat-rate Taxes, Journal of
Political Economy 103(3), 519-50.
Smulders, S. and R. Gradus, 1996, Pollution Abatement and Long-term Growth,
European Journal of Political Economy 12(3), 505-32.
Tahvonen, O. and J. Kuuluvainen, 1991, Optimal Growth with Renewable Resources
and Pollution, European Economic Review 35(3), 650-61.
van Ewijk, C. and S. van Wijnbergen, 1995, Can Abatement Overcome the Conflicts
between the Environment and Economic Growth, De Economist 143(2), 197216.
Xepapadeas, A., 1997, Economic Development and Environmental Pollution: Traps
and Growth, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 8(3), 327-50.

-26-

