NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAKING IT IN AMERICA: SOCIAL MOBILITY
IN THE IMMIGRANT POPULATION
George J. Borjas
Working Paper 12088
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12088
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, John F. Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University; and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Min
Zhou for providing very helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Making it in America: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 12088
March 2006
JEL No. J61
ABSTRACT
The ultimate impact of immigration on the United States obviously depends not only on the
economic, social, political, and cultural shifts that take place during the life cycle of the immigrant
population, but also on the adjustment process experienced by the immigrant household across
generations. This paper documents the evidence on social mobility in the immigrant population and
summarizes some of the lessons implied by the evidence. There is significant economic "catching
up" between the first and second generations, with the relative wage of the second generation being,
on average, about 5 to 10 percent higher than that of the first generation. At the same time, there is
a strong positive correlation between the socioeconomic outcomes experienced by ethnic groups in
the immigrant generation and the outcomes experienced by their children, and a weaker correlation
between the immigrants and their grandchildren. In rough terms, about half of the differences in
relative economic status across ethnic groups observed in one generation persist into the next. As
a result, the very large ethnic differences in economic status that characterize the current immigrant
population will likely dominate discussions of American social policy for much of the 21st century.
George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu

MAKING IT IN AMERICA: SOCIAL MOBILITY IN THE IMMIGRANT POPULATION
George J. Borjas*
I. Introduction
The ultimate impact of immigration on the United States obviously depends not only on
the economic, social, political, and cultural shifts that take place during the life cycle of the
immigrant population, but also on the adjustment process experienced by the immigrant
household across generations. Because of the resurgence of large-scale immigration in recent
decades, which raised the foreign-born share of the U.S. population from 4.7 percent in 1970 to
12.7 percent in 2003, the population share of second generation persons (i.e., of persons born in
the United States with at least one foreign-born parent) is expected to grow rapidly in the next
few decades, from 10.5 percent in 2004 to nearly 14 percent by 2050. Moreover, the
grandchildren of current immigrants will make up an additional 9 percent of the population by
mid-century.1
The traditional view of the social mobility experienced by immigrant households across
generations is vividly encapsulated by the melting pot metaphor: Immigrants are molded from a
collection of diverse national origin groups into a homogeneous native population in a relatively
short time, perhaps two generations. Although many analysts have questioned the relevance of
the melting pot hypothesis for understanding the experience of many ethnic groups in the United
States, the metaphor seems to have a magnetic and intuitive appeal that often confounds the

* Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, John F. Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University; and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Min Zhou for
providing very helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
1 Barry Edmonston and Jeffrey S. Passel, “Immigration and Immigrant Generations in Population
Projections,” International Journal of Forecasting 8, no. 3 (1992): 459-476.

2
detractors.2 As a result, the “assimilationist” perspective has long dominated the thinking of
many observers of the immigrant experience.
Ironically, and from a purely economic perspective, it is not clear that the United States
would be better off if the melting pot operated at breakneck speed, quickly assimilating the new
immigrants and churning them out as clones of native-born workers. After all, the productivity
gains from immigration are maximized when the immigrant population differs most from the
native population and immigrants have skills that the native workforce lacks—or in the
commonly used phraseology, when “immigrants do jobs that natives do not want to do.” As a
result, the productivity gains from immigration would be larger if the United States pursued
policies that hampered and delayed the assimilation of immigrants. If the melting pot were to
operate smoothly, the only way that the country could replenish the productivity gains from
immigration would be to admit more and more immigrants.
Of course, this perspective is much too narrow and misses the point. Most available
estimates suggest that the net productivity gains from immigration are quite small even in the

2 Classic expositions of the melting pot hypothesis are given by Robert Park, Race and Culture (Glencoe,
IL: Free Press, 1975); and Milton Gordon, Assimilation and American Life (New York: Oxford University Press,
1964). The revisionist literature that questions the empirical validity of the hypothesis include the studies of Nathan
Glazer and Daniel P. Moynihan, Beyond the Melting Pot: The Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians, and Irish of
New York City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963); Stanley Lieberson and Mary C. Waters, From Many Strands:
Ethnic and Racial Groups in Contemporary America (New York: Russell Sage, 1988); Joel Perlmann, Ethnic
Differences: Schooling and Social Structure Among the Irish, Italians, Jews, and Blacks in an American City, 18801935 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988); and Alejandro Portes and Min Zhou, “The New Second
Generation: Segmented Assimilation and Its Variants,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 530 (1993): 74 96. A good survey of the competing hypotheses is given by Min Zhou, “Segmented
Assimilation: Issues, Controversies, and Recent Research on the New Second Generation,” International Migration
Review 31, no. 4 (1997): 825-858.

3
first generation, when the immigrants are most different from native workers.3 Moreover, the
economic, social, and political consequences of delaying assimilation could be disastrous. The
ethnic conflicts in many regions of the modern world, for instance, often originated centuries
ago, and their consequences still fester. One does not have to be a very astute observer of the
human condition to learn that it pays to have a cohesive social fabric. Therefore, it is probably in
the national interest of the United States to pursue policies that spur substantial intergenerational
progress by immigrant households, and that reduce the importance of ethnicity in determining
socioeconomic outcomes in future generations.
This paper summarizes the evidence on social mobility in the immigrant population and
draws out some of the lessons implied by the evidence. The available data suggests that there is
significant economic “catching up” between the first and second generations, with the relative
wage of the second generation being, on average, about 5 to 10 percent higher than that of the
first generation. At the same time, the evidence indicates that there is a strong positive
correlation between the socioeconomic outcomes experienced by ethnic groups in the immigrant
generation and the outcomes experienced by their children, and a weaker correlation between the
immigrants and their grandchildren. In rough terms, about half of the differences in relative
economic status across ethnic groups observed in one generation persist into the next. As a
result, the very large ethnic differences in economic status that characterize the current

3 George J. Borjas, “The Economic Benefits from Immigration,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no.
2 (1995): 3-22; and Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein, “Technological Superiority and the Losses from
Migration,” Working Paper 8971 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002).

4
immigrant population will likely dominate American society—and discussions of American
social policy—for much of the 21st century.

II. An Economic Perspective on Social Mobility
From a broad perspective, the process of social mobility in immigrant households
encompasses a wide variety of related phenomena, including the cultural adaptation that
immigrants and their children make to their new environment, the adoption of social norms and
attitudes that may differ greatly from those that the immigrant generation brought from the
sending countries, and the accumulation of human capital investments, including educational
attainment, language skills and geographic resettlement, that improve the immigrant’s economic
status in the receiving country. The discussion in this paper focuses exclusively on this economic
aspects of social mobility—the rate at which the economic status of the immigrant household
improves across generations. Hence it provides a very restrictive picture of the intergenerational
changes that immigrant households inevitably experience in the United States.
Despite this narrow focus, however, there is an important link between the economic
notion of social mobility stressed here and the cultural issues that are traditionally emphasized in
the immigration debate in the United States and many other receiving countries. In order to
experience economic improvement, an immigrant will often have to acquire skills that are valued
by American employers, such as learning the English language, adopting the norms of the
American work place, and moving to economically vibrant areas that may lie far beyond the
borders of the ethnic enclave. Each of these decisions helps to weaken the link between the
immigrant’s foreign past and his or her American future.

5
Many immigrants, therefore, face an important tradeoff: In order to achieve economic
progress they may have to discard some of the attributes, habits, and cultural characteristics that
can hamper the chances of success in the American economy, and pick up the ones that enhance
those chances. Put differently, economic and non-economic forms of social mobility may often
complement each other: there will be more mobility of one type when there is more mobility of
the other.
The existing literature on immigrant economic performance has provided two insights
that now serve as “stylized facts” in the immigration debate. First, the typical immigrant worker
in the United States suffers a sizable earnings disadvantage (relative to native-born workers)
upon arrival, and it is unlikely that this disadvantage disappears during the immigrant’s working
life. Second, there is a great deal of dispersion in socioeconomic status and earnings across the
many national origin groups that make up the first generation.4
Even within the boundaries provided by the narrow definition of social mobility used in
this paper, any study of intergenerational economic progress in immigrant households needs to
examine two related, but distinct, phenomena. First, to what extent does the economic
disadvantage experienced by immigrants narrow across generations? Put differently, do the
children (or grandchildren) of immigrants “catch up” to the average economic status of the
baseline population. It seems reasonable to suspect that the second-generation enjoys a “head
start” in their earnings capacity that is not experienced by any other generation. After all,
second-generation Americans are typically the first members of the immigrant household to
graduate from American schools, the first to benefit from having English as a native tongue, and

4 George J. Borjas, “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature 32, no. 4 (1994):
1667-1717; and David Card, “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal 115, no. 507 (November
2005): F300-F323.

6
the first to know about the internal workings of the U.S. labor market prior to getting their first
job.
Second, it is well known that the relation between the earnings of parents and children,
regardless of whether the parents are foreign- or native-born, is driven by a phenomenon known
as regression towards the mean. Even though the children of highly successful parents are
themselves likely to be successful, it is unlikely that the children will be as successful as their
parents. The economic performance of these children will probably revert somewhat towards the
lower population average. Similarly, even though the children of low-skill parents are
themselves likely to be low-skill, it is unlikely that the children will be as unskilled as the
parents, and again there is a reversion towards the higher population average. Regression
towards the mean acts like a double-sided magnet: it pulls the economic status of the children in
outlying groups towards the mean of the population, regardless of where the parents start out.
This phenomenon occurs because parental skills and family background are not the only
factors that influence the intergenerational transmission of skills. Many other unknown and
random factors also enter the process, including luck and imperfect genetic transmission of
ability, motivation, and drive. These extraneous factors imply that the children of parents who
reside at either tail of the wage distribution will probably lie closer to the middle of that
distribution.
The concept of regression towards the mean plays a crucial role in understanding the
process of social mobility in the immigrant population. Some ethnic groups enter the United
States doing very well in the labor market, while other groups perform very poorly. Part of these
ethnic differences will likely be transmitted to their offspring. The melting pot metaphor, in
effect, argues that ethnicity is not “sticky”. Ethnic differences disappear in a relatively short time

7
and all the groups eventually become indistinguishable from each other. The conjecture of a
quick-acting melting pot, therefore, is an empirical statement about the extent of regression
towards the mean in the economic status of different ethnic groups. If regression towards the
mean is an important phenomenon, the differences observed among ethnic groups in the first
generation will not last long, and an immigrant’s ethnic background should have little influence
on the economic outcomes of his descendants.5

III. The Economic Performance of the Children of Immigrants
It is widely perceived that, on average, the socioeconomic performance of the children of
immigrants far surpasses that of their parents. This perception originated in the early studies of
Barry Chiswick and Geoffrey Carliner that compared the earnings of various generations of
workers in the United States at a particular point in time, such as the 1970 decennial Census.6
Table 1 summarizes the available evidence for three such cross-sections: the 1940 Census, the
1970 Census, and the pooled 1994-2003 Current Population Surveys (which, for convenience, I
will refer to as the 2000 cross-section).7

5 Note that the second-generation may experience an increase in their earnings capacity—relative to that of
the first generation—even if there were no regression towards the mean (each second-generation national origin
group would then simply earn x percent more than the corresponding group in the immigrant generation, but there
would be no narrowing of ethnic wage differentials). Although these two sources of economic mobility are
sometimes confused in the literature, they capture different phenomena.
6 Barry R. Chiswick, “Sons of Immigrants: Are They at an Earnings Disadvantage?” American Economic
Review 67, no. 1 (1977): 376-380; and Geoffrey Carliner, “Wages, Earnings, and Hours of First, Second and Third
Generation American Males,” Economic Inquiry 18, no. 1 (1980): 87-102.
7 The data sources are the 1940 and 1970 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) of the
decennial U.S. Census, as well as the pooled 1994-2003 IPUMS-CPS files of the March Current Population
Surveys.

8
Each of these cross-section data files allows the precise identification of two generations
of Americans: the immigrant generation (i.e., persons born abroad) and the second generation
(i.e., persons born in the United States who have at least one parent born abroad). The generation
of the remaining persons in the sample (i.e., of persons who have American-born parents and
were themselves born in the United States) cannot be determined exactly, but they are typically
referred to as “third-generation” Americans. It is worth noting, however, that this residual group
of third-generation workers contains individuals who are both grandchildren of immigrants as
well as descendants of the Mayflower Pilgrims.
For each of the available data cross-sections, Table 1 reports the (age-adjusted) log
weekly wage of first- and second-generation workers relative to that of the baseline third
generation.8 In 1970, for example, immigrant men earned about 1.4 percent than men in the
third-generation, while second-generation working men earned 14.6 percent more than the
baseline workforce. Even though trends in the relative wage of working women are influenced
by the selection biases associated with rising female labor force participation, the table reveals
exactly the same intergenerational pattern in relative wages for women. The typical working
immigrant woman earned 6.8 percent more than women in the third generation, while the typical
second generation working woman earned about 10.1 percent more. In short, second-generation
workers in 1970 earned more than both the immigrants and than the subsequent generations.

8 The log wage differential is calculated in the sample of workers aged 18-64 who do not reside in group
quarters, work in the civilian sector, are not enrolled in school, and report a valid measure of earnings for the
calendar year prior to the survey. The adjusted wage differences were calculated by estimating a log weekly
earnings regression model that includes dummy variables indicating the worker’s generation as well as a vector of
dummy variables indicating the worker’s socioeconomic characteristics (such as age and education). The
regressions using the pooled Current Population Surveys also include a vector of dummy variables indicating the
year of the survey.

9
In fact, Table 1 reveals this exact empirical pattern for every single cross-section of data.
In 1940, for example, second-generation working men earned 17.8 percent more than the
baseline third-generation, while immigrants earned only 5.8 percent more. In 2000, secondgeneration working men earned 6.3 percent more than the baseline third-generation, while
immigrants earned 19.7 percent less.
The wage superiority of the second generation workforce in each cross-section snapshot
seems to imply—and has been interpreted as implying—that second-generation Americans earn
more than both their parents and their children. A common story used to explain this inference is
that the children of immigrants are “hungry” and have the drive and ambition that ensures
economic success in the U.S. labor market—and that this hunger is lost once the immigrant
household becomes fully Americanized by the third generation. If this interpretation were
correct, the policy concern over the relatively low skill level of the immigrants who have arrived
in the past three decades may be misplaced. If historical patterns were to hold in the future, the
children of these immigrants will outperform not only their parents but the rest of the workforce
as well in only a few decades.
It turns out, however, that the evidence summarized in Table 1 does not necessarily
justify this inference. After all, the family ties among the three generations identifiable in any
cross-section of data are very tenuous. It is biologically impossible for most second-generation
workers enumerated in a particular cross-section to be the direct descendants of the immigrants
enumerated at the same time. For instance, working-age immigrants enumerated in 2000 (most
of whom arrived in the 1980s and 1990s) typically cannot have American-born children who are
also of working age. Second-generation Americans of working age can only be the descendants
of immigrants who have been in the country for at least two or three decades. Put differently,

10
most of the second-generation workers enumerated in 2000 are unlikely to be the children of the
immigrant workers enumerated at the same time. Because there are skill differences across
immigrant cohorts, and because some of these differences could easily be transmitted to their
children, the wage gap between first- and second-generation workers in a cross-section does not
correctly portray the social mobility that occurs across generations.
In short, the fact that second-generation workers earn more than other workers at a
particular point in time does not necessarily imply that second generation workers earn more
than either their parents or their children. To calculate the improvement in economic status
between the first and second generations, one must link the economic performance of parents
and children, rather than compare the economic performance of workers belonging to different
generations at a point in time.
It is possible to conduct the correct intergenerational comparison by tracking the
immigrant population over time.9 For instance, the 1970 Census provides information on the
economic performance of the immigrants present in the United States at that time. Many of these
immigrants are, in fact, the parents of the second-generation workers enumerated in the 2000
cross-section. Similarly, the 1940 Census provides information on the economic performance of
immigrants in 1940. These immigrants, in turn, are probably the parents of the second-generation
workers enumerated by the 1970 Census. It is only by comparing the economic performance of
immigrant workers in 1940 with the economic performance of second-generation workers in
1970—or the economic performance of immigrants workers in 1970 with that of the second-

9 George J. Borjas, “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics 11, no.
1, Part 1 (1993): 113-135.

11
generation in 2000—that we can correctly determine the economic progress experienced by the
children of immigrants.
To illustrate, consider again the wage information summarized in Table 1. If we
(incorrectly) used only the information provided by the 2000 cross-section, we would conclude
that since second generation workers earn 6.3 percent more than the baseline third generation
and first-generation workers earn 19.7 percent less than the baseline, second-generation workers
earn 26.0 percent more than first-generation workers. A correct calculation of the secondgeneration improvement, however, reveals much less intergenerational improvement. After all,
the typical immigrant in 1970 earned 1.4 percent more than the typical third-generation worker.
And the typical second-generation worker in 2000 (who is presumably the descendant of the
immigrants enumerated in 1970) earns 6.3 percent more than the baseline. In short, the true
intergenerational growth in relative wages was only on the order of 5 percent—rather than the 26
percent implied by the intergenerational wage differentials observed in 2000.
Similarly, the 1970 Census seems to imply that the children of immigrants earn 13.2
percent more than their parents (or 14.6 percent minus 1.4 percent). But the economic status of
the parents of these second-generation workers can only be observed in the 1940 Census, where
the immigrants had a relative wage advantage of 5.8 percent. The intergenerational wage
improvement between 1940 and 1970 is then on the order of 8.8 percent (or .146 - .058). Again,
immigrant households experienced less wage growth across generations than would be implied
by looking at the intergenerational wage differentials in a single cross-section. Note, however,
that the 5 to 10 percent intergenerational wage growth between the first and second generations
still represents a substantial improvement in economic opportunities.

12
The bottom panel of the table reports the wage differentials among the various
generations after the data are adjusted for differences in educational attainment across workers.
The adjusted wage differentials (for both working men and women) reveal that much of the
intergenerational progress found in the “raw” data disappears once the data are adjusted for
differences in educational attainment. Put differently, much of the intergenerational progress
observed between the first and second generations (which leads to the 5 to 10 percent wage
increase in the second generation) can be explained by the changes in educational attainment that
occur between these two generations, as the native-born children of immigrants go through the
American education system.
Finally, the evidence summarized in Table 1 reveals a second potentially important
empirical pattern. In particular, note that the age-adjusted relative wage of immigrants has
declined steadily since 1940. In 1940, the typical immigrant working man earned 5.8 percent
more than workers in the third generation; by 1970, this economic advantage had fallen to +1.4
percent; and by 2000 the slim economic advantage had become a sizable wage disadvantage of
19.7 percent. Although this decline in the relative economic status of the immigrant workforce
has been well documented in the literature, the data in Table 1 also show a concurrent (and much
less studied) decline in the relative wage of the second generation workforce. In 1940, the typical
second generation working man earned 17.8 percent more than workers in the baseline thirdgeneration; by 1970, the wage advantage had fallen to 14.6 percent, and by 2000 it had fallen to
6.3 percent. In short, the relative economic status of second-generation workers has been falling
over time—just like that of the foreign-born workforce.
Put differently, the data clearly reveal that the second generation workers enumerated in
2000 (whose parents made up the immigrant workforce in 1970) have a lower economic status

13
than the second generation workers enumerated in 1970 (whose parents made up the immigrant
workforce in 1940). If these historical trends were to continue, the extrapolation of the data over
the next few decades can easily lead to a somewhat pessimistic forecast for the economic
performance of the children of the current (i.e., circa 2000) wave of immigrants. These
immigrants now have a substantial wage disadvantage of 19.7 percent. If the intergenerational
jump in relative earnings between the first and second generation is between 5 and 10 percent,
the children of the current immigrant workforce will experience a 10 percent wage disadvantage
circa 2030. This remarkable turnaround in the economic status of the second generation
highlights an important insight provided by the historical experience: the secular trend in the
relative economic performance of the second generation workforce tracks that of the first
generation, but with a generational lag.10

IV. The Persistence of Ethnic Wage Differentials
There is a lot of variation in socioeconomic status among ethnic groups both in the first
and second generations. Some national origin groups, typically those originating in advanced
economies, do quite well in the U.S. labor market, while other national origin groups, typically
originating in poorer countries, fare much worse. Table 2 shows some of this variation for a
select number of national origin groups.11 In 1970 for instance, immigrants from Canada earned
18.5 percent more than the typical worker in the baseline third generation, while immigrants

10 See also Joel Perlmann and Roger Waldinger, “Second Generation Decline? Children of Immigrants,
Past and Present—A Reconsideration,” International Migration Review 31, no. 4 (1997): 893-922.
11 The ethnic background of second-generation Americans in the calculations presented in this section is
determined by the mother’s country of birth (unless only the father is foreign-born, in which case it is determined
from the father’s country of birth).

14
from Mexico earned 31.6 percent less. By 2000, second-generation workers from Canada earned
16.8 percent more than the typical third-generation worker, while second-generation workers
from Mexico earned 14.7 percent less.
To determine how much of the ethnic differences in relative economic status that exist
among immigrants persist into the second generation, some studies estimate statistical models
that relate the relative wage of a second generation national origin group to the relative wage of
their first-generation counterpart.12 The statistical analysis, of course, accounts for the fact that
first and second generation workers observed in a single cross-section of data have little
biological connection with each other, so the statistical models link the relative earnings of
second generation workers at a particular point in time (e.g., the 2000 cross-section) to the
earnings of first-generation workers a few decades past (e.g., the 1970 Census).
Before summarizing the statistical evidence, it is insightful to illustrate the nature of the
empirical exercise. Figure 1 shows the intergenerational link for male workers belonging to a
large number of national origin groups in the 1970-2000 period.13 The horizontal axis gives the
age-adjusted relative wage of working men in the immigrant generation. These data are obtained
from the 1970 Census. The vertical axis gives the age-adjusted relative wage of the working men
in the second generation, and these data are obtained from the 2000 cross-section. There is an
obviously strong and positive correlation between the average skills of workers in the two

12 George J. Borjas, “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics 11, no.
1, part 1 (1993): 113-135; David Card, John DiNardo, and Eugena Estes, “The More Things Change: Immigrants
and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s,” in Issues in the Economics of Immigration,
edited by George J. Borjas (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), pp. 227-270.
13 The figure provides information for 61 national origin groups. Each group satisfies the sample
restriction that there were at least 20 observations in both the 1970 and 2000 cross-sections to calculate the wage of
the ethnic group in each respective generation.

15
generations; the national origin groups that fared economically well in the first generation also
fared well in the second.
The upward-sloping regression line illustrated in Figure 1 summarizes the statistical
relationship that links the relative wages of particular national origin groups across the two
generations. The slope of this regression line is often called the intergenerational correlation in
relative wages and measures the extent of regression towards the mean across generations.
If the regression line were relatively flat, it would indicate that there is little connection
between the average skills of the ethnic groups in the second generation and the average skills of
the immigrant groups. Put differently, all second-generation groups would have relatively similar
wages regardless of the economic performance of their parents. In this case, the intergenerational
correlation would be near zero, and there would be complete regression towards the mean. If the
regression line were relatively steep, there would then be a substantial link between relative
wages in the first and second generations. If the intergenerational correlation were equal to one,
for example, there would be a perfect correlation between the relative wages of the two
generations and the regression line would have the slope of a 45 degree line. In this extreme
case, if the typical worker in a particular immigrant group earns 30 percent more than a third
generation worker, the typical second generation descendant of that group would also earn 30
percent more than the third generation. There is no regression towards the mean because the
ethnic differences stick completely from generation to generation.
Table 3 reports the estimated intergenerational correlations over both the 1940-70 period
and the 1970-2000 period. Among working men, the intergenerational correlation reported in
row 2 of the table is 0.511 for the 1940-1970 period, and 0.560 for the 1970-2000 period. Among
working women (reported in row 3), the intergenerational correlations are smaller, 0.242 for the

16
1940-1970 period and 0.280 for the 1970-2000 period. As noted above, however, the
intergenerational changes in the relative wage of working women may reflect not only the
transmission of skills but also the changes in the selection bias resulting from the dramatic
increase in the female labor force participation rate over this six-decade period.
The bottom panel of Table 3 reports the estimated intergenerational correlations after the
earnings data is adjusted not only for age differences across the groups, but for differences in
educational attainment as well. The intergenerational correlations become much weaker after the
data control for the differences in educational attainment. The intergenerational correlation
estimated in the sample of working men, for example, drops by nearly half to 0.287 in the 19401970 period and to 0.245 in the 1970-2000 period. In short, much of the stickiness in ethnic
wage differentials arises because there is a significant transmission of differences in educational
attainment across generations.
The estimated intergenerational correlations for working men reported in the top panel of
the table suggest two important conclusions. First, the intergenerational correlation between the
skills of the first and second generations is about halfway between zero and one. An
intergenerational correlation of 0.5 implies that half of the wage differential between any two
national origin groups in the first generation persists into the second generation. If the average
wage of two ethnic groups is 30 percentage points apart in the first generation, the average wage
of the two groups is expected to be about 15 percentage points apart in the second. There is some
social mobility, therefore, but ethnicity remains an important determinant of labor market
outcomes in the second generation.
Second, there is a remarkable stability in the estimates of the intergenerational correlation
over the 1940-2000 period. The data clearly suggest that the process linking the economic

17
performance of first and second generation national origin groups was quite similar during the
last six decades of the 20th century, despite the major changes in economic and social conditions,
as well as in immigration policy, over the period.14
It is also important to determine if the ethnic differences that remain in the second
generation get partially transmitted to the grandchildren of the immigrants. To establish how
long a person’s ethnic background matters in determining wage outcomes, one can track the
economic performance of the grandchildren of the immigrants who entered during the “First”
Great Migration at the beginning of the twentieth century.15 This tracking would use data from
the 1910 Census to obtain information on the skill level of the national origin groups that made
up the First Great Migration, and the General Social Surveys to obtain information on the sample
of American-born workers (circa 1985) who had at least one grandparent born outside the United
States.
Figure 2 summarizers some of the available data. There clearly exist differences in
relative wages among third-generation ethnic groups—although these differences are far smaller
than the ones observed in the first generation. Nevertheless, even after three-quarters of a
century, there is a positive correlation between the relative wage of the original immigrant
groups and the relative wage of the corresponding third-generation ethnic groups. The slope of
the regression line linking the relative wage of the first generation and the relative wage of the

14 As noted in the previous section, the relation between the relative economic status of the first and
second generations depends not only on the rate of regression towards the mean, but also on whether the second
generation has a head start relative to the first generation. The intercept of the regression line illustrated in Figure 1
measures this intergenerational head start (i.e., the intercept measures the wage growth exhibited by the descendants
of an immigrant group that had the same relative wage as the baseline third generation). The intercept (and standard
error) is 0.107 (0.021) in the 1940-1970 regression and 0.069 (0.014) in the 1970-2000 regression.
15 George J. Borjas, “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
Grandchildren of the Great Migration,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47, no. 4 (1993): 553-573.

18
third generation implies an intergenerational correlation of .22, so that 22 percent of the wage
gap observed between any two groups in the immigrant generation persisted into the third.
Recall that roughly half of the wage gap between any two immigrant groups disappears between
the first and second generations. It seems that about half of what remains in the second
generation disappears between the second and the third.16
The historical record suggests one broad generalization. The “half-life” of ethnic skill
differentials is roughly one generation—about half of the ethnic differences in relative wages
disappears in each generation. Put differently, a 20-percentage point wage gap among ethnic
groups in the immigrant generation implies a 10-point gap among second-generation groups, and
a 5-point gap among third-generation groups.

V. Ethnic Capital and Social Mobility
The finding that the intergenerational correlation in the relative wage of ethnic groups is
around 0.5 raises an important puzzle. Many studies conclude that about 20 to 40 percent of the
skill differences among parents are typically transmitted to their children. 17 It seems, therefore,

16 In a recent study, Richard Alba, Amy Lutz, and Elena Vesselinov question whether the correlation
between the first and third generations illustrated in Figure 2 correctly portrays the experience of European
immigrant groups. They show that it is easy to reduce the measured intergenerational correlation to nearly zero by
selectively excluding particular ethnic groups from the analysis. In particular, they show that the statistical
significance of the intergenerational correlation vanishes if the regression analysis drops Mexicans, Chinese,
Japanese, Austrians, Hungarians, Poles, Yugoslavs, and Russian Jews from the sample. The wisdom of this
selective pruning of the statistical evidence is highly questionable. The magnitude (and sign) of any statistical
correlation can be changed at the researcher’s whim by selectively screening the data; in this instance, by dropping
observations of groups that do either too well or too poorly. See Richard D. Alba, Amy Lutz, and Elena Vesselinov,
“How Enduring were the Inequalities among European Immigrant Groups in the U.S.?” Demography 38, no. 3
(2001): 349-356; and George J. Borjas, “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials, Revisited,”
Demography 38, no. 3 (2001): 357-361.
17 See Kenneth A. Couch and Thomas A. Dunn, “Intergenerational Correlations in Labor Market Status: A
Comparison of the United States and Germany,” Journal of Human Resources 32, no. 1 (1997): 210-232; Gary
Solon, “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American Economic Review 82, no. 3 (1992): 393-

19
that there is more stickiness in the ethnic wage differential than one would expect simply from
the intergenerational correlation between parents and children.
To solve this puzzle, it has been argued that a person’s ethnic background—in and of
itself—may influence the process of social mobility.18 In particular, the skills of the next
generation depend not only on what parents do, but also on the characteristics of the ethnic
environment where the children are raised—which has been called “ethnic capital.” A highly
advantaged ethnic environment—where most parents are college graduates, for example—
imbues the children who grow up in that environment with valuable characteristics that enhance
the children’s socioeconomic achievement later in life. In contrast, disadvantaged ethnic
environments—where most parents may be high school dropouts or welfare recipients—imbue
the children raised in those environments with characteristics that may impede future
socioeconomic achievement. In effect, the ethnic environment is like glue in the process of social
mobility, ensuring that the average characteristics of the ethnic group do not change much from
generation to generation.
To illustrate the link between ethnic capital and social mobility, consider the outcomes
facing the children of a hypothetical Mexican and Korean family. Suppose the parents in these
two families are similar in terms of the relevant socioeconomic characteristics. Even though the
parents in these families are, say, high school graduates, the child in the Mexican household will
likely grow up in an ethnic enclave where many of the neighbors are high school dropouts and
where few of the child’s friends go on to college. In contrast, the child in the Korean household

408; and David J. Zimmerman, “Regression toward Mediocrity in Economic Status,” American Economic Review
82, no. 3 (1992): 409-429.
18 George J. Borjas, “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
107, no. 1 (1992): 123-150.

20
will likely grow up in an area where many neighbors have some college education and where
many of the child’s friends will go on to college.
If ethnic capital matters—in other words, if exposure to different types of ethnic
influences has an effect on social and economic development—the two children in this
hypothetical example are on different socioeconomic paths, and these paths will lead to very
different life experiences. The Mexican child will be continually exposed to the cultural and
economic contacts that are common among low-educated workers, while the Korean child will
be exposed to the contacts that are common among college graduates. The ethnic capital
hypothesis argues that the continual exposure to a particular type of ethnic capital tends to “pull”
the child towards the average or norm in that ethnic group. In other words, ethnic capital is like a
magnet—attracting the child towards the socioeconomic outcomes experienced by the typical
person in the particular ethnic group. In effect, ethnic capital increases the stickiness in ethnic
wage differentials across generations.
A number of studies have shown that ethnicity seems to have an independent effect—
above and beyond the information provided by parental socioeconomic outcomes—on the
outcomes of children in particular ethnic groups, and that much of the ethnic capital effect can be
directly linked to the importance of ethnic enclaves, which tend to cluster workers with relatively
similar socioeconomic characteristics into a very compact geographic area.19 In rough terms,
about half of the stickiness in the relative wage of different ethnic groups documented in the
previous section seems to be attributable to the spillover effects associated with ethnic capital.

19 George J. Borjas, “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externalities,” American Economic
Review 85, no. 3 (1995): 365-390. See also David M. Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “Ghettos and
the Transmission of Ethnic Capital,” in Ethnicity, Social Mobility and Public Policy: Comparing the US and UK,
edited by Glenn Loury, Tarig Modood, and Steven M. Teles (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp.

21
It is worth stressing that the mix of factors that make ethnic capital a socially important
construct may differ significantly across ethnic groups and across ethnic enclaves. A recent study
of ethnic neighborhoods in Los Angeles documents that local social organizations and businesses
in Chinatown and Koreatown are dominated by the respective ethnic group, while those in PicoUnion (a Mexican/Central American immigrant neighborhood) tend to be much more mixed.20
The Chinese and Korean owners of small businesses tend to attend local churches in their
respective ethnic enclave, eat at local restaurants, and shop at local stores alongside the working
class Chinese and Korean immigrants. Such mixing, however, is rarer in the Mexican/Central
American neighborhood. Because the social and economic consequences of these different types
of interactions are not fully understood, much work remains to be done in delineating how the
concept of ethnic capital helps or hampers the assimilation process for different ethnic groups.

VI. Do Current Conditions Promote or Hinder Social Mobility for Immigrants?
The evidence reported in this paper can be summarized in terms of two general insights.
First, the historical trend over much of the 20th century suggests that the intergenerational
“jump” in relative wages between the first and second generations is somewhere between 5 and
10 percentage points. If this historical trend were to continue into the future, the relatively low
relative wage of the current immigrant workforce suggests that the next generation of second-

204-222; and Alexis Leon, “Does ‘Ethnic Capital’ Matter? Identifying Peer Effects in the Intergenerational
Transmission of Ethnic Differentials,” Working Paper (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh, 1995).
20 Min Zhou, “How Neighborhoods Matter for Immigrant Adolescents,” CPRC Brief (Berkeley, CA:
California Policy Research Center, December 2002); see also Min Zhou and Susan S. Kim, “Community Forces,
Social Capital, and Educational Achievement: The Case of Supplementary Education in the Chinese and Korean
Immigrant Communities,” Harvard Educational Review, forthcoming 2006.

22
generation workers, who will make up an important part of the workforce in 2030, may
experience a sizable wage disadvantage of around 10 percent.
Second, the conclusion that ethnic skill differentials have a half-life of one generation has
important implications for ethnic inequality throughout the next century. For example, Canadian
immigrants earned 22.6 percent more than the baseline third generation, while Mexican
immigrants earned 45.1 percent less. If the historical pattern were to hold, the third-generation
descendants of today’s Canadian immigrants will earn about 17 percent more than the
descendants of today’s Mexican immigrants towards the end of the 21st century.
Note, however, that these glimpses into the crystal ball crucially rely on the assumption
that the same forces that promoted (or hindered) social mobility in the past century continue
indefinitely into the future. The available evidence clearly indicates that the intergenerational
correlation for ethnic wage differences was around 0.5 for much of the 20th century. But this rate
of social mobility was shaped by unique historical events and by social and economic
circumstances that may be difficult to replicate in the future.
For instance, the immigrants who entered the United States at the beginning of the 20th
century faced dramatically different economic conditions than the immigrant workforce today. In
the early 1900s, the low-skill immigrant workforce helped build the manufacturing sector; threequarters of the workers at the Ford Motor Company in 1914 were foreign-born and over half of
these immigrants came from the less developed areas of southern and eastern Europe. These
manufacturing jobs evolved into stable and well-paying economic opportunities to many
immigrants and their descendants. It is far from clear that the employment sectors seeking
immigrants today—particularly in a labor market that increasingly rewards high-skill workers—

23
can provide the same growth opportunities that the rapidly expanding manufacturing sector
offered to their counterparts a century ago.
Second, in some respects there is less ethnic diversity among the “new” immigration than
there was among early 20th century immigrants. In particular, current immigration is much more
dominated by a single ethnic group than the First Great Migration ever was. In 2000, for
example, Mexicans made up almost 30 percent of the immigrant population. In contrast, the
largest two national origin populations enumerated by the 1920 Census were Germans and
Italians, and together these two populations comprised only 24 percent of the foreign-born
population at the time. The relative lack of ethnic diversity in post-1965 immigration may
greatly reduce the incentives for assimilation by allowing the largest ethnic groups to essentially
develop separate enclave economies and social structures, interacting little with the economic
mainstream. These ethnic enclaves may well impede the assimilation process and create an
additional obstacle in the road of social mobility.
Third, the political reaction to the social and economic dislocations associated with the
First Great Migration was swift and severe. By 1924, the United States had adopted strict
limitations on the number and types of persons who could enter the country. This policy shift,
combined with the poor economic opportunities available during the Great Depression, created a
de facto immigration moratorium. In the 1920s, 4.1 million persons entered the United States; by
the 1930s, only half a million persons entered the country. This moratorium could have provided
a “breathing period” that may have fueled immigrant social mobility by cutting off the supply of
new workers to ethnic enclaves, and by reducing the economic and social contacts between the
immigrants and the various countries of origin.

24
Fourth, there is an important sense in which some of the large immigrant groups that
arrived in the United States before 1924 were “encouraged” to assimilate by the changes in
social attitudes and in tolerance towards particular national origin groups associated with the two
World Wars. The Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups reports that “by summer
1918 about half of the [U.S.] states had restricted or eliminated German-language instruction,
and several had curtailed freedom to speak German in public…The total number of German
language publications declined from 554 in 1910 to 234 in 1920.”21 Surely these unique and
sudden shifts in social attitudes had a distinctive effect on the social mobility experienced by
Germans and Italians in the United States.
Finally, the favorable ideological climate that boosted social pressures for assimilation
and acculturation throughout much of the 20th century has all but disappeared. Put differently,
the consensus summarized by the motto of the United States seal, “E pluribus, Unum” (Out of
many, one), no longer exists. The radical shift in the paradigm is best illustrated by Vice
President Albert Gore’s 1994 ruminations on the melting pot—and illuminating mistranslation of
the motto: “We can build a collective civic space large enough for all our separate identities, that
we can be E Pluribus Unum—out of one, many.”
Because of these factors, the social mobility of the immigrants who arrived a century ago
may not be a good predictor of the assimilation prospects of current immigrants. It is still too
early to determine if these factors will prove important and slow down the rate of economic
assimilation of the new immigrants. Nevertheless, the dramatic shifts in the social, political, and

21 Kathleen M. Conzen, “Germans” in Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups, edited by
Stephen Thernstrom (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 423.

25
economic climate suggest that ethnic differences could easily be incubated for much longer
periods in the future.

26
Figure 1. Social mobility between 1st and 2nd generations, 1970-2000

Relative wage, 2nd generation, 2000

0.6

Poland
Philippines
Cuba

Italy

Belgium
UK

China

India
Germany

Sweden

0
Honduras
Mexico
Dominican
Republic

Haiti

-0.6
-0.4

0

0.4

Relative wage, 1st generation, 1970

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1970 Census and the pooled 1995-2003 March Current Population Surveys.
The relative wage gives the age-adjusted log wage differential between a particular group and the typical thirdgeneration worker in the labor market at that point in time.

27

Relative wage in 3rd generation, 1985

Figure 2. Social mobility between 1st and 3rd generations, 1910 and 1985.

0.4
China

0.3
0.2

Russia
Austria

0.1

Hungary

England

Jspsn

Scotland

0

Canada

-0.1

Romania

Mexico
Belgium

Portugal

-0.2
-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

Relative wage in 1st generation, 1910
Source: George J. Borjas, “Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skills Differentials: The Children and Grandchildren
of the Great Migration,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47, no. 4 (July 1994), pp. 561-562. The relative
wage gives the log wage differential between a particular group and the typical worker in the labor market at that
point in time.

28

Table 1. Wage differentials across generations

Age-adjusted log weekly wage, relative to 3rd generation
Male:
1st generation
2nd generation
Female:
1st generation
2nd generation
Age- and education-adjusted log weekly wage, relative to
3rd generation
Male:
1st generation
2nd generation
Female:
1st generation
2nd generation

1940

1970

2000

0.058
0.178

0.014
0.146

-0.197
0.063

-0.007
0.115

0.068
0.101

-0.102
0.088

0.107
0.189

0.028
0.124

-0.106
0.029

0.106
0.164

0.101
0.101

-0.034
0.057

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1940 and 1970 Censuses, and the pooled 1995-2003 March Current
Population Surveys.

29
Table 2. Age-adjusted relative wage for selected ethnic groups, 1970-2000
(relative to the third generation)

Country of origin:
Canada
Cuba
Dominican Republic.
El Salvador
France
Germany
Greece
Haiti
India
Ireland
Italy
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
UK

Relative wage of
immigrants in 1970

Relative wage of second
generation in 2000

0.185
-0.202
-0.370
0.066
0.198
0.249
-0.019
-0.217
0.308
0.243
0.029
-0.228
-0.316
-0.184
0.278
-0.119
0.119
-0.234
-0.074
0.252
0.033

0.168
0.044
-0.189
-0.043
0.059
0.195
0.139
-0.106
0.271
0.170
0.131
0.012
-0.147
-0.043
-0.032
0.014
0.269
0.042
0.141
0.422
0.239

Source: Author’s calculations from the 1970 Censuses, and the pooled 1995-2003 March Current Population
Surveys.

30
Table 3. Intergenerational correlation in relative wages

Age-adjusted
All workers
Male
Female
Age- and education-adjusted
All workers
Male
Female

1940-1970

1970-2000

0.416
(0.113)
0.511
(0.127)
0.242
(0.091)

0.434
(0.089)
0.560
(0.066)
0.280
(0.123)

0.202
(0.088)
0.287
(0.101)
0.061
(0.070)

0.128
(0.022)
0.245
(0.034)
-0.007
(0.042)

Notes: Author’s calculations from the 1970 Censuses, and the pooled 1995-2003 March Current Population
Surveys.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The regressions estimated in the 1940-1970 period use information
from 30 national origin groups, while the regressions for the 1970-2000 period use information for 61 national
origin groups The regressions are weighted by the size of the ethnic group in the second generation.

