NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION
Alan M. Garber
Charles I. Jones
Paul M. Romer
Working Paper 12080
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12080
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

Prepared for RAND/NIH Workshop on the Economic Consequences of Medical Research, June 1, 2005,
RAND Corporation, Arlington, VA. We are grateful to Dean Scrimgeour for excellent research assistance.
Garber’s research is supported in part by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Institute on Aging,
and an Investigators Award in Health Policy Research from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Jones
also thanks the Toulouse Network on Information Technology for research support. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Alan M. Garber, Charles I. Jones and Paul M. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Insurance and Incentives for Medical Innovation
Alan M. Garber, Charles I. Jones and Paul M. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 12080
March 2006
JEL No. I1, O30
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the interactions between health insurance and the incentives for innovation.
Although we focus on pharmaceutical innovation, our discussion applies to other industries
producing novel technologies for sale in markets with subsidized demand. Standard results in the
growth and productivity literatures suggest that firms in many industries may possess inadequate
incentives to innovate. Standard results in the health literature suggest that health insurance leads
to the overutilization of health care. Our study of innovation in the pharmaceutical industry
emphasizes the interaction of these incentives. Because of the large subsidies to demand from health
insurance, limits on the lifetime of patents and possibly limits on monopoly pricing may be necessary
to ensure that pharmaceutical companies do not possess excess incentives for innovation.
Alan M. Garber
PCOR/CHP
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
garber@stanford.edu
Charles I. Jones
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
chad@econ.berkeley.edu
Paul M. Romer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
paul.romer@stanford.edu

2

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

1. INTRODUCTION
When a market suffers from a distortion that cannot be removed, second-best
policy prescriptions may run counter to standard first-best results. This kind of
distortion is inevitably present in any market where new goods are continually
being introduced. Innovation is associated with a fundamental nonconvexity
that renders infeasible the standard first-best market equilibrium based on
price-taking competition. In the market that we consider here, the market for
pharmaceuticals, this nonconvexity is resolved by granting monopoly power
to the suppliers of new compounds.
It should come as no surprise that intuitions honed on first-best analysis are
a poor guide to the welfare analysis of this market. When consumers purchase
pharmaceuticals, moral hazard — the insurance subsidy that enables patients
to pay only a fraction of the cost of pharmaceutical products they consume
(Pauly 1968) — creates a distortion that can improve welfare. Intuitively,
monopoly markups lead to suboptimally low consumption of pharmaceuticals,
while a coinsurance rate of less than 100% leads to excessive consumption.
Under some circumstances, these effects may offset one another. This point
is not new. A similar observation was made by Crew (1969) more than 35
years ago. Nevertheless, the difference between the welfare effect that insurance subsidies have on spending for pharmaceuticals as opposed to spending
on other types of health services seems not to have received the attention
it deserves. Nor has the potential it creates for excessive innovation in the
pharmaceutical industry.
In this paper, we study the optimal provision of medical goods such as
pharmaceuticals. We break our analysis into two parts. We use the phrase
“static efficiency” to characterize departures from the optimal utilization of a
drug that has already been developed, and “dynamic efficiency” to characterize
the degree to which innovators have the correct incentives to incur the fixed
cost necessary to introduce a new compound.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

3

We start with the ex post analysis of static efficiency. After a pharmaceutical firm has introduced a new compound, we look for a coinsurance rate that
achieves efficient utilization of the drug. Next we observe that if the development cost is known only to the firm, the firm will have the right ex ante
incentives to develop the drug if its anticipated profits equal the consumer
surplus the drug will generate.
In the full equilibrium that we describe, all consumers pay for a pharmaceutical insurance policy, and a sick consumer pays a low out-of-pocket cost
for the pharmaceutical. To facilitate the analysis and link it to data on the
incidence of a medical condition in the population, we specify a distribution that characterizes the various benefits different people receive from the
pharmaceutical. For example, people with other risk factors for heart disease and higher initial levels of blood cholesterol may receive greater benefits
from a cholesterol-reducing drug than consumers at lower risk. It is easiest
to interpret the demand function implied by this distribution function if we
assume that consumers make a zero-one decision about whether to take one
standardized course of treatment with the pharmaceutical, and we rely on this
simplifying assumption to describe our results. The results can, however,
readily be extended to the case where consumers also decide what quantity
of the drug to consume. Faced with this simple zero-one decision, consumers
purchase the drug if their out-of-pocket cost is less than or equal to the consumer surplus they receive.
Because we specify the demand for the good in terms of a distribution
function for its benefits, we can highlight a useful connection between the
hazard rate for consumer benefits and the elasticity of demand for the good.
This allows us to link the hazard rate to the simple monopoly price that a
patent-owning firm would charge, and to characterize the profits the firm
receives relative to the consumer surplus it generates in terms of the behavior
of the hazard rate. In particular, consider the case where the coinsurance rate

4

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

is set to achieve static efficiency. In this case, as long as the hazard rate does
not fall too quickly (and certainly for a constant or increasing hazard), profits
will exceed consumer surplus. Dynamic efficiency then requires a restriction
on monopoly power, such as finite patent life.
These results are not mere curiosities. In many years, pharmaceuticals have
been the fastest-growing portion of health care expenditures, and accounted
for about 11.5% of U.S. health expenditures in 2005 according to Heffler,
Smith, Keehan, Borger, Clemens and Truffer (2005). In the rich countries of
the world, they are arguably the most important conduit for the practical application of fundamental biomedical advances. The pharmaceutical industry
may also be a prototype industry for an economy that relies increasingly on
private firms to develop and put into use fundamental scientific and technological knowledge.
These results are also relevant to current policy debates. The movement
away from low coinsurance rates and toward systems in which consumers pay
the full cost of a medical treatment (as embodied in the recently introduced
Health Savings Accounts) might be welfare-improving for traditional services
that are priced near marginal cost. It may, however, harm social welfare if
applied to purchases of new drugs.
Gaynor, Haas-Wilson and Vogt (2000), in an extension of the Crew (1969)
analysis, have shown that health insurance provided by a competitive market
can achieve static efficiency when the copayment for each good or service
is set optimally. Taking the price of medical care as exogenous, they show
that price reductions, at least when price is above marginal cost, increase
welfare. Their analysis does not consider whether the resulting profits offer
appropriate rewards for innovation. Our analysis considers an alternative
benchmark where monopoly firms set medical prices given an exogenous
coinsurance rate. We study the optimal coinsurance rate and incentives for
innovation in this framework.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

5

In a recent paper Lakdawalla and Sood (2005) consider dynamic efficiency.
They view the health insurance contract as a two-part tariff and show that
efficient innovation may result. In particular, the health insurance premium
may extract expected consumer surplus from patients while the coinsurance
rate ensures optimal utilization. The innovator captures consumer surplus
through a competitive insurance industry that pays a two-part tariff to access
the innovation. This elegant result illustrates that efficient innovation may
result from nonlinear pricing arrangements. Our analysis complements this
approach by examining what happens to utilization and incentives to innovate
when monopoly innovators can only charge linear prices. We show that when
coinsurance rates ensure optimal utilization, incentives for innovation are
often excessive.

2. THE BASIC MODEL
The economy contains a collection of people indexed by i on the interval
[0, 1]. A fraction of the population, s, becomes sick with an illness that can be
treated by the single pharmaceutical product that is the focus of the analysis
here. Everyone has the same ex ante risk of becoming ill. Those who become
sick suffer a loss of utility, denoted by δi . For these individuals, utility takes
the form
U = u(ci ) − δi .

(1)

The first term in this expression is the utility from consuming standard goods.
The second term, δi , represents the disutility the person suffers from being
sick.
The drug that can treat this condition does not produce the same expected
relief in every individual. We assume that consumers know this conditional
expected benefit, which we denote by vi . If a sick consumer uses the phar-

6

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

maceutical and consumes other goods at the level ci , her utility will be
U = u(ci ) − δi + vi .
For a curative treatment, δi = vi , an exceptional circumstance that is not
required for the model. The fraction s also could equal 1, and v i could
exceed δi (which can be zero). Thus the formulation is consistent with a
pharmaceutical that positively affects well-being in the absence of disease.
The random variable vi is distributed among the sick according to a distribution
function F (v).1 The utility loss term δi is given exogenously for consumer i.
Because this disutility term enters utility in an additively separable fashion, we
can neglect it in analyzing consumer i’s decisions and in calculating aggregate
welfare. This means, in particular, that the distribution of δ i does not affect
anything that follows.
As noted above, we assume for the sake of simplicity that consumers can
choose whether or not to receive a common, single dose of the drug in question.
To focus only on the risk associated with being sick (or more precisely, on the
risk that someone will have an opportunity to give up some income to benefit
from a treatment) and to suppress the risk that individuals will receive different
levels of income, we assume that all individuals have the same initial income
ȳ. (A more realistic but more complicated approach would be to assume that
income risk is not insurable.)
Our description of the supply side is as simple as possible. The pharmaceutical firm must incur a fixed cost W to develop the drug. This cost will
matter only when we consider the ex ante analysis of the decision to introduce
the drug in Section 4 below. After developing the drug, the firm can produce
each additional dose at a constant cost of w per consumer.

2.1. The First Best
1

Chang and Kim (2003) use a related approach to generate an aggregate labor supply curve
based on heterogeneous individual labor productivities.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

7

The first-best optimum is the solution to the social planner’s maximization
problem:
u(c̃) + s
Ω∗ = max
∗
v

Z

∞
v∗

vF 0 (v)dv

(2)

subject to
c̃ = ȳ − s(1 − F (v ∗ ))w.

(3)

Note that we have dropped the δi terms because they only add a constant term
Z

1
0

δi di

to the objective function. By integrating utility from standard goods over all
consumers we obtain the single term u(c̃). Because preferences are additively
separable, equating the marginal utility of consumption across consumers requires that all people have the same consumption in the first-best equilibrium.
With these simplifications, social welfare equals the sum of utility from other
goods, plus the benefits from treating people who have a benefit level greater
than v ∗ , minus the neglected δi terms.
The constraint in the optimization problem shows that c̃ equals per capita
income minus the cost of treating people who are sicker than a cutoff value
v ∗ . A fraction s of all individuals become sick. A fraction 1 − F (v ∗ ) of these

sick individuals will receive a benefit from treatment that exceeds v ∗ . The
per-person cost of treatment is w.
The first-order condition for this social optimization problem implies that
the optimal choice of the cutoff value v ∗ satisfies
v ∗ = u0 (c̃)w.

(4)

This has a natural interpretation in terms of benefit and cost. The variable w
represents the cost in goods of an additional treatment. The expression on the

8

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

right-hand side, u0 (c̃)w, represents the cost in foregone utility of an additional
treatment. The first-order condition says that the social planner should first
allocate treatment to the patients who receive the greatest benefit and continue
only until the marginal benefit v ∗ equals the marginal cost.

3. EQUILIBRIUM WITH COINSURANCE PAYMENTS
If each consumer’s benefit vi were observable, there would be no problem implementing this first best optimum. If the patient (and the patient’s
doctor) can observe vi but the insurer cannot, it is impossible to support this
equilibrium. Any patient with vi > 0 will report a value greater than v ∗ .
Suppose therefore that the insurance contract pays a fraction 1 − λ of the

cost of the drug when someone buys, leaving a required coinsurance payment

of λp for the individual. For the moment, we assume the coinsurance rate λ is
exogenously given. Later on, we will study the optimal setting of the coinsurance rate (for example, by the government for publicly-provided health plans
or through regulation). If λp is small relative to total income and consumption, the loss in utility associated with the payment λp will be small, and the
equilibrium with coinsurance payments will provide almost full insurance.
We assume that a single pharmaceutical firm has the exclusive right to produce the pharmaceutical that treats the condition in question. The monopolist
observes the total demand curve for the drug and selects the monopoly price
at which the drug is to be sold to consumers.

3.1. The Consumer’s Problem
Each person who contracts the disease makes the following calculation. A
sick person has income y ≡ ȳ − (1 − λ)px(λp) + x(λp)(p − w). The first

term of this equation is the endowment, ȳ. The second term is the actuarially
fair insurance premium that covers the per person cost of insurance, where

p is the price of the drug and x is the total quantity demanded at that price.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

9

Finally, we assume the drug companies are owned by the agents. The last
term is equal to each person’s share of the ex post profits earned by the firm.
A patient will purchase the drug if
u(y − λp) + vi ≥ u(y).
Rewriting, person i purchases the drug whenever
vi ≥ u(y) − u(y − λp) ≈ u0 (c)λp

(5)

where c = y − λp is the consumption of someone who purchases the drug.

This approximation is valid as long as λp is small relative to y, which is
something that we will need to check in equilibrium. Note that λp need not
be small when λ is.
Let q denote the out-of-pocket payment that the consumer makes, q = λp.
Then we can write the demand curve as
x(q) = s(1 − F (u0 (c)q)).

(6)

Faced with a direct cost q, all sick people with a benefit greater than the cutoff
value v̄ = u0 (c)q purchase the drug.

3.2. The Monopoly Problem
We assume that the producer cannot engage in price discrimination. The
monopolist faces a standard profit maximization problem with constant marginal
cost except that in this case, the monopolist receives payments from both the
consumer and the insurance company. When the consumer pays q, the monopolist receives p = λq :
max π ≡ (
q

q
− w)x(q).
λ

The first order condition for this problem yields the equation




q
1
− w x0 (q) + x(q) = 0.
λ
λ

(7)

10

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

Multiplying through by

λ
x(q)

yields

λw q 0
q 0
x (q) −
x (q) + 1 = 0.
x(q)
q x(q)
If we let  stand for the elasticity of the consumer demand curve,
 ≡ −x0 (q)

q
.
x(q)

the first order condition for the optimal payment by the consumer q ∗ reduces
to


q∗
=
· w.
λ
−1

If we write this in terms of the payment p received by the monopolist, this
takes on the more familiar form,
p∗ =


· w,
−1

(8)

where  is evaluated at the price q ∗ = λp∗ paid by the consumer.
For the demand curve given above in equation (6), the derivative x 0 (q) can
be written as
x0 (q) = −sF 0 (u0 (c)q)u0 (c).
The expression for  can then be written as
 = h(v̄)u0 (c)λp,

(9)

where h(v) ≡ F 0 (v)/(1 − F (v)) is the hazard rate corresponding to the

distribution F and v̄ ≡ u0 (c)λp is the cutoff level for purchasing the drug.

(Henceforth, it will be easiest to work with the price p the monopolist receives
rather than the price q the consumer pays.)
In our application, the hazard rate h(v) has the following interpretation.
Suppose we take the set of people whose health benefit from treatment is at

least v and consider a small interval (v, v + µ). The proportion of this group

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

11

with a benefit inside this small interval is equal to h(v)µ. Roughly speaking,
as v increases, h(v) tells us the rate at which people drop out of the group
of people who have a value greater than or equal to v. (Using traditional
language, this group would be called “survivors,” but in our pharmaceutical
application, this term instead means the people gain a benefit greater than the
level in question.)
The key result here is that the elasticity of demand for the drug is this
hazard rate, multiplied by the marginal utility of consumption and by the
out-of-pocket cost to the consumer.
Combining this expression for the demand elasticity with the monopoly
markup rule in equation (8) yields a more revealing expression for the monopoly
price received by the pharmaceutical manufacturer:
p∗ = w +

1
.
h(v̄)u0 (c)λ

(10)

This is still an implicit equation for the solution since both v̄ and c depend
on the monopoly price. As we will see, it neverthess offers insight into the
pricing problem of the firm. Other things equal, the markup increases with
a decrease in the hazard rate, a decrease in λ, and an increase in income that
lowers the marginal utility of consumption.
The profits of the monopolist are given by
π(λ) =

x(λp)
.
h(v̄)u0 (c)λ

(11)

In this expression, x is the number of treatments sold, and the inverse of
h(v̄)u0 (c)λ is the profit margin earned on each treatment.

3.3. Social Welfare and Consumer Surplus
As shown in Appendix A, social welfare in this equilibrium is approximately
Ω(λp) ≈ u(ȳ) + CS(λp),

(12)

12

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

where
CS(λp) ≡ s

Z

v̄

∞

vF 0 (v)dv − u0 (ȳ)wx(λp).

(13)

The first equation says that social welfare is the sum of two terms. The
first u(ȳ) is the utility consumers would receive from consuming all of their
income. The second term is a consumer surplus-like measure, CS. CS, in
turn, depends on two terms. The first is the total utility gain generated by drug
treatment, the sum of the vi ’s across all people. Subtracted from this is the
total cost of producing these treatments, wx(λp), which is converted into its
utility equivalent by multipling by the marginal utility of consumption.
In this expression, we have neglected the loss in utility associated with the
incomplete insurance caused by the coinsurance payment λp. This loss is
second order in λp and for small value of λp it can be neglected. We will
focus instead on two other losses. The first is the static efficiency loss that
arises when the price of the drug to the consumer is too high. The second is
the dynamic efficiency loss that can arise when a drug with a value CS that is
greater than its development cost W is not introduced, and the mirror image
case, when a drug with a value CS that is less than W is introduced.

4. EFFICIENT UTILIZATION AND THE INCENTIVE TO
INNOVATE
In equation (4), we showed that the efficient utilization of the drug requires
all people with health benefits vi ≥ v ∗ ≡ u0 (c̃)w to receive treatment where

c̃ is the common consumption level. In our equilibrium with coinsurance, the

treatment cutoff value is v̄ ≡ u0 (c)λp where c is the consumption for someone
who is sick and makes the coinsurance payment.
First notice that c̃, c, and y are related by
c̃ = ȳ − wx(w).
y = ȳ − x(λp)(λp − w).

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

13

c = y − λp.
In particular, as long as ȳ is sufficiently large compared to λp, we have
u0 (c̃) ≈ u0 (y) ≈ u0 (c) ≈ u0 (ȳ).

(14)

(These approximations would also hold exactly if the utility function were
linear). From now on, we make the assumption that this approximation holds,
so that the marginal utility of consumption is roughly the same whether one
buys the drug or not.
Under this assumption, efficient utilization of the drug requires
v̄ = v ∗

⇐⇒

λp = w.

(15)

That is, all people with health benefits at least as large as v ∗ need to get the
drug. This requires the intuitive condition that the price faced by the consumer,
λp, be equal to the marginal cost of producing the drug, w. As long as this is
true, the economy can achieve full static efficiency.
What about the incentives for the pharmaceutical company to introduce
the drug in the first place? The pharmaceutical company will consider the
expected present discounted value of profits that can be earned when deciding
whether to develop and introduce a new drug. From the social welfare measure
given above in equation (12), though, we saw that social welfare depends on
the consumer surplus-like measure, CS.
A useful measure to keep in mind when discussing the incentives to innovate,
then, is the ratio of profits to consumer surplus, which we will call ρ:
ρ≡

π(λ)
.
CS(λp)/u0 (ȳ)

(16)

In this expression, we’ve divided CS by the marginal utility of consumption
to convert it from units of utility into units of consumption.
Graphically, Figure 1 shows the profits and consumer surplus for the special
case in which the utilization of the drug is efficient, i.e. when λp = w. Notice

14

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

FIGURE 1. Profits and Consumer Surplus with Efficient Utilization
Price, p

Consumer Surplus, CS(w)/u’(y)
p
Profits, π
λp = w
x(p)

s

x(w)

Quantity, x

that, in contrast to the standard monopoly case with no subsidy to demand,
the profit rectangle here includes a portion outside the consumer surplus. This
raises the possibility — which is confirmed in several examples below — that
the profits earned by the pharmaceutical company can exceed the consumer
surplus associated with the introduction of the drug treatment.

5. EXAMPLES
5.1. A First Example: the Pareto Distribution
As a simple illustrative example, suppose that treatment benefits are distributed according to the Pareto distribution:
F (v) = 1 −



v
v0

−α

, α > 1,

(17)

on the interval [v0 , ∞). The Pareto distribution often appears as a good description of the upper tail of the income distribution, which has a “thick” tail.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

15

To see what this means, suppose we consider that part of the population with
incomes greater than some cutoff y. Now ask what fraction of this rich population has incomes that exceed y by more than 25%. For the Pareto distribution,
this fraction is invariant to the level of the cutoff y, whereas for distributions
with thinner tails, the fraction declines as the income cutoff rises. Saez (2001)
shows that this invariance accurately characterizes U.S. incomes in the early
1990s between $100,000 and $30 million. Assuming a Pareto distribution for
treatment benefits, then, assumes that there is a long, thick tail of people with
very high benefit levels.
When treatment benefits obey a Pareto distribution, the results from the
model are very simple. First, the demand curve for the drug exhibits a constant
price elasticity:
x(λp) = sv0α (u0 (ȳ)λp)−α .

(18)

Second, the monopoly price is given by a constant markup over marginal cost,
where the markup is determined by the constant elasticity of demand:
p∗ =

α
· w.
α−1

(19)

The monopoly price increases with marginal cost and decreases in the elasticity of demand.
Finally, the ratio of the monopoly profit to consumer surplus is given by 2
ρ(λ) =

1
.
α
1 + α( α−1
λ − 1)

(20)

This formula shows that the ratio of profits to consumer surplus depends
on the product of the monopoly markup µ ≡ α/(α − 1) and the coinsurance

rate λ. In particular, a lower coinsurance rate tends to raise the ratio of profits
2

2

Notice that this expression is only defined for λ > α−1
. If λp < w by too much, which
α
occurs at this point, then the consumer surplus shrinks to zero: the cost of producing the drug
exactly offsets the benefit received.

16

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

TABLE 1.
The Ratio of Profits to Consumer Surplus, Pareto Example
Markup
µ

Implied
α

0.20

2
3
5
10

2.00
1.50
1.25
1.11

...
2.50
1.00
0.47

—— The Coinsurance Rate λ ——
0.33
0.50
3.00
1.00
0.55
0.28

1.00
0.57
0.35
0.18

1.00
0.33
0.25
0.17
0.09

Note: The table reports values of ρ(λ) computed according to equation (20). The markup µ
is α/(α − 1).

to consumer surplus, as the lower coinsurance rate increases the quantity of
drugs sold over which the monopolist earns a markup.
Table 1 shows some values of ρ(λ) for some parameter values.

There

are two things to note about the table. First, the ratio of profits to consumer
surplus falls as consumers are forced to pay the entire price of the drug. It also
falls as the demand curve becomes less elastic (leading to a higher markup).
Second, in extreme cases in which the demand elasticity is relatively high
and the coinsurance rate is low, profits can exceed consumer surplus. In this
case, the increase in demand associated with the low coinsurance rate leads to
“excess” profits. The incentives for a pharmaceutical company to introduce a
new drug then exceed what is optimal. This case turns out to be more worthy
of consideration than one might have thought, as we will see again in the
examples that follow.
Finally, consider the case in which the coinsurance rate λ is chosen to deliver
the efficient utilization of the treatment. Recall that the condition for efficient
utilization is λp = w, so that the first-best level of utilization is achieved by
setting λ∗ =

α−1
α .

In this case, ρ(λ∗ ) = 1. That is, the profits earned by the

monopolist are exactly equal to the consumer surplus.
So for a Pareto distribution of treatment benefits, we have these striking
results. The government or a private insurer can achieve the first best level

17

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

of utilization of a drug by setting λ =

α−1
α

so that λp = w. Consumers will

compare the marginal cost of the drug with its benefits to them, leading to
efficient utilization. Moreover, if marginal cost is small compared to average
income, the losses from incomplete insurance will be relatively small. Finally,
in this equilibrium, a drug manufacturer with an infinitely lived patent will
have the correct incentives to introduce a new drug. Profits earned equal
consumer surplus, both at a point in time and therefore in present discounted
value. If this present value exceeds the cost of introducing the drug, the firm
will introduce it. Otherwise, it will not.

5.2. A Second Example: the Exponential Distribution
Suppose now that the values for the treatment benefit v have an exponential
distribution,
F (v) = 1 − e−αv

(21)

on the interval [0, ∞). The demand function in this case is also an exponential

function

0

x(λp) = e−αu (ȳ)λp .
This distribution has a constant hazard rate
h(v) = α,
so the monopoly price is an additive markup over marginal cost:
p=w+

1
αu0 (ȳ)λ

(22)

.

Notice that this expression implies that the treatment cutoff is bounded from
below:

1
.
α
This suggests an important difference between the exponential case and the
v̄ = u0 (ȳ)λp = u0 (ȳ)λw +

Pareto case. For the exponential distribution, the mean value of v is

1
α.

The

18

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

payment (in utility units) that the consumer makes will be larger than the mean
value of the benefit from treatment, no matter how small λ is. Reductions in
λ induce offsetting increases in p. In the Pareto case, efficiency required that
λp be equal to marginal cost. If marginal cost is low compared to income,
then consumer payments will be also. Here, λp is always greater than the
mean benefit from treatment. This may be large compared to income, so the
assumption that λp is small may not apply. The coinsurance payment may be
too large to achieve an adequate level of risk sharing.
For the exponential distribution, the ratio of profits to consumer surplus is
given by
ρ(λ) =

1
1
·
.
λ 2 − α(1 − λ)u0 (ȳ)w

(23)

At its upper bound λ = 1, the incentive for innovation is too small by a
factor of 1/2. As λ decreases, though, the ratio of profits to consumer surplus
2
increases. As λ approaches a lower level 1 − αu0 (ȳ)w
, the ratio goes to infinity

as net benefits go to zero.

To ensure that the treatment will be utilized efficiently, λ needs to be chosen
so that λp = w. Using the monopoly price from equation (22), this implies a
copayment of
λ∗ = 1 −

1
αu0 (ȳ)w

.

(24)

At this first-best level of treatment, the ratio of profits to consumer surplus is
ρ(λ∗ ) =

1
> 1.
λ∗

(25)

That is, at the efficient level of treatment, the profits to the pharmaceutical
company exceed the consumer surplus, suggesting the possibility of an excessive incentive to innovate.
How is this possible? Recall that the monopolist is earning profits on every
treatment sold. Because of the monopoly markup, the efficient utilization of

19

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

the drug requires a copayment rate that is less than one, and this subsidy leads
to a high level of demand and large profits, as shown in Figure 1 earlier.
What remedies are available in this case? Suppose the government sets an
upper bound on the price of the drug that is equal to m times w. Then a copay
λ =

1
m

will achieve efficient utilization of the drug, so v̄ will be equal to

u0 (ȳ)w. If m is large, the government will be able to achieve a high degree
of risk sharing through a low copay.
With a choice of λ =

1
m,

ρ will be equal to m, which may still induce

excessive efforts by firms to introduce new drugs. In this case, there may be a
case for a finite patent length and competitive production thereafter, with no
insurance coverage for off- patent drugs, which sell at marginal cost.
Society will receive the full present discounted value of the net benefits
from the drug, but the manufacturer will receive only a fraction of the present
discounted value of the profits. If the patent life is choosen so that this fraction
is equal to λ =

1
m , then firms will have the correct incentives to introduce new

drugs. So the combination of a price ceiling that is large compared to marginal
cost and a finite patent life can achieve a result that is very close to the first-best
social optimum. Because the firm captures the entire present discounted value
of consumer surplus in this case, it will clearly prefer this equilibrium with a
price ceiling to an unregulated equilibrium with an infinitely lived patent and
no insurance. Of course, from a private point of view, the best outcome for
the firm would be to have insurance with a low coinsurance rate and no price
ceiling.

5.3. Linear Demand
Finally, suppose that the treatment benefits are uniformly distributed on the
interval [0, µ]. Then the distribution function takes the form F (v) =

v
µ

and

20

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

the demand function is (approximately) given by
x(λp) = 1 −

u0 (ȳ)λp
.
µ

That is, the uniform distribution corresponds to the case of linear demand.
The hazard rate h(v) =

1
µ−v

is increasing in v, and the monopoly price can

be written as





1
µ
p=
w+ 0
.
2
λu (ȳ)
Once again, the payment in utility units u0 (ȳ)λp that consumers make for the
drug is bounded from below by the mean benefit in the population from the
drug, µ2 .
For this distribution, the ratio of profits to our consumer surplus-like measure is given by
ρ(λ) =

1
2(µ − wλu0 (ȳ))
·
.
λ 3µ − wu0 (ȳ)(4 − λ)

(26)

In the case of no coinsurance, where λ = 1, this ratio is ρ(1) = 2/3, so profit
falls short of consumer surplus, as one would expect.
What if λ is set to deliver efficient utilization of the drug? Solving the
condition λp = w for λ yields
λ∗ = 2 −

µ
u0 (ȳ)w

.

With this value for λ, the expression for ρ reduces to
ρ(λ∗ ) =

2u0 (ȳ)w
> 1.
2u0 (ȳ)w − µ

In the range of values for which marginal cost is less than the maximum
possible benefit and in which it is possible to achieve optimal utilization of
the drug,
u0 (ȳ)w ∈ (µ/2, µ).

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

21

Therefore the ratio of profits to consumer surplus varies between 2 and ∞

when the treatment is efficiently utilized.

As in the case of the exponential demand, the combination of an upper
bound on the price charged by the monopolist, together with a finite lived
patent, can nearly achieve the first-best social optimum.

6. ROBUSTNESS OF THE RESULTS
The examples we provide in this paper illustrate that efficient utilization —
allocating the drug to those people who derive a benefit at least as great as
marginal cost — does not inevitably lead to appropriate incentives to develop
the drug. In particular, the profits earned by the pharmaceutical company
setting a monopoly price can exceed the consumer surplus created by the
introduction of the drug, leading to a failure of dynamic efficiency. The
subsidy to demand inherent in the low copayment leads to excess profits in
two of our three examples, and to profits that exactly equal consumer surplus
in the third.
Are these results peculiar to the distributions that we used in these examples?
Setting the coinsurance rate to achieve static efficiency does not lead to profits
in excess of the consumer surplus for every distribution of treatment benefits
F (v). To see this point, it is helpful to refer back to Figure 1. The monopoly
price p is determined by the local elasticity of demand at the point x(w). In
contrast, the consumer surplus depends on the shape of the demand function
at all prices above w. For the Pareto, exponential, and uniform distributions,
the local shape and the global shape of the demand function are connected in
such a way that ρ(λ∗ ) ≥ 1.

For the Pareto distribution, the implied demand function exhibits constant

elasticity. The exponential and uniform distributions exhibit large demand
elasticities at high prices and are inelastic at low prices. Intuitively, this is
why profits can exceed consumer surplus: the monopoly price is based on

22

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

the portion of the demand curve with a low price elasticity, generating high
profits.
This suggests that a demand curve that had the opposite shape — inelastic
at high prices and very elastic at low prices — would lead to profits less than
consumer surplus when the treatments are efficiently utilized. Interestingly,
this is not what conventional distributions like those in our examples yield. In
those cases, the percentage change in demand associated with a one percent
decline in price is large when demand is low (i.e. at high prices) and small
when demand is high (at low prices).3
Appendix B shows how these results can be extended to more general
demand curves and more general underlying distributions. As long as the
elasticity of demand is a decreasing function of the price, static efficiency is
associated with profits that are too large relative to consumer surplus. In terms
of the underlying distribution of benefits from the innovation, this decreasing
elasticity corresponds to a hazard rate of the distribution F (v) that falls no
faster than 1/v.
Our work shows that static and dynamic efficiency are unlikely to be achieved
simultaneously by any simple or generic rule. Optimal strategies depend upon
the shape of the demand curve, which in turn reflects the distribution of benefit, and which changes as substitutes and complements become available.
Static efficiency may be achievable if the insurance market is competitive,
as Gaynor and colleagues have argued (Gaynor et al. 2000). They show that
marginal cost pricing leads to a welfare gain over monopoly pricing, as long as
copayments for each product or service are set optimally. Their purely static
analysis does not consider incentives to innovate and other aspects of dynamic
3
Still one can concoct a mechanical counterexample: consider the case where treatment
benefits have a Pareto distribution for most people, but for some small fraction of people there
is a positive mass at a high benefit level. This will not change the monopoly price or profits,
but it will increase consumer surplus. Since the straight Pareto case involved ρ(λ ∗ ) = 1, this
richer example will deliver ρ(λ∗ ) < 1.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

23

efficiency. Static efficiency in our model also assumes that copayments are
set optimally for a price-taking insurer; the results would differ if, for example, the insurer as well as the pharmaceutical company had substantial market
power. In that case, the copayment would be set at a level that takes into
account the price response of the monopolist pharmaceutical company.
It is unlikely that the insurance arrangements common today result in optimal copayments; there is typically a single copayment level for drugs in
government programs, and usually three tiers of copayments in commercial
health insurance plans. An insurer’s response to the imposition of a high
price for a drug is usually to move the drug to a higher tier. Benefit based
copayments are a proposed solution to better align cost sharing to benefits,
and if successfully implemented might lead to utilization patterns closer to
the optimum (Fendrick, Smith, Chernew and Shah 2001, Goldman, Joyce and
Karaca-Madic 2006, Rosen, Hamel, Weinstein, Cutler, Fendrick and Vijan
2005).
We have also assumed that the pharmaceutical producer cannot price discriminate. Perfect price discrimination leads to an excess quantity of consumption, rather than the competitive equilibrium, due to the insurance subsidy. Furthermore, the monopolist gaining all of the surplus would receive
much larger profits than those considered in our examples. Thus, with price
discrimination, profits are likely to exceed consumer surplus for a broad range
of distributions of benefit, leading to a failure of dynamic efficiency. Shorter
patent life could offset the excessive rewards for innovation, though such
a change would not correct overutilization occurring during the period of
monopoly.

7. CONCLUSIONS
This paper illustrates that efficient utilization — allocating the drug to those
people who derive a benefit at least as great as marginal cost — does not

24

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

inevitably lead to appropriate incentives to develop the drug. Static efficiency,
in this formulation, is obtained by the interaction of a monopoly with a market
that has subsidized demand. A fractional coinsurance rate can cause excessive
use, but it also helps avoid underuse.
However, with efficient utilization — static efficiency — the profits earned
by the pharmaceutical company setting a monopoly price can exceed the
consumer surplus created by the introduction of the drug, leading to a failure
of dynamic efficiency. The subsidy to demand inherent in the low copayment
leads to excess profits in many cases. The resulting dynamic inefficiency raises
the possibility that finite patent lives could be welfare improving by reducing
excessive innovation. The examples also suggest that an upper bound on the
price received by the manufacturer may in some cases be required to ensure
that revenues are not too large in relation to the benefits consumers receive.
In practical terms, these results imply that if price increases too rapidly as
the coinsurance rate declines, insurers may not be able to lower the out-ofpocket costs sufficiently to get high benefit patients to consume the drug. For
some distributions of benefit, it may also be very difficult to keep the highbenefit patients adequately insured without paying for the treatment of many
low-benefit patients. Moreover, with low coinsurance rates, the incentives to
innovate can easily be too great, at least in the case of infinite patent length.
Thus we expect that in the typical case, achieving both efficient utilization
and dynamic optimality requires a combination of a low coinsurance rate and
variation in patent duration.
In practice, however, simple use of either of these instruments may not
lead to optimality. For example, pricing should change as demand changes,
due perhaps to the entry of new competitors, and an administered price that
does not change correctly can lead to the wrong incentives. Similarly, optimal
patent duration would vary with the drug, yet rules that permit product-specific
patent life, and that preserve optimality properties in the presence of uncer-

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

25

tainty, would require fundamental changes in the law. In some extreme cases,
a very high upper bound on a drug’s price — one that could be much higher
than the price a monopolist would charge in a market with a 100% coinsurance rate — may help keep the price from growing without bound as the
coinsurance rate gets smaller.
The growing, though still limited, use of consumer-directed health plans and
health savings accounts is a sign of generally greater cost sharing. In such
plans, the coinsurance rate is 100% below a (high) deductible. Such plans are
likely to exacerbate the tendency to consume less than the optimal quantity
of monopoly-produced drugs, since price then equals marginal benefit to the
patient, but exceeds marginal cost.
Unlike traditional health insurance and high cost-sharing plans like consumerdirected plans, managed care seeks to limit quantities consumed more directly.
To the extent that such plans are successful, they steer allocation of drugs
toward patients who derive the greatest benefit. Yet such plans are likely
to exacerbate the underconsumption of monopoly products, leading to both
static and dynamic inefficiency.
An important avenue for future research is to examine pricing strategies and
the incentives for innovation empirically. For example, Philipson and Jena
(2005) study the ratio of consumer surplus to profits in treating HIV/AIDS.
They argue that pharmaceutical innovators have captured only about 5% of
the total surplus, suggesting that the incentives for innovation in this particular
market may be far too small. As our results (and those of Lakdawalla and Sood
(2005)) suggest, this result would not be expected if pharmaceutical firms were
free to behave as monopolists who can choose a profit maximizing price to
charge consumers covered by health insurance. Prices may be constrained
by monopolistic competition between alternative treatments that are close
substitutes, an effect that is not captured in our simple one-good model. In
such a situation, each product might receive profits equal to the incremental

26

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

surplus generated by the new product, even if the profits for all drugs in the
class are less than the consumer surplus that results from the availability of the
entire class of drugs. In this case, a small ratio of profits to surplus for the class
does not mean that the ratio will be small at the level of any single drug, and
it is not clear that the incentives to develop new drugs would be inadequate.
Alternatively, profits may be low relative to surplus in markets characterized
by significant monopsony power, yielding insufficient incentives to innovate.
Empirical work should guide the development of more complete models of
the policies that some governments use to limit the profits of pharmaceutical
companies. For example, there may be merit to industry claims that aggressive
government purchasing schemes pursued in the European Union may go too
far in the direction of limiting the profits earned on important new drugs. Such
claims would need to be tested empirically. Optimal policy requires balancing
the possibility of prices that are too low to encourage innovation and prices
that are too high. We find that in the absence of monopsony, price controls, and
other tools to limit demand, a system of medical insurance that relies on low
consumer coinsurance payments creates incentives for a monopoly provider
of a pharmaceutical to charge far more for its product than it otherwise would,
and possibly to receive excessive rewards for innovation.
APPENDIX A

Deriving Social Welfare in Equilibrium
To compute the value of social welfare, recall that x ≡ x(λp) denotes the

measure of people who purchase the treatment in equilibrium. Then, ignoring
the exogenous δi terms, social welfare (treating each person equally) is

Ω(λp) = (1 − x)u(y) + xu(y − λp) + s

Z

∞
v̄

vF 0 (v)dv.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

27

Social welfare is the sum of three terms: utility from those who do not purchase, consumption utility from those who do purchase the treatment, and the
treatment benefit for these people, i.e. those with benefits larger than v̄.
Assuming λp is small relative to y, we can use the substitution u(y − λp) ≈

u(y) − u0 (y)λp to get

0

Ω(λp) ≈ u(y) − xu (y)λp + s

Z

∞
v̄

vF 0 (v)dv.

Next, recall that the relationship between equilibrium income y and the endowment ȳ is
y = ȳ + x(λp − w).
That is, income adjusts for the copayment and the profits of the drug company.
Substituting this expression in for y we get
Ω(λp) ≈ u(ȳ) − u0 (ȳ)xw + s

Z

v̄

∞

vF 0 (v)dv.

This is the expression given in the text in equations (12) and (13).
APPENDIX B

Additional Results
The following discussion shows how our results related to the ratio of profits
to consumer surplus generalizes to other distributions. Details of the proofs
are available from the authors.
Proposition B.1. Consider our model with demand x(q). Suppose this
q
demand function exhibits a price elasticity (q) ≡ − dx
dq x that is weakly de-

creasing in the consumer price q. Then ρ(λ∗ ) ≥ 1, with strict inequality if
(q) decreases strictly over some interval.

This proposition expresses a general result for the ratio of profits to consumer surplus in terms of the elasticity of the demand function. In the text,

28

GARBER, JONES, AND ROMER

we showed that the constant elasticity demand function leads profits to equal
consumer surplus when the treatment is utilized efficiently, and gave two
examples (exponential and linear demand) when profits exceeded consumer
surplus. This proposition generalizes these examples by showing that if the
elasticity is decreasing, we get the result that profits will exceed consumer
surplus.1 In fact, this proposition generalizes to any demand function that lies
below an artificial constant elasticity demand function, where the artificial
constant elasticity is equal to the actual elasticity at the equilibrium price.
We can then extend this result for demand elasticities to the underlying
distribution that generates the demand function. The key is to note that, as
shown in equation (9), the elasticity of demand is
 = h(v)v.
A decreasing elasticity (as a function of price) ends up corresponding to a
hazard rate that falls no faster than 1/v. So as a direct corollary of our
proposition, our model delivers ρ(λ∗ ) ≥ 1 as long as the hazard rate h(v) falls

no faster than 1/v. Any underlying distribution with a constant or increasing

hazard, then, will generate the result that profits exceed consumer surplus
when utilization is efficient.

REFERENCES
Chang, Yongsung and Sun-Bin Kim, “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply:
A Quantitative Analysis based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,” July
2003. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 03-05.
Crew, Michael, “Coinsurance and the welfare economics of medical care,” American
Economic Review, December 1969, 59 (5), 906–908.
Fendrick, A.M., D.G. Smith, M.E. Chernew, and S.N. Shah, “A benefit-based copay for prescription drugs: patient contribution based on total benefits, not drug
acquisition cost,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2001, 7, 861–867.
1

This result can be proved graphically by drawing the standard consumer surplus and profit
picture on a log-log scale, i.e. with log price on the vertical axis and log quantity on the
horizontal axis.

INSURANCE AND INCENTIVES FOR MEDICAL INNOVATION

29

Gaynor, Martin, Deborah Haas-Wilson, and William B. Vogt, “Are Invisible Hands
Good Hands? Moral Hazard, Competition, and the Second-Best in Health Care
Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108, 992–1005.
Goldman, D.P., G.F. Joyce, and P. Karaca-Madic, “Varying pharmacy benefits with
clinical status: the case of cholesterol-lowering therapy,” American Journal of
Managed Care, 2006, 12, 17–28.
Heffler, S., S. Smith, S. Keehan, C. Borger, M.K. Clemens, and C. Truffer, “Trends: U.S. Health Spending Projections For 2004-2014,” Health Affairs, February 23 2005, pp. W5 74– W5 85. Accessed on web at
http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/reprint/hlthaff.w5.74v1, 6/18/2005.
Lakdawalla, Darius and Neeraj Sood, “Insurance and Innovation in Health Care Markets,” September 2005. NBER Working Paper 11602.
Pauly, Mark V., “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” American Economic
Review, June 1968, 58, 531–537.
Philipson, Tomas J. and Anupam B. Jena, “Who Benefits from New Medical Technologies? Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs,”
December 2005. NBER Working Paper 11810.
Rosen, A.B., M.B. Hamel, M.C. Weinstein, D.M. Cutler, A.M. Fendrick, and S. Vijan,
“Cost effectiveness of full Medicare coverage of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors for beneficiaries with diabetes,” Annals of Internal Medicine, 2005,
143, 89–99.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Tax Rates,” Review of Economic Studies, 2001, 68, 205–229.

