                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           RECENT PERSPECTIVES IN AND ON MACROECONOMICS




                       Benjamin M. Friedman




                      Working Paper No. 1208




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #1208
                                                        September 1983

                 RECENT PERSPECTIVES IN ND ON MACROECONOMICS


                            Benjamin   M. Friedman



                                  lbs tract




       The experience of costly disinflation in the early 1980s has contradicted

the central policy promise of the new classical macroeconomics just as sharply

as the experience of accelerating inflation in the l970s contradicted the

chief promise of earlier thinking. Much of the attractive appeal of each

approach rested on its holding out the prospect of successfully dealing

with the foremost macroeconomic policy issue of its time — unemployment

in the earlier case, and inflation more recently —without incurring the

costs that previous thinking associated with effective solutions. Inflation

did accelerate in the l970s, however, and now the real economic costs of

disinflation have proved remarkably in line with conventional estimates

antedating the new classical macroeconomics. The implication of this

unfortunate outcome is not, of course, simply to return to earlier approaches,

but to retain what is theoretically appealing about the methodology of the

new classical macroeconomics i a form that does not lead to falsified

policy conclusions.




                                       Benjamin M. Friedman
                                       Harvard University
                                       Department of Economics
                                       Littauer Center 127
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       (617) 495—4246
                                                               Revised
                                                               July, 1983



                RECENT PERSPECTIVES IN AND ON MACROECONOMICS


                            Benjamin M. Friedman
                             Harvard University



       For a would—be science with no laboratory, whatever experiments

nature provides carry great weight. For economics, and especially for

macroeconomics, the experience of actual economies not only motivates ideas

but also sometimes disconfirms them. When actual economic events are

sufficiently compelling, they can even change long-established thinking

or reverse the momentum of newer approaches just establishing themselves.

       The economic experience of the early 1980s in the industrialized western

countries, and in the United States in particular, may well be having just

that effect. Real economic activity abated sharply during this period,

bringing record levels of both unemployment and idle industrial capacity.

Restrictive monetary policy aimed at slowing price inflation was a key

element, probably the key element, in producing this decline. Moreover,

at least in the United States after 1980, disinflationary monetary policy

was hardly a surprise.

       This combination of circumstances has had, and should have, a powerful

influence on macroeconomic thinking, in large part because it directly

contradicts the predominant new line of macroeconomic research developed

in the 1970s —the "new classical macroeconomics." The central policy

conclusion of the new classical macroeconomics is that real economic activity

is invariant to monetary policy actions which are anticipated in advance.

The corollary of this principle with special relevance to the leading economic

policy debate of the past decade is that disinflation produced by tight

monetary policy need not be costly. The apparent contradiction between the
primary policy message of the new classical macroeconomics and the actual

economic experience of the early 1980s has already dulled the appeal of this

direction of thinking to a noticeable extent.

       The thesis of this essay is that the contradiction between recent

economic experience and the new classical macroeconomics is not just apparent

but real, and that it represents a disconfirmation at least as compelling

as the set of events which led to disillusionment with the previously

prevailing macroeconomic consensus and thereby provided the attraction of

the new classical macroeconomics in the first place. The implication that

follows for macroeconomic research is not, of course, to return without

modification to that earlier set of views. Instead, it is that still further

approaches, of which some are already at hand, offer the best vehicle to

retain what remains attractive about the methodology of the new classical

macroeconomics yet derive policy conclusions consistent with the apparent

working of actual economies in any but the longest time horizons —

specifically,   that money is not neutral, that trade-off s exist, and that

policy matters for real economic outcomes.

       Section I re—emphasizes the connection between macroeconomic thinking

and actual economic experience, and in particular relates the rise of the

new classical macroeconomics to the experience of price inflation in the

1960s and 1970s. Section II reviews the main assumptions and conclusions

of the new classical macroeconomics, and compares these conclusions to the

observed results of the disinflation policy pursued in the early l980s.

Section III summarizes the implications of this comparison, and calls atten-

tion to several new directions in macroeconomic thinking — each bearing

different policy conclusions than the new classical macroeconomics — that

have already emerged.
                                       —3—




 I. The New Classical Macroeconomics in the Context of Macroeconomic Experience

       Major developments in economic thinking often owe as much to the

influence of actual economic events as to the internal momentum of scientific

discovery building on itself. The attitudes that economic theories embody

toward the role of government are a particular case in point. For example,

a society's live experience of the consequences of uncontrolled negative

externalities like air pollution or unsafe driving often spawns an era of

fertile thinking about the benefits of authoritative intervention. Conversely,

realized disappointment over ineffective or even counterproductive goverent

correctives typically renews interest, at the abstract level as well as

the practical, in the power of the market mechanism.

       Macroeconomics has always displayed a special responsiveness to

the tide of prevailing economic circumstances. One cause of this sensitivity,

of course, is simply that the goal of so much of macroeconomic analysis is

to address the potential role (or lack thereof) for government policy.

Another factor, often overlooked but of substantial importance nonethless, is

the commonality of the macroeconomic experience in the modern economy. Specific

industries and geographic regions display great heterogeneity, to be sure, but

the major macroeconomic events —   prosperity   or contraction, stability or

volatility, inflation or steady prices —emerge, recede, and re-emerge

in importance at roughly the same time to almost everyone in the society,

including its economists. Moreover, increasing interdependence among

nationst economies in the modern world has kept pace with the erosion

of international impediments to scientific exchange, so that much of the

commonality of experience that matters in this context also extends well

beyond the economists of any one country.

       As a result, the history of macroeconomics is in many respects
                                       —4—




a   mirror of macroeconomic history. As early as the first decades of

the nineteenth century, problems of wartime finance and its aftermath

stimulated interest in price inflation and the role of money, and not

much later the evolution of the modern banking system fostered new and

different thinking on closely related issues. The continuing clash of

agrarian and industrial interests, virtually throughout the nineteenth

century, powerfully set the stage for the development of new fundamental

ideas on free trade versus protection. The worldwide depression of the

l930s, perhaps the most striking example of this kind of influence, led

to whole new concepts based on sticky prices and realized excess demands

in place of the earlier progressive refinement of neoclassical ideas

appropriate to a fully employed economy with flexible prices. Since

World War II macroeconomists have focused — again, not just in

recognizable attempts to be "practical," but in basic theoretical work

as 1l — on      a series of emerging conditions in the actual economic environ-

ment, including irregularly periodic business contractions, persistent and

accelerating price inflation, disappointing productivity trends and, most
recently, external shocks imposed via prices of cartelized raw materials.
         Probably the most interesting development at the   fundamental

level of macroeconomics in recent years, and certainly the most challenging

along several dimensions, has been the emergence of the "new classical

macroeconomics." This line of research, as the label in part suggests,

uses a combination of theoretical insights and specific assumptions, often

along with modern mathematical and statistical tools, to establish in a

more dramatic way the policy ineffectiveness propositions previously

associated with an earlier analysis.

         several distinguishing features of this line of thinking have
                                      —5—




importantly enhanced its attractiveness. The rigor of the explicit

optimizing framework it imposes, for example, creates a proliferation

of research opportunities at the theoretical level, including potentially

important new avenues for the integration of macro- with micro-economics.

In addition, the set of restrictions it delivers on observable outcomes

presents both challenges to and opportunities for research on the

methodology of statistical inference. As a corollary, of course, it also

presents an entire agenda for applied empirical research. Still, even

these substantial implications of this new line of thinking cannot fully

account — indeed, nor should they —   for   its proven attractiveness among

macroeconomists.

       The main reason why the new classical macroeconomics has proved

so broadly compelling is that it connects in a direct way to specific

questions and problems that macroeconomists have addressed, often with

sharply diverging answers, since at least the mid 1960s: Does monetary

policy affect real economic outcomes? Is there scope for macroeconomic

choice in the usual sense of policy trade—off s? Are whatever trade—of fs

the economy presents exploitable? Does the framework defining monetary

policy decisions and actions matter? Is disinflation costly?

       The principal innovators in the new classical macroeconomics,

Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent, have both written delineating the emergence

of this line of thinking as a scientific phenomenon.1 Lucas' account

places this development in the context of the evolution of general

equilibrium theory broadly construed, embracing the flow of ideas both in

economics and in related disciplines, while Sargent's emphasizes prior

steps in statistical methodology. Both convey a useful sense of the

axiomatic dimension of the cumulative process characteristic of scientific
                                       —6—




inquiry.
         Nevertheless, macroeconomic ideas rarely develop in isolation from

the unfolding of actual economic events, and in this case too what has

doubtless provided the real thrust behind the advance of the new classical

macroeconomics has been the power and relevance of its conclusions about

economic behavior in the context of currently pressing questions about

economic policy. As Lucas and Sargent writing together have emphasized,

the new classical economics is intended as a replacement for a previously

prevailing consensus paradigm that bore implications which, in their view,

economic experience plainly falsified.2 As is clear in their joint paper

as well as throughout Lucas' earlier writings,3 the central economic

"event" motivating this development was the acceleration of price inflation

during the 1960s and l970s.

         More precisely, the central motivating factor has been the apparent

contradiction between, on the one hand, the observation of upward drift

in the inflation rate over time and, on the other, the "Keynesian" conclusion

that macroeconomic policy could indefinitely maintain higher trend levels

of output and employment at the cost of a higher, but nonetheless stable,

inflation rate. In their joint paper Lucas and Sargent highlight this

experience as a "decisive test" of the earlier views, as embodied in the

macroeconometric models of the time, arid label the contradiction between

these views and the observed outcome "spectacular" and "wildly incorrect" —

an "econometric failure on a grand   scale."   More recently Lucas has argued,

on the   basis of this same contradiction, that the earlier approach was
"in deep trouble, the deepest kind of trouble in which an applied body of

theory can find itself: It appears to be giving seriously wrong answers

to the most basic questions of macroeconomic policy."4
                                        —7—




          That the experience of two decades apparently contrasted with such

 an important policy implication of Keynesian macroeconomic thinking

 (actually, a post—Keynesian synthesis of Keynesian and neoclassical ideas)

 clearly testified to the need for substantial modification at a minimum,

 and perhaps wholesale replacement. That the aspect of economic behavior

most obviously at issue in accounting for the apparent inconsistency

between actual experience and the earlier macroeconomic paradigm

the dynamic interaction between expectations and labor supply decisions
— was     also the principal focus of the new paradigm, immediately drew

the latter way of thinking into the vacuum created by rejecting the

former.

          The link between the new classical macroeconomics and the debate

over the stability of the inflation-unemployment trade-off — or, put the

other way around, the "acceleratjonjst" debate —    is   clear enough. As

Phelps and Friedman had pointed out early on, the stability of the

"Phillips curve" summarizing wage (and hence price) setting behavior

rested on the assumed failure of workers or their agents to recognize,

and respond to, the implications of inflation for their real wages.5

In addition, as an early contribution by Lucas showed,6 and as Sargent's

recent paper emphasizes, this important aspect of economic behavior

had a close parallel in the problem of statistically modeling expectations

and slow adjustments. Through an evolution that is now familiar history,
                                                                  7
the solution proposed by Lucas, drawing on Muth's earlier work, in time

became the new classical macroeconomics.

        What is striking in all this — though hardly surprising, in light

of the history of macroeconomics — is the importance of a specific

economic "event" both in motivating a new line of analysis and in making
                                        —8—




it attractive to large numbers of researchers. The "great inflation"

of the 1960s and l970s was hardly as shocking an event as the "great

depression" of the 1930s, but each in its turn profoundly affected economic

thinking just as it realigned political priorities and allegiances. In

response to persistent inflation, macroeconomists have chosen new questions

and   looked   for new answers. For many, the way of seeking those answers

has been the new clssical macroeconomics.

        what one economic "event" can do, however, another can undo —

at   least in some respects. Because empirical evidence can disconfirm

a theory but, strictly speaking, can never confirm one, scientifically

operational hypotheses are like Humpty—Dumpties. To the extent that the

experience of the 1960s and l970s really disproved the then—prevailing

macroeconomic consensus, no subsequent experience can restore it. By

contrast, further experience can equally damage the new classical economics.

An important question that macroeconomics faces today is whether the

experience of the early l980s has already done so.
                                      —9—




II. The New Classical Macroeconomics and Recent Macroeconomic Experience

       Has the economic experience of the early 1980s provided yet another

major economic "event" to change the course of macroeconomic thinking?

In order to decide even whether a test of the new classical economics

has occurred, it is first necessary to determine the chief implications

of that line of thinking for observable economic behavior.

       The proposition of the new classical macroeconomics that most

closely corresponds to the earlier promise of a stable inflation—

unemployment trade-off, which Lucas and Sargent take to provide the

basis for the "decisive test" of the earlier "Keynesian" thinking, is the

promise of costless disinflation. These two policy conclusions, offered

respectively by two lines of thinking, share important parallels. Each

addressed that aspect of the macroeconomic condition widely identified

as the primary public policy problem of the time — unemployment in the

l960s, and inflation in the l970s. Most importantly, each offered the

prospect of solving the policy problem it addressed withQ. incurring

the perceived cost that both economistg and the general public feared

would accompany the most obvious remedies. Certainly by the l960s,

the idea that government policy could reduce unemployment was hardly new;

what was novel was the promise of doing so, permanently, without significantly

inducing inflation. Similarly, in the 1970s the idea that government policy

could slow inflation was not new either; the novelty was the promise of

doing so without significantly raising unemployment, or reducing output

and incomes, even in the short run.

       For a would—be science eager to avoid value judgments, the promise

of costless disinflation had special appeal. In place of the earlier

discussion of trade—offs between percentage points of inflation and
                                    —10—




point—years of unemployment, policy analysis could now focus strictly on

the inflation problem without considering the consequences of disinflation

for the real economy.

       Moreover, analyzing away any real costs was of particular importance

in mounting practical arguments for a disinflationary policy. On the one

side, as Okun and others emphasized,8 most conventional estimates of those

costs were large, ranging from 2 to 6 point—years of unemployment for every

one—point reduction in inflation, with a median just over 3—for—l. Further,

if each 1% change in unemployment corresponded to some 3% in the economy's

real growth, then that median estimate implied that slowing inflation

from, say, 10% to 5% per annum would ultimately cost half a year's

output —hardly a small sum. On the other side, economists were frustrated

by their failure to provide any persuasive analysis indicating comparable

real costs of inflation itself. Apparently the public's aversion to

inflation, if it was not simply misguided, stemmed more from hard-to-

quantify concerns about the fragility of societal relationships than from

the kinds of costs that comfortably suit economic analysis.

       At least in its formal evolution, the new classical macroeconomics

did not start out with the proposition of costless disinflation any more

than the earlier analysis had begun from the idea of a stable long-run

inflation—unemployment trade-off. As is well known, the two basic building

blocks of this line of research are the assumptions that expectations are

"rational" and that supply decisions lead to "full employment" output and

employment except in the context of specific kinds of surprises.9 As is

also well known, both of these propositions depend in turn on still

more elementary assumptions, including the ideas of individual

optimizing behavior and market clearing that Lucas and Sargent have
                                          —11—




emphasized, and     others   as well.10 The required "rationality" of expectations,

for example, depends on individuals' not Only using efficiently whatever

information they have but also having enough information to know, both

qualitatively and quantitatively, how the economy works. Similarly,

the "Lucas supply function" depends not only on the flexibility of prices

and wages but also on suppliers' observing their output prices before

observing their input prices.

       The achievement of the new classical macroeconomics was to combine

this set of assumptions not just to show that disinflation is costless

but to derive the more general conclusion that anticipated monetary policy

actions do not affect real economic activity, and hence that no trade-off

exists between inflation (or, for that matter, any other nominal magnitude)

and employment or output (or any other real magnitude). Costless disinflation

follows simply as a specific application of the general result.

       In a completely atemporal context, it is difficult to know how to

react to these propositions. Indeed, the oxymoron "new classical" itself

suggests this tension. Notwithstanding the l960s view of a "permanent"

inflation—unemployment trade-off, there is nothing either new or surprising

in monetary neutrality propositions that obtain under appropriate conditions

in some sufficiently long run. Apart from Tobin effects,11 which are likely

to be quantitatively small, few economists would argue that the average

rate of money growth maintained over a century would much influence the

level of real economic activity at the century's end, while most would

expect an effect on the average inflation rate over that time. By contrast,

what is new and striking         as well as of great practical importance, if

it is true —   is   the conclusion of the new classical macroeconomics that

these familiar neutrality propositions obtain in the short run too.
                                    —12—




       How, then, has the new classical macroeconomics met the "decisive

test" provided by the quest for costless disinflation in the early l980s?

In 1980 the U.S. economy entered a period of protracted weakness involving,

in record short order, two successive business recessions (as identified

in the standard NBER chronology). The economies of other industrialized

western nations exhibited similar, if not even more severe, weakness.

In the United States the utilization of both labor and capital resources

fell to post World war II record lows by yearend 1982, with 10.8% of the

labor force unemployed and 32.7% of industrial capacity idle. While

neither the 1980 recession (the shortest on record) nor the 1981-82

recession (the longest since World War II) was extraordinary individually,

the effect of the two together represented as great an impact on the real

economy as any business cycle experience in the post—war era.   It also

dramatically slowed inflation.

       What makes this "event" so immediately relevant to evaluating

the new classical macroeconomics is the important role of monetary policy,

especially after 1980, in bringing it about Business cycle historians

will no doubt continue for some time to debate the causes of the brief

recession in the spring of 1980. The new "monetarist" monetary policy

adopted in October 1979 was a factor, to be sure, but so were the imposition

of credit controls in March 1980, the movement of the federal budget into

surplus on a high—employment basis in 1979, and the doubling of world oil

prices in 1979—80.

        By contrast, restrictive monetary policy stands out as the primary

 force halting the recovery that began in mid 1980. Whether measured by

money growth or by interest rate levels, monetary policy was tight during

 this period. After declining from 8.2% in 1978 to 7.4% in 1979 and 7.2%
                                         —13—




 in 1980, the growth   of the Ml money   stock fell to 5.2% in 1981 — or Only

 2.5% after the Federal Reserve Board's suggested adjustment to reflect

 the nationwide authorization of NOW accounts at the year's outset.

 Both short- and long—term nominal interest rates moved to new record

 highs at yearend 1980 and remained at those levels until late in 1981.

 Moreover, even when nominal interest rates finally declined, they remained

 (and, through the time of writing, continue) at unprecedentedly high

levels in relation to the economy's ongoing rate of price inflation. The

primacy of this tight monetary policy stance in bringing about the recession

that   began in mid 1981 is all the clearer in that the high—employment federal
budget was moving progressively into deficit, and real oil prices were
falling, throughout this period.
         what implications, for price inflation and for real economic

activity, does the new classical macroeconomics suggest as a consequence

of this monetary policy? It is always possible to argue, of course, that

that analysis carries no implications at all for the outcome of any such

policy because it is impossible to know whether the policy was anticipated

or not. This response is not satisfactory, however. Although the initial

change in monetary policy in October 1979 may well have caught the public

unaware, the continuation of that policy from late 1980 onward was hardly

a surprise. Especially in the context of the 1980 general election,

the tight monetary policy during this period was probably about as well

anticipated as such a policy is ever likely to be. Because expectations

are unobservable, of course, it is impossible ever to establish definitively

what was and what was not anticipated in advance. Even so, if the new

classical macroeconomics analysis of anticipated monetary policy is not

relevant to U.S. monetary policy during this period, then it is not clear
                                        —14—




when   — or if ever — that analysis is likely to be relevant.
         Table 1 summarizes some basic dimensions of u.s. macroeconomic

experience during 1980-82, including not only the slowing of price inflation

but also the decline in real economic activity. For purposes of establishing

some minimal historical context, the table also traces the re—acceleration

of inflation during the years after the 1973-75 recession. The rise in

the inflation rate during 1976-80 was gradual at first, then more rapid

as the business expansion carried the economy to higher utilization

levels and finally as international oil prices rose sharply in 1979—80.

The subsequent drop in the inflation rate was somewhat sharper, halving it

in two    years,   and thereby more than reversing the entire rise since 1975 and

bringing    inflation   to its slowest pace since 1972.

          What about the behavior of real economic activity that accompanied

this disinflation? Was this experience consistent with the central

propositions of the new classical macroeconomics?         Did the performance

of the real economy bear out the prediction of costless disinflation?

          The economic events documented in Table 1 suggest anything but

costless disinflation. Instead, they are strikingly in line with the

conventional estimates of the cost of disinflation surveyed by Okun some

years before the fact.

          The slowing of inflation from 10% per annum in 1980 to 5% in 1982
                                                    unemployment rate of 7 1/2 %
had, just by yearend 1982, required an average

 during   the three years 1980-82. If the economy was approximately at full

 employment during 1978—79, when the unemployment rate was 6% on average,

 then the cost through 1982 of about 5 points of disinflation was about

 5 point-years of unemployment, Stopping the accounts at yearend 1982

 makes no sense, however. The calculation is incomplete without tallying
                                                         TABLE 1

                                 INFLATION, GROWTHAND EMPLOYMENT OF RESOURCES:    1976-1982



                             Inflation                            Growth                   Employment of Resources
                     Total GNP      Consumption            Real      Industrial         Unemployment     Capacity
                     Deflator        Deflator              GNP       Production             Rate        Utilization


1976                   47%l              5.l%l             44%l            74%2                7.8%       80.0%
1977                   6.1               5.8               5.7             5.2                 6.4        82.6
1978                   8.5               7.0               5.8             8.0                 6.0        86.4
1979                   8.2               9.0               1.4             0.5                 6.0        84.4


1980                  10.2             10.3               —0.6         —1.4                    7.3        79.1
1981                   8.9               8.6               0.7         —4.7                    8.8        74.8
1982                   4.4               5.1              —1.1         —2.5                   10.8        67.6




Notes:     1.    Fourth quarter growth from previous year's fourth quarter.
           2.    December growth from previous year's December.
           3.    December level.
           4.    Fourth quarter level.

Sources:        U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Labor, Board of Governors of the
                                                                                                 Federal
                     Reserve System.
                                        —15—




the continuing point—years of unemployment that accrue until the economy

returns to full employment. The current federal government projection

as of the time of writing, for example, places the return to 6% (actually

6 1/2 %) unemployment in 1988, with an average of 8 1/2 % of the labor

force unemployed during 1983—88 (and no further slowing of inflation)

This outlook therefore implies an additional 15 point—years of unemployment,

bringing to 20 point-years the total associated with 5 points of disinflation,

for a final trade-off of 4-to—l —toward the pessimistic end of Okun's

range.

          it is also possible to construct a more favorable picture on the

basis    of   more optimistic assumptions, of course. For example, if the post—

recession business expansion were sufficient to reduce unemployment to

9 1/2 % in 1983, 7 1/2 % in 1984, arid then 6% in 1985 and thereafter —

and all that without any re-acceleration of inflation — then the relevant

total would have been "only" 10 point-years of unemployment, implying a

final trade-off of "only" 2-f or-l — about at the optimistic end of Okun's

range.

          Whether the correct number summarizing the unemployment cost of

disinflation ultimately turns out to be somewhat above or somewhat below

Okun's median estimate is beside the point. What matters is that the

disinflation already has not been, and will not turn out to be, costless.

Experience has belied the most significant policy implication of the new

classical macroeconomics, the implication that, at an important level,

gave this new line of thinking its appeal.

          Does this event constitute "a decisive test"? Was the prediction

of costless disinflation "wildly incorrect"? Was the inconsistency between

it and the economy's observed behavior "spectacular," representing
                                          —16—




"econometric failure on      a   grand scale"? Did the analysis that concluded
that    disinflation was costless give "seriously wrong answers to the most
basic questions of macroeconomic policy"? Is the new classical macroeconomics
therefore now in "the deepest kind of trouble in which an applied body of
theory   can find itself"?
         Such terms are difficult to assess, much less to apply. what does
seem clear is that the decline of real economic activity that accompanied
the disinflation of the early       1980s has contradicted the chief policy

implication   of the new classical     macroeconomics just as surely, and   just
as greatly, as the overall upward trend in inflation during the 1960s and
l970s   contradicted the chief policy implication of an earlier macroeconomic

analysis.
                                     —17—




III. Future Directions for Macroeconomics

       Where does macroeconomics go from here? To be sure, the wrong

lesson to draw from the recent experience would be that thinking on the

subject should simply return to its prevailing state of a decade or two

ago, rejecting as a whole all developments associated with the new classical

macroeconomics. In the first instance, the disconfirmation of the costless

disinflation proposition does not eliminate from the empirical record the

earlier disconfirmation of the stable inflation-unemployment trade-off

proposition. Breaking a new eggshell today does not restore to integrity

another eggshell broken yesterday.

       More importantly, it is both unnecessary and wrong to reject

every new element introduced by the new classical macroeconomics just

because the specific combination of elements used in that line of research

has led to falsified conclusions. As the discussion above has already

emphasized, the assumptions that people behave in their own self-interest

and that markets clear (in some broad sense) are not by themselves sufficient

to deliver the key results of short-run policy neutrality and costless

disinflation. Those more ambitious results follow only from additional,

more far—reaching assumptions including the availability of sufficient

information, the absence of transactions costs (again in a very broad

sense), and the flexibility of wages and prices.

       Moreover, the series of methodological developments initially

associated with the new classical macroeconomics bears little if any

relation to the ultimate behavioral conclusions associated with this line

of research. The emphasis on microeconomic foundations, including in

particular the effort to derive macroeconomic relationships from explicit

models of individual behavior, is one example. This approach to macroeconomics
                                    —18—




is not without costs, of course, including (at least to date) the need

to assume away aggregation issues as well as to ignore valid aspects of

the individual behavioral environment, like transactions costs, which would

render formal analysis iritractible. Nevertheless, in many contexts these

costs may well be worth incurring in order to exploit the power of the

available microeconomic theory. Another example is the use of empirical

estimation methods that exploit the theory underlying a multi-equation

model to impose cross—equation restrictions on the admissible parameter

values. Here too there are costs, but in many contexts they may be

justified by the resulting advantages in terms of more rigorous hypothesis

testing or, under a maintained hypothesis, better quantitative estimates.

       The important point is to distinguish these and other methodological

developments in macroeconomic thinking from the context of the policy

conclusions derived by the new classical macroeconomics under quite specific,

and in some cases implausible, assumptions. Genuine methodological

advances are applicable more broadly. The current direction of macroeconomic

research is not abandoning these developments, nor is the future direction

of research in the field likely to do so.

       At the same time, if macroeconomics is not simply to continue to

focus on a framework that delivers falsified conclusions, important

departures from the new classical macroeconomics are clearly necessary.

In part those departures are already in progress. At least to date, two

major themes - one based on the costs of decisions and transactions,

and the other based on informational limitations and asymmetries —have

predominated. These themes have appeared separately and also in conjunction.

       Early on in the debate over the then emerging new classical macro-

economics, Phelps and Taylor as well as Fischer pointed out the necessity
of the price flexibility assumption for the policy neutrality conclusion.13

The specific context of this and the ensuing literature was the existence

of fixed nominal wage contracts, perhaps the most obvious violation of

the flexibility assumption in modern western economies, but the point

at issue really applies to sticky wages and prices of any kind, anywhere

within the system. As economists have known for decades, stickiness of

wages and/or prices matters importantly, and the associated implications

are no less striking in the context of the methods and other assumptions

typical of the new classical macroeconomics. Indeed, wages or prices

set for fixed but overlapping time periods are sufficient, even within

this framework of anaysis, to generate persistent inflation and real

activity effects that last well beyond the length of the longest contract,

as well as business cycles in the sense of policy or other effects on real
                                                       14
economic activity that first build before subsiding.

       Moreover, price and wage inflexibility is itself just an instance

of the broader theme of decision and transactions costs. In the spirit

of the new classical macroeconomics, it is helpful not just to accept

sticky wages and prices as a fact but to seek additional insights from

trying to understand the reasons behind their existence. Some economic

rationale often underlies the form of society's institutional arrangements.

In this case the prevalence of arrangements setting inflexible wages or

prices for either fixed or indefinite periods of time rio doubt reflects

the costs of making decisions, including the costs of gathering the

information needed for decision making. In the presence of such costs,

even an economy made up entirely of people who optimize their own interests

 within optimally chosen arrangements will fail to exhibit the central
                                                            15
 properties claimed by the new classical macroeconomics.
                                        —20—




         Issues   of information availability not Only provide a basis for

 wage and price stickiness but also constitute yet a further potential

 avenue for using the methods of the new classical macroeconomics without

 proceeding to its empirically falsified conclusions. Even under the

maintained assumption that only deviations of outcomes from the associated

prior expectations affect real economic activity, an important question

is the basis on which those prior expectations are formed. What especially

matters in the context of the potential role of monetary policy is whether

the   central bank, and the people whose behavior more proximately matters
for decisions affecting output, share the same basis for forming expectations.'6
If   not, then even systematic monetary policy is not neutral with respect

to real economic activity.

        Moreover, if the respective information differential between the

central bank   and   the relevant parts of the economy's private sector is

such as to favor (in a minimum-variance sense) the central bank, then

monetary policy will be able to exploit the resulting nonneutrality.

Especially since the presumed sign of the effect of surprises on output

decisions in this analysis makes sense primarily in the context of the

decisions of households, rather than of businesses or of traders in

financial markets, an information differential in the required direction

is hardly implausible. Once again, much of the method and analytical body

of the new classical macroeconomics can still obtain (here even including the

price flexibility assumption), yet the end result of the analysis is an

altogether different set of policy conclusions.

        Finally, the transactions cost theme and the information availability

theme blend in other ways as well. A third direction for subsequent

macroeconomic research is to emphasize the actual process of making and
                                        —21—




coordinating decisions in the modern, large-scale market economy. One

way to view wages or price stickiness, for example, is simply as the
result   of the private sector's being able to take and implement price and
output decisions at less frequent intervals than the central bank can
taice and implement monetary policy decisions. other element in this
line of thinking is to recognize the impossibility of fully simultaneous

decision making among all relevant actors throughout the market economy.

Blanchard,     for example, has shown that the lack of synchronization of price
and production decisions is itself sufficient to lead to different policy
conclusions,     even within a remaining context drawn   entirely from the new
classical macroe cononucs. 17
         What has already emerged from recent research, therefore, is the extreme

fragility of the central policy conclusions of the new classical macroeconomics.

Under even small and apparently reasonable modifications in the underlying

assumptions, a fully corresponding analysis indicates that money is not

neutral, that systematic policy affects real output and employment, and

that trade-off s exist — and that disinflation is not costless. If the

objective of the analysis were to defend the specific policy conclusions

of the new classical macroeconomics, recent trends in macroeconomic research

would be as distressing at the theoretical level as the actual experience

of disinflation in the early l9BOs has been at the empirical level.

         If the objective is instead to gain an even better understanding

of how the macroeconomy works, however, these new directions are likely

to prove constructive. They show that it is possible to exploit what is useful

from the advances of the previous decade without following an inevitable

path   to empirically falsified results.
         In   the light of how macroeconomics has always developed, all this
                                    —22—




is not surprising. The respective disappointments over the economy's

failure to recover quickly from the depression of the 1930s and then

to avoid inflation in the l960s and l970s in both cases led to substantial

rethinking, and now so too has the failure to achieve costless disinflation

in the early 1980s. It is this responsiveness to actual economic events,

just as much as the cumulative nature of scientific thinking in the

abstract, that gives macroeconomics its vitality.
                                  Footnotes




1. Lucas (1980) and Sargent (1982).

2. Lucas and Sargent (1978).

3. See, even more recently, Lucas (1981).

4. Lucas (1981).

5. phelps (1967) and Friedman (1968).

6. Lucas (1970).

7. auth (1960, 1961).

8. Okun (1978). See also for example, Gordon (1975) and Cagan (1978).

9. Gordon (1976) and Shiller (1978) are useful surveys.

10. See, for example, Taylor (1975), Friedman (1978, 1979) and Simon (1979).

11. Tobin (1965). See also Sidrauski (1969).

12. U.S. Government (1983).

13. Phelps and Taylor (1977) and Fischer (1977).

14. See Taylor (1980, 1982).

15. See, for example, Grossman and Weiss (1982).

16. See again Taylor (1975) and Friedman (1979) as well as, for example,
     Weiss (1980) and Siegel (1982).

17. Blanchard (1983).
                                     References



 Blanchard, Olivier J. 1983. "Rigid      Relative   Prices and Price Level Inertia."
        Mimeo, Harvard University.

 Cagan, Philip. 1978. "The Reduction of Inflation by Slack Demand." In
        William Feliner, ed., Contemporary Economic Problems 1978. Washington:
        American Enterprise Institute.

 Fischer, Stanley. 1977. "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and
        the Optimal Money Supply Rule." Journal of Political Economy, 85
        (February), 191-206.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1978. "Discussion." In After the Phillips Curve:
       Persistence of High Inflation and High Unemployment. Boston: Federal
       Reserve Bank of Boston.

Friedman, Benjamin M. 1979. "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Informa-
       tion Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels." Journal
       of Monetary Economics, 5 (January), 23-41.

Friedman, Milton. 1968. "The Role of Monetary Policy." American Economic
       Review, 58 (March), 1—17.

Gordon, Robert J. 1975. "The Impact of Aggregate Demand on Prices."
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 3), 613-662.

Gordon, Robert J. 1976. "Recent Developments in the Theory of Inflation
       arid Unemployment." Journal of Monetary Economics, 2 (April), 185-219.

Grossman, Sanford, and Weiss, Lawrence. 1982. "A Transaction Based Model
       of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism: Parts I and II." Mimeo,
       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lucas, Robert E. 1970. "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis."
       In Otto Eckstein, ed., The Econometrics of Price Determination.
       Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Lucas, Robert E. 1980. "Methods and Problems in Business Cycle Theory."
       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12 (November, Part II), 696-715.

Lucas, Robert E. 1981. "Tobin and Monetarism: A Review Article."
       Journal of Economic Literature, 19 (June), 558—567.

Lucas, Robert E., and Sargent, Thomas J. 1978. "After Keynesian Macroeconomics."
       In After the Phillips Curve: Persistence of High Inflation and High
       Unemployment. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Muth, John F. 1960. "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts."
       Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55 (June), 299—306.

Muth, John F. 1961. "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements."
       Econometrjca, 29 (July), 315—335.
Okun, Arthur M. 1978. "Efficient Disinflationary policies." American
       Economic Review, 68 (May), 348—352.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1967. "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and
       Optimal Unemployment over Time." Economica, 34 (August), 254-281.

Phelps, Edmund S., and Taylor, John B. 1977. "Stabilizing Powers of
       Monetary Policy under Rational Expectations." Journal of political
       Economy, 85 (February), 163-190.

Sargent, Thomas J. 1982. "Beyond Demand and Supply Curves in Macroeconomics."
       American Economic Review, 72 (May), 382—389.

Shiller, Robert J. 1978. "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure
       of Macroeconomic Models: A Critical Review." journal of Monetary
       Economics, 4 (january ), 1—44.

Sidrauski, Manuel. 1969. "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth."
       journal of political Econ1, 77 (July/August, Part II), 575-585.

Siegel, Jeremy J. 1982. "Monetary Stabilization and the Informational
       Value of Monetary Aggregates." Journal of political Economy,
       90 (February), 176—180.

Simon, Herbert A. 1979. "Rational Decision Making in Business Organizations."
       American Economic Review, 69 (September), 493—513.

Taylor, John B. 1975. "Monetary policy During a Transition to Rational
       Expectations." journal of political EconOy, 83 (October), 1009-1021.

Taylor, John B. 1980. "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts."
       Journal of political EconomI, 88 (February), 1-23.

Taylor, John B. 1982. "Union wage Settlements During a Disinflation."
       Mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research."

Tobin, James. 1965. "Money and Economic Growth."   EconometriCa, 33 (October)
       671—684.

U.S. Government. 1983. The Budget of the United States Government- Fiscal
       Year 1984. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Weiss, Lawrence. 1980. "The Role for Active Monetary Policy in a Rational
       Expectations Model." journal of political Economy, 88 (April),
       221—2 33.
