NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAR IN IRAQ VERSUS CONTAINMENT
Steven J. Davis
Kevin M. Murphy
Robert H. Topel
Working Paper 12092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12092
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

Prepared for the CESifo Conference on “Guns and Butter: The Economic Causes and Consequences of
Conflict” held in Munich, Germany on December 9 and 10, 2005. This study is a revised version of an
analytical essay circulated by the authors shortly before the March 2003 invasion of Iraq. The earlier essay,
titled “War in Iraq vs. Containment: Weighing the Costs,” is available at
gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/steven.davis/research/. For many thoughtful comments on the earlier essay, we
especially wish to thank, without implicating, Ricardo Caballero, Charles Himmelberg, Eric Rasmussen,
Roberto Rigobon, Christopher Sims, and Andy Torok. We also thank seminar participants at the University
of Chicago, the NBER Working Group on the Economics of National Security and the CESifo conference.
We thank Chris Foote for assistance with data on Iraqi employment and oil production. Sophie Castro-Davis
provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Steven J. Davis, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

War in Iraq versus Containment
Steven J. Davis, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel
NBER Working Paper No. 12092
March 2006
JEL No. H56
ABSTRACT
We consider three questions related to the choice between war in Iraq and a continuation of the prewar containment policy. First, in terms of military resources, casualties and expenditures for
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction, is war more or less costly for the United States than
containment? Second, compared to war and forcible regime change, would a continuation of the
containment policy have saved Iraqi lives? Third, is war likely to bring about an improvement or
deterioration in the economic well-being of Iraqis? We address these questions from an ex ante
perspective as of early 2003.
According to our analysis, pre-invasion views about the likely course of the Iraq intervention imply
present value costs for the United States in the range of $100 to $870 billion. Our estimated present
value cost for the containment policy is nearly $300 billion and ranges upward to $700 billion when
we account for several risks stressed by national security analysts. Our analysis also indicates that
war and forcible regime change will yield large improvements in the economic well-being of most
Iraqis relative to their prospects under the containment policy, and that the Iraqi death toll would
likely be greater under containment.
Steven J. Davis
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu

Kevin M. Murphy
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kevin.murphy@gsb.uchicago.edu

Robert H. Topel
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
robert.topel@gsb.uchicago.edu

Executive Summary
Prior to the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, the United States, Britain and their
allies pursued a policy of containment authorized by the United Nations Security
Council. Major elements of the policy included economic sanctions on Iraq,
disarmament requirements, weapons inspections, Northern and Southern no-fly zones
within Iraq, and maritime interdiction to enforce trade restrictions. Continued
containment was the leading option to war and forcible regime change. We analyze these
two policy options, war and containment, with attention to three questions:
• In terms of military resources, casualties and expenditures for humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction, is war more or less costly for the United States than
a policy of continued containment?
• Compared to war and forcible regime change, would a continuation of the
containment policy have saved Iraqi lives?
• Is war likely to bring about an improvement or deterioration in the economic
well-being of Iraqis?
We address these questions largely from an ex ante perspective. That is, we premise
the analysis on data and facts that were known, or reasonably knowable, as of early 2003.
This perspective is the one that confronts decision makers faced with the question of how
to deal with “tyrants, rogue states and terrorists who threaten not only their own people
but also others.” In this regard, one of our goals is to show how basic economic
principles and a quantitative approach can inform analyses of national security and
humanitarian concerns presented by rogue states.
We rely on a variety of historical data to estimate the economic cost of U.S. military
inputs – capital, labor and materials. To assess the costliness of the Iraq intervention, we
then apply our cost estimates for military inputs to a wide range of scenarios for the war
in Iraq and the postwar occupation. We factor in additional costs for the economic value
of fatalities and casualties sustained by U.S. military personnel, lifetime medical costs for
the treatment of injuries suffered by U.S. soldiers in Iraq, and U.S. outlays for
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction aid.
Forcible regime change in Iraq has proved to be a costly undertaking. As of January
2006, it appears likely that the Iraq intervention will ultimately unfold along a path that
implies present value costs for the United States in the range of 410 to 630 billion in 2003
dollars. These figures reflect a 2 percent annual discount rate. They capture the
estimated economic costs of U.S. military resources deployed in the war and postwar
occupation, the value of lost lives and injuries sustained by U.S. soldiers, the lifetime
medical costs of treating injured soldiers, and U.S. outlays for humanitarian assistance
and postwar reconstruction. Pre-invasion views about the likely course of the Iraq
intervention imply present value costs in the range of $100 to $870 billion. Military
resources devoted to postwar occupation account for more than half of the total costs
except in optimistic scenarios that envision a short occupation, little postwar conflict and
a smooth reconstruction effort.
2

The high cost of the Iraq intervention is sometimes seen as a compelling argument
against the decision to forcibly overthrow the ruling order and install a new regime. This
argument is deficient because it ignores the costs of alternative responses to the national
security and humanitarian concerns presented by the pre-war Iraqi regime. A wellfounded verdict on the Iraq intervention requires, at a minimum, an evaluation of what
these alternatives would cost. We tackle this issue by assessing the costs of sticking with
the pre-war containment policy.
Containment required the continuous engagement of a potent U.S. military force in
southern Turkey, the Middle East and the Persian Gulf. The United States devoted
roughly 28,000 troops, 30 naval vessels, 200 military aircraft and other equipment to
Iraqi containment efforts prior to the pre-war buildup. We estimate the economic cost of
these military resources to be about $14.5 billion per year. Based on our assessment of
the likely duration of a dangerous regime in Iraq, absent external intervention, this annual
flow translates into an expected present value of nearly $300 billion. Hence, containment
was also a costly option for the United States, even under the favorable assumption that it
would be completely effective in achieving its national security goals.
Advocates for forcible regime change in Iraq expressed several concerns about the
pre-war containment policy. Some stressed an erosion of political support for the
containment policy that threatened to undermine its effectiveness and lead to a much
costlier conflict with Iraq in the future. Others stressed the difficulty of compelling Iraqi
compliance with a rigorous process of weapons inspections and disarmament, widely
seen as a critical element of containment. And others stressed the potential for Iraqi
collaboration with international terrorist groups. To evaluate these concerns, we model
the possibility that an effective containment policy might require the mounting of costly
threats and might lead to a limited war or a full-scale regime-changing war against Iraq at
a later date. We also consider the possibility that the survival of a hostile Iraqi regime
raises the probability of a major terrorist attack on the United States. We draw on our
empirical analysis to assess the potential costs of these contingencies, but their
probabilities are especially difficult to assess with confidence.
We show that any one of these contingencies can sharply raise the expected cost of
the containment policy. We also develop an integrated analysis that simultaneously
captures several possible contingencies under a policy of containment. The integrated
analysis focuses on three scenarios chosen to capture a range of views about the
likelihood and cost of the contingencies. Factoring the contingencies into the analysis
yields present value costs for the containment policy in the range of $350 to $700 billion.
These large sums are in the same ballpark as the likely costs of the Iraq intervention seen
from the vantage point of early 2006. Thus, even with the benefit of partial hindsight, it
is difficult to gauge whether the Iraq intervention is more costly than containment.
We also consider the consequences of the war-versus containment choice in two
other respects: the economic well-being of Iraqis, and the loss of Iraqi lives. Based on our
analysis, we conclude that the war will lead to large improvements in the economic wellbeing of most Iraqis relative to their prospects under the policy of containment. This

3

conclusion follows from some basic observations. First, the Iraqi economy was in terrible
condition before the war, and it would have remained in a sorry state under the policy of
containment. Second, the regime of Saddam Hussein was an economic failure of
tremendous proportions. The available evidence suggests that real income per capita fell
by roughly 75 percent as a consequence of Saddam’s misrule. In addition, much of Iraq’s
greatly diminished output was diverted to an oversized military, an apparatus of terror
and repression and the relentless glorification of Saddam. Third, the removal of
sanctions, the expansion of petroleum exports, large-scale reconstruction aid, and the
reintegration of Iraq’s economy into the world economy provide a strong basis for
economic gains – even in a society with serious institutional weaknesses. If, over the
course of a generation, Iraqis recover even half of the economic losses they suffered
under Saddam Hussein, then they will be significantly better off in material terms as a
consequence of forcible regime change.
The economic failures of the Saddam Hussein regime were not its greatest crimes.
The regime brought torture, repression, displacement and death to huge numbers of Iraqis
and others. We review some of the evidence in this regard, drawing heavily on work by
others. All told, the regime killed or caused the deaths of more than 500,000 Iraqis.
Under the policy of containment after the 1991 Gulf War, a reasonable estimate is that at
least 200,000 Iraqis died prematurely at the hands of the regime or as a direct
consequence of its policies, including its refusal to comply with U.N. Security Council
Resolutions and its diversion of oil revenues and other resources to palaces and
monuments. Had containment remained in effect, the historical record suggests that
premature Iraqi deaths would have continued indefinitely at the rate of 10,000 to 30,000
per year. There is, of course, a great deal of uncertainty about the number of premature
Iraqi deaths under either war or containment, but we think the weight of evidence points
to a greater Iraqi death toll from a continuation of the pre-war containment policy.
Perhaps the strongest reason to question this assessment is the possibility that a post-war
Iraq could devolve into an extended and large-scale civil war. This possibility cannot be
ruled out. What can be ruled out in light of the evidence is that the leading alternative to
war involved little loss of Iraqi lives.
The question of how to deal with “tyrants, rogue states and terrorists who threaten
not only their own people but also others” is a profoundly difficult one. The stakes,
human and economic, are enormous. The policy options are complex and fraught with
uncertainty. And sound decision-making requires a daunting range of inputs and
analysis. Yet, precisely because the stakes are so high and the decisions are so difficult,
it is essential to systematically evaluate alternatives as an input to decision making and
the formulation of national security policy. Our study is an effort to apply a systematic
approach to the evaluation of the two leading policy options on the table prior to the Iraq
war.

4

How can the international community best deal with tyrants, rogue states, and
terrorists who threaten not only their own people but also others – and who defy the
world’s attempts to restrain them?—William Shawcross, Allies: Why the West Had
to Remove Saddam (2004)
1. Introduction
Prior to the invasion of Iraq in March 2003, the United States, Britain and their
allies pursued a policy of containment authorized by the United Nations Security
Council. Major elements of the policy included economic sanctions on Iraq,
disarmament requirements, weapons inspections, Northern and Southern no-fly zones
within Iraq, and maritime interdiction to enforce trade restrictions. Continued
containment was the leading option to war and forcible regime change. We analyze these
two policy options, war and containment, with attention to three questions: In terms of
military resources, casualties and expenditures for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction, is war more or less costly for the United States than a policy of continued
containment? Compared to war and forcible regime change, would a continuation of the
containment policy have saved Iraqi lives? And, is war likely to bring about an
improvement or deterioration in the economic well-being of Iraqis? Our attention to
these questions reflects strong and vocal concerns – before and after March 2003 – about
the costs of war, the loss of life in the event of war, and the longer term effects of war on
Iraqi society.
Our study is a revised and expanded version of an analytical essay that we
circulated shortly before the March 2003 invasion.1 Although the decision point for the
Iraq invasion is past, we largely retain the ex ante perspective of our earlier essay. That

1

Davis, Murphy and Topel (2003).
5

is, we premise the analysis on data and facts that were known, or reasonably knowable, as
of early 2003. This perspective is the one that confronts decision makers faced with the
question of how to deal with “tyrants, rogue states and terrorists who threaten not only
their own people but also others.” In this regard, one of our goals is to show how basic
economic principles and a quantitative approach can inform analyses of national security
and humanitarian concerns presented by rogue states.
Several important issues pertaining to the Iraq intervention are beyond the scope
of our study. For example, we do not consider whether the pre-war containment policy
could have been reformulated to achieve its main objectives with less harm to the Iraqi
population. Nor do we evaluate the conduct of the war and ensuing occupation. Other
important issues outside the scope of our analysis include the impact of war on oil prices,
the broader costs and benefits of nation building in Iraq, the effects of military
intervention in Iraq on other rogue states and on weapons proliferation, the war’s effects
on attitudes towards the United States in the rest of the world, and the implications of the
war for U.S. relations with other nations. These issues merit careful attention, but we do
not address them here.
In making the case for war, the U.S. and U.K. governments stressed threats posed
by Iraqi weapons of mass destruction (WMD), i.e., long-range ballistic missiles and
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. As it turns out, no large WMD arsenals were
discovered in Iraq after the March 2003 invasion. This development undercut the case
for war in the views of many and diminished the credibility of the U.S. and U.K.
governments and their intelligence agencies. Our analysis, however, does not turn on the
issue of whether Iraq possessed large WMD stockpiles prior to the 2003 invasion.

6

Instead, we initially proceed under the assumption that containment was, and would
remain, fully effective in preventing Iraq from using WMDs against the United States, its
allies and their interests. This assumption serves to focus attention on the relative costs
of the two policy options. We also extend our analysis to consider several costly
contingencies that might arise under a continuation of the containment policy.
Several other studies assess the economic consequences of the Iraq conflict.
Nordhaus (2002) projects the costs of military spending, occupation, humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction. He also considers the potential effects of war on oil
markets and the U.S. economy. McKibbin and Stoeckel (2003) consider war-induced
effects of potentially higher oil prices and greater uncertainty on macroeconomic
outcomes in the world economy. Wallsten and Kosec (2005) take up some of the same
questions as our study, but from an ex post rather than ex ante perspective. We rely on
their study in assessing the cost of U.S. military casualties resulting from war in Iraq.
Another recent study by Bilmes and Stiglitz (2006) estimates a variety of direct and
indirect costs of the Iraq war. Several reports by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office
and other government agencies address the budgetary consequences of the Iraq war. We
draw heavily on these reports in constructing our projections for the economic costs of
war and containment.2 Our study differs from previous work in many respects, large and
small, but perhaps the most significant difference is our systematic evaluation of the two
leading policy options on the table prior to the Iraq war.

2

Broader studies of the economic costs of military conflict include Hess (2003), who
investigates the empirical relationship between consumption growth and military conflict
throughout the world in recent decades; and Collier et al. (2003), who document the
highly detrimental effects of civil war on economic development.
7

We proceed as follows. Section 2 considers the U.S. military resources required
to carry out a policy of containment, the economic cost of those resources, and the likely
duration of a hostile Iraqi regime under containment. Section 3 considers projected U.S.
costs of war in Iraq including the costs related to postwar occupation, fatalities and
injuries sustained by U.S. military personnel, humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
aid. Section 4 draws on the inputs developed in Sections 2 and 3 to calculate and
compare U.S. costs of war and containment in present value terms. Section 5 extends the
cost analysis to consider concerns related to the sustainability and effectiveness of
containment and the effect of the war on the likelihood of major terrorist attacks on the
United States. Section 6 builds a simple model to gauge the economic welfare of Iraqis
under the containment and war options. We calibrate the model based on the economic
record of the Saddam Hussein regime and assumptions about the duration of the regime
under containment, the impact of war on Iraq’s economy, and the path of economic
development after regime change. Section 7 considers the issue of lost Iraqi lives, and
Section 8 concludes.

2. U.S. Military Resources and Costs under Containment
The military aspects of the containment policy were undertaken principally by U.S.
and British forces.3 The analysis below restricts attention to the size and cost of the U.S.

3

Seventeen countries participated in or provided logistical support to the maritime
interdiction force. See “Embargo Chief Says Iran in Cahoots with Iraq Oil Smugglers” at
http://www.defense.gov/news/Apr2000/n04112000_20004111.html. France initially
participated in the enforcement of Iraqi no-fly zones along with the United States and
Britain. France ceased participation in the Northern no-fly zone in 1996 and in the
Southern no-fly zone in December 1998.
8

military forces engaged in the containment of Iraq, but we would welcome a comparable
analysis for Britain and other countries.
2.1. Baseline Case
2.1.1. Military Resources
In September 2000 General Tommy R. Franks testified before the U.S. Senate
Committee on the Armed Services as follows: “By maintaining a significant forward
presence in the region, the U.S. seeks to deter and, if need be, to defeat Iraqi aggression.
To this end, at any given time, some 30 naval vessels, 175 military aircraft, and between
17,000-25,000 soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines are in the CENTCOM AOR [Area of
Responsibility].”4 In his testimony, Franks makes clear that EUCOM, which
encompasses Turkey in its AOR, also played a key role in containing Iraq, particularly in
the enforcement of the Northern No-Fly Zone. On this basis, we use a figure of 200
military aircraft devoted to Iraqi containment at the time of General Franks’ testimony in
2000. His testimony also refers to a Maritime Interdiction Force, comprised of naval
vessels from the United States and seven other countries, charged with enforcing U.N.
sanctions and restricting Iraqi exports and imports. Franks does not provide figures for
the military resources devoted to Iraqi containment under EUCOM or the Maritime
Interdiction Force, but it is clear that his figures for troops, aircraft and naval vessels in
the CENTCOM AOR comprise only a partial inventory of the full military resources
deployed to contain Iraq.
A Department of Defense document on Fiscal Year (FY) 2001 budget requests for
U.S. military operations in Bosnia, Kosovo, Southwest Asia and East Timor provides

4

U.S. Senate Committee on the Armed Services (2000).
9

more precise information about the troops devoted to containment.5 For operations in
Southwest Asia directed toward the containment and deterrence of Iraq, the document
lists “troop strength” levels (including Guard and Reserve troops) of 3,550 for Army
Requirements, 15,691 for Navy Requirements, 426 for Marine Corps Requirements,
8,457 for Air Force Requirements and 40 for Defense Health Program Requirements for a
total of 28,164 troops. The document also shows expenditures for Southwest Asia under
Defense-Wide Requirements but does not list troops in this category. Presumably, the
U.S. also undertook other surveillance and intelligence-gathering activities to contain Iraq
(including CIA and State Department activities) that are not reflected in the document.
These sources make clear that containment required a potent U.S. military
presence in the Southwest Asia region, including many personnel and large amounts of
military hardware. In short, the U.S. devoted roughly 28,000 troops, 30 ships (including
a carrier battle group), and about 200 aircraft and other equipment to containment efforts
prior to the pre-war buildup. The next step in the analysis is to estimate the economic
costs of these military resources. We are not aware of reports by the Department of
Defense or other sources that provide economic cost figures for the full complement of
military resources devoted to the containment of Iraq, so we construct our own cost
estimates. We develop two methods that differ somewhat with respect to data
requirements and underlying assumptions.
2.1.2. Cost Calculations: Method 1
Our first method calculates the economic cost of military resources devoted to
containment as the sum of labor costs, capital costs and the cost of expended munitions.

5

U.S. Department of Defense (2001).
10

Consider labor costs. In September 2002, the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
issued a document on the “Estimated Costs of a Potential Conflict with Iraq.”6 Based on
the experience of U.S. Army peacekeepers in Bosnia and Kosovo, the document assigns
costs of $226,000 per person-year for troops deployed in a prospective postwar
occupation of Iraq.7 We adopt this figure in calculating the labor costs of the military
resources deployed in the containment of Iraq. We interpret the figure as capturing costs
for compensation, personnel transport and personnel support. As explained below, we
calculate capital costs and expenditures for munitions separately.
For our purposes, the CBO figure for labor costs has some problematic aspects.
First, it appears to include certain capital costs such as spare parts for the operation and
maintenance of equipment in theater. Second, and cutting the other way, it omits a large
chunk of personnel costs, because CBO accounting practices do not include the basic pay
of active-duty military personnel engaged in an overseas operation as part of the
operation’s cost.8 This large omission is on the order of 40-50 thousand dollars per
person-year by our estimates.9 The CBO figure also omits the cost of military personnel

6

U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2002).
This figure does not include the cost of heavy reconstruction after a prospective war in
Iraq. See page 5 and Tables 3 and 4 in CBO (2002).
8
See, for example, page 2 of CBO (2002).
9
To arrive at this estimate, we divide Army personnel costs in FY 2001 by the estimated
number of full-time equivalent Army personnel as of September 2000. Here are the
details. As of September 30, 2000, the Army had 482,170 active-duty personnel (Table
1.1 in DoD, 2000b). The ready-reserve component of the U.S. armed forces numbers
about 1.2 million persons in 2000 and 2001 (Census Bureau, 2005, Table 508). In 2000
and 2001, the annual number of active-duty days per ready reserve member is about 14
(CBO, 2005a, Figure 6). Army reserve units account for the vast majority of all activeduty days by reserve personnel (CBO, 2005a, page 3). On that basis, we attribute all
active-duty days by reserve personnel to the Army, which implies 14 days times 1.2
million active-duty days by Army reserve units. Assuming that regular Army personnel
work 220 days per year, the full-time equivalent Army military force as of September
7

11

who support the operation but are stationed outside the theater of operations. Finally, the
CBO figure does not include the costs of compensating, supporting and training the
additional troops who rotate through the theater of operations over time. These costs are
large, because the number of troops required to sustain a long term overseas operation is
at least three times bigger than the force in theater at a point in time.10
On net, the full economic cost of the personnel resources (including personnel
support and transport) required to carry out the containment policy is probably larger than
$226,000 per person-year. Nevertheless, we adopt this figure in constructing our first
estimate for the cost of containment. To facilitate a consistent cost comparison between
policy options, we use the same figure for personnel-related costs when estimating the
economic cost of a postwar occupation of Iraq. Multiplying $226,000 per person-year by
28,164 military personnel in theater yields annual labor costs of $6.4 billion for the
containment policy.
To estimate the capital value of the ships, planes and other military equipment
engaged in the containment of Iraq, we rely on another document produced by the U.S.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO), titled “Budgeting for Naval Forces.”11 According
to this document, the CBO estimates that the average shipbuilding rate needed to
2000 amounts to (14/220)(1.2 million) + .482 million =566,000. According to Table 622 in DoD (2000a), Army outlays for FY 2001 include $28.11 billion in personnel costs.
We ignore any special pay for hazardous duty in this figure, because few U.S. military
forces were actively engaged in combat operations or other hazardous duty in 2000 and
2001. Dividing 28.11 billion by the number of full-time equivalent Army personnel in
September 2000 yields an annual per-person figure of $49,670 or 51,223 in 2003 dollars.
If the CBO uses an 80-20 mix of regular and reserve personnel in its cost projections,
then the omitted personnel costs amount to (.80)($51,233) = $40,978.
10
See the discussion of troop rotation ratios in Appendix C of CBO (2003a). An
analogous point clearly applies to military equipment, naval vessels for example, that
rotate through the theater of operations over time.
11
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2000).
12

maintain a 300-ship Navy is 8.5 ships per year at a cost of $10.8 billion, which implies
that the capital value of 30 “average” ships is $38.1 billion. The same document estimates
annual construction costs for 148 aircraft at $10.2 billion, so the capital value of 200
“average” aircraft is about $15.3 billion.12 In the calculations below, we scale up these
figures for ships and aircraft by 6% to express them in 2003 dollars.13 In addition, we
estimate that Army, Marines and Air Force ground units required an additional $1.5
billion in military equipment in theater to carry out the containment policy.14
The next step is to estimate the annual costs of these capital inputs – depreciation,
maintenance, fuel and other operating expenses, and the government’s opportunity cost
of funds tied up in capital goods. Table 1 provides estimates for the depreciation,
maintenance and operating costs of military equipment. Line (1) reports straight-line
depreciation rates calculated from projected equipment lifetimes. Line (2) reports
estimated operations and maintenance (O&M) spending on military equipment in
peacetime use, expressed as a percentage of capital value. This category captures the
costs of fuel, parts and depot maintenance for military equipment at a peacetime
operations tempo. To derive the estimates in line (2), we rely on the steady-state
assumption that the ratio of O&M spending on military equipment to procurement
spending for new capital goods is constant over time. We also assume that this ratio is the

12

Tables 4 and 5 in U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2002).
We carry out all price-level adjustments using the GDP implicit price deflator for all
goods and services.
14
Military equipment per Army personnel deployed in Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan is
about $189,000 according to data in CBO (2005b). We apply this figure to the number of
Army troops and Marines devoted to the containment policy and half this amount to the
number of Air Force personnel. The result is about $1.5 billion in 2003 dollars.
13

13

same for all types of military equipment.15 Applying these assumptions to data on
military spending in CBO (2001) yields the O&M spending rates in line (2). Actual
O&M spending rates are higher for military equipment stationed in theater because of a
higher operations tempo. Line (3) draws on CBO (2005b) estimates of the extra
depreciation and maintenance costs incurred by in-theater military equipment in Iraq,
Kuwait and Afghanistan to illustrate the impact of a higher operations tempo. Summing
the entries in lines (1) to (3) yields annual depreciation, maintenance and operating costs
of roughly 4.5 to 5.5 percent of capital value for aircraft and naval vessels and more than
20 percent for ground equipment. These figures, reported in line (4), do not capture the
extra fuel costs associated with a higher operations tempo for equipment in theater.
Line (5) of Table 1 reports the rate of depreciation, maintenance and operating
costs that we apply to military equipment used in the containment policy. For Army and
Marines equipment (mostly ground equipment), we use a much lower figure than line (3)
based on the view that containment involved a much lower operations tempo for such
equipment than engagements in Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan. For naval vessels and
aircraft, we adjust the line (3) entries upwards to account for the missing extra fuel
consumption. To account for the opportunity cost of government funds, line (6) adds two
percentage points, which is consistent with the evidence below that the U.S. government
faces a two percent real interest rate.

15

The two assumptions underlying the entries in line (2) are strong ones, and we would
prefer to relax them by exploiting detailed data on normal O&M spending for military
equipment. Unfortunately, as noted in CBO (2001, page 2), the Department of Defense
does not produce detailed breakouts for its equipment-related spending on fuel, spare
parts, other consumables and depot maintenance. This lack of data precludes a more
direct estimate of normal O&M costs for military equipment.
14

We now have in place the required elements for our first method of calculating
the economic cost of the military resources devoted to the containment policy. Table 2
Panel A summarizes the calculations. Applying the real user cost of capital inputs from
line (8) of Table 1 to the capital asset values derived above yields capital costs of $4.7
billion per year. Adding $6.4 billion for labor costs and $0.2 billion per year for
expended munitions yields total containment costs of about $11.3 billion per year.16
2.1.3. Cost Calculations: Method 2
As a check on this cost figure, consider a simpler set of calculations that relies on
different inputs and assumptions. First, Table 5 in CBO (2000) provides a figure of $94.7
billion as the annual cost of maintaining a 300-ship navy (excluding $10.3 billion for
research and development). This figure encompasses procurement costs, operating costs,
personnel costs, military construction and other items. The implied all-in cost for an
average 30-ship naval force is about $9.5 billion per year, or $10.0 billion in 2003
dollars. Second, recall that naval forces (including marines) account for 16,117 out of
28,164 military personnel devoted to the containment of Iraq. Multiplying $10 billion by
(28,164/16,117) yields $17.5 billion per year as the implied cost of containing Iraq.
This calculation does not adjust for differences in labor intensity among the armed
services. Defense budget figures for FY 2001 imply that military personnel account for
24.4% of total costs in the Air Force, 40.4% in the Army and 28.9% in the Navy.17 To
adjust for these differences, think of the Air Force, Army and Navy as three different
16

We regard the $0.2 billion figure for munitions as a low-end guess. According to
Center for Defense Information (1998), cruise missiles and other smart munitions
expended by U.S. forces during the four-day December 1998 Desert Fox operation cost
$478 million to produce. Desert Fox was one of the largest operations conducted by
allied forces during the containment of Iraq.
17
U.S. Department of Defense (2000), Tables 6.18 to 6.20.
15

technologies for producing “military output,” and assume that the value of military output
per dollar of expenditure is the same across the three services. This condition must hold
on the margin, if Department of Defense funds are allocated efficiently among the
services. Next, divide the all-in cost estimate for the U.S. naval force devoted to the
containment of Iraq ($10 billion) by the number of naval personnel (16,117). This
calculation yields an all-in annual cost per person for U.S. naval forces devoted to
containment of $620,463. Given this figure, and using the data on labor cost shares and
number of military personnel devoted to Iraq by service, we have
$620, 463 ( 28.9 / 24.4 ) 8, 457 + (28.9 / 40.4)3, 590 + 16,117 = $17.8 billion as the

estimated annual cost of containing Iraq.18
This figure is substantially larger than the $11.3 billion figure calculated above
using Method 1. In the absence of a compelling reason to prefer one estimate over the
other, we adopt the simple average of $14.5 billion 2003 dollars as our baseline figure for
the estimated annual costs of containment. By way of comparison, outlays by the U.S.

18

This calculation may also lead to a substantial understatement of containment costs.
First, it does not include the costs of compensating, supporting and training the additional
troops who rotate through the theater of operations over time. Second, it does not include
the additional costs of constructing and maintaining naval vessels and other equipment
that rotate through the theater over time. Third, the calculation rests on an implicit
assumption that depreciation, maintenance and operating costs for military equipment is
the same whether or not the equipment is in theater. Fourth, the calculation includes no
adjustment for higher munitions expenditures in theater. Nevertheless, this calculation
may also lead to an overstatement of containment costs, if the naval vessels devoted to
the containment policy are less costly to build or operate than the average U.S. naval
vessel. The calculation may also lead to an overstatement if containment operations
facilitate the training, readiness and development of U.S. military forces, because these
benefits are not netted out of the estimated costs.
16

Department of Defense were $344 billion in Fiscal Year 2002.19 So $14.5 billion for the
containment of Iraq amounts to about 4.2 percent of the pre-war U.S. defense budget.
2.2. Higher Containment Costs
One might reasonably argue that the $14.5 billion figure is too small for at least two
reasons. First, containment efforts also drew on U.S. military resources that were
stationed outside the Southwest Asia region, or that were stationed in the region only on
an occasional basis for particular operations. These additional military resources helped
to deter Iraq and to support and execute particular operations, but their costs are not
included in the $14.5 billion figure. A noteworthy example is Operation Desert Fox, a
four-day bombing campaign carried out by U.S. and British forces against Iraqi targets in
December 1998. The execution of Desert Fox relied heavily on out-of-area military
resources and military resources temporarily deployed to the Middle East.20 As we
discuss in Section 5, the United States also undertook large additional force deployments
to the Persian Gulf region in 1994 and 1996 to deter Iraqi aggression against other states.
Second, containment efforts in 2000 and 2001 involved a level of military pressure
that was insufficient to compel Iraq’s full compliance with U.N. Security Council
resolutions. Prior to the pre-war buildup of U.S. and British forces, Iraq had for several
19

See, for example, “Billions More for Defense – and We May Not Even Know It” by
Robert Higgs in the San Francisco Chronicle on 18 January 2004, available at
http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/c/a/2004/01/18/INGSM4A8JB1.DTL.
20
During a press briefing shortly after the end of Desert Fox, General Anthony Zinni,
Commander-in-Chief of U.S. Central Command [CENTCOM] stated that “The operation
involved over 30,000 troops, and 10,000 more outside our area of responsibility who
supported and alerted from bases virtually around the world…. Over 300 aircraft were
involved in strike and support roles…. Over 40 ships performed strike and support
roles… Thousands of ground troops deployed to protect Kuwait and to respond to any
counteraction. Hundreds of our Special Operations Forces troops also deployed to carry
out their assigned missions.” A transcript of the press briefing is available at
http://www.defenselink.mil/transcripts/1998/t12211998_t1221fox.html.
17

years refused to admit U.N. weapons inspectors.21 Iraq had a long history of stalling,
evading, undermining and circumventing the U.N. weapons inspection process (Pollack,
2002, chapter 3), an essential element of the containment policy.22 Even on the brink of
war, Iraq continued to resist and impede U.N. weapons inspections, often with
considerable success.23 Given this history of continual resistance to inspection and
limited disarmament by the Saddam Hussein regime, an effective containment policy
apparently required a larger commitment of U.S. military resources and a more
aggressive posture by U.S. forces. That is, a fully effective containment policy would
have cost substantially more than $14.5 billion per year.
It is not obvious how best to adjust for the incomplete effectiveness of the
containment policy. It is also difficult to quantify the cost of the out-of-area military
resources that contributed to containment efforts and that provided a deterrent to Iraqi

21

See, for example, the testimony of General Tommy R. Franks before the U.S. Senate
Committee on the Armed Services on 19 September 2000: “Iraq’s WMD capabilities
remain a key concern. It has been more than a year and a half since UN weapons
inspections last occurred in Iraq, and Saddam Hussein has thus far refused new
inspections.” U.N. weapons inspectors did not return to Iraq until November 2002.
22
In his December 1998 address to the American people, shortly after U.S. and British
forces commenced Operation Desert Fox, President Bill Clinton described the importance
of the weapons inspection program this way: “First, without a strong inspection system,
Iraq would be free to retain and begin to rebuild its chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons programs in months, not years. Second, if Saddam can cripple the weapons
inspection system and get away with it, he would conclude that the international
community – led by the United States – has simply lost its will. He will surmise that he
has free rein to rebuild his arsenal of destruction, and someday – make no mistake – he
will use it again as he has in the past. Third, … If we turn our backs on his defiance, the
credibility of U.S. power as a check against Saddam will be destroyed. We will not only
have allowed Saddam to shatter the inspection system that controls his weapons of mass
destruction program; we also will have fatally undercut the fear of force that stops
Saddam from acting to gain domination in the region.” A transcript of President
Clinton’s full address is available at
http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/stories/1998/12/16/transcripts/clinton.html.
23
See, for example, “U.N. Withdraws U-2 Planes,” New York Times, 12 March 2003.
18

aggression. As a crude adjustment for these factors, we consider a higher containment
cost figure of $19.4 billion, which is one-third greater than our baseline figure. Section 5
develops an alternative approach to concerns about the containment policy.
2.3. Dual-Use Military Deployment
Another criticism of our containment cost calculations cuts the other way. The
military resources that the U.S. devoted to Iraqi containment prior to March 2003
projected U.S. power in the region and functioned as forward bases in a critical and
volatile part of the world. Hence, a friendlier Iraqi regime would only mitigate, not
obviate, the need for the deployment of U.S. military resources to the region. According
to this argument, some portion of the costs calculated above is not fully attributable to the
policy of containing Iraqi.24 This argument is logically sound, but its quantitative force is
unclear. On the one hand, the United States had no major military bases and few ground
forces in the Middle East prior to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.25 This
fact suggests that few U.S. ground forces would be stationed in the Middle East if Iraq
were governed by a stable, unthreatening regime. On the other hand, U.S. military bases
in southern Turkey and a strong naval presence near the Middle East were significant
features of U.S. policy long before the invasion of Kuwait. As a crude adjustment for the
dual-use character of U.S. military resources deployed in the containment of Iraq, we

24

Another argument is that U.S. forces engaged in containment activities can and will
continue to carry out some of the same general training and readiness preparation that
they would undertake in any event.
25
See U.S. General Accounting Office (1991) for an overview of U.S. military activities
in the Middle East during the 1980s and their costs. While the U.S. had few grounds in
the Middle East prior to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990, developments in the broader
Southwest Asia region provided much of the motivation for the creation of a U.S.-based
Rapid Deployment Force in the early 1980s.
19

consider a lower containment cost figure of $9.7 billion, which is one-third smaller than
our baseline figure.
2.4. Spontaneous Regime Change
Containment is necessary only so long as a dangerous regime, or a like-minded
successor, remains in power. So our calculation of containment costs should account for
the possibility that the pre-war Iraqi regime would peacefully evolve into a far less
dangerous one. It is hard to precisely assess the probable duration of a dangerous Iraqi
regime, absent war, but history offers some guidance.26 The regime of Saddam Hussein
survived a devastating war with Iran in the 1980s, a crushing military defeat in the Gulf
War of 1991, twelve years of draconian sanctions, and a tremendous decline in living
standards during the war with Iran and again in the 1990s under containment. These facts
suggest that the regime was hard to dislodge under a policy of containment. Other highly
repressive regimes, such as Cuba and North Korea, also show much staying power.
The key issue is not how long Saddam Hussein himself would continue to rule
Iraq, absent external intervention. Rather, the real issue is the expected duration of a
regime that presents a similar threat to the United States and others. The experience of
North Korea provides a case in point. When the North Korean leader Kim Il-sung died in
1994, many doubted the ability of his son and designated successor, Kim Jong-il, to
secure the reins of power. Those doubts turned out to be misplaced, and the regime
continued in essentially the same repressive and hostile form. Moreover, North Korea
26

See Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2003) for a detailed analysis of the factors that influence
the survival of political leaders and regimes. In their chapter 7, they estimate survival
functions and hazard rates for individual political leaders. The issue at hand for our
analysis, however, is the duration of a dangerous regime in Iraq, not the survival of a
particular leader. We are unaware of econometric studies that speak directly to the
regime survival question.
20

under Kim Jong-il continued to advance its nuclear weapons program and its long-range
missile delivery systems.27 In the case of Iraq, expert accounts suggest that Saddam’s
sons had a firm grip on the apparatus of terror, repression and security prior to the March
2003 invasion. Pollack’s (2002, chapter four) account indicates that Saddam’s sons,
especially Qusay, were well positioned to continue in their father’s place after his death.
Pollack’s account also stresses that much of the regime’s leadership was closely linked to
Saddam by ties of family and clan. In sum, it does not appear that the continuity of the
regime rested on the personal survival of Saddam Hussein.
In this light, consider an optimistic scenario in which the pre-war Iraqi regime
peacefully morphs from malign to benign at an annual hazard rate of 3 percent. This
assumption implies an expected duration for a hostile regime, absent external
intervention, of 33 years beyond March 2003. If one dates the onset of a dangerous Iraqi
regime to Saddam’s assumption of the presidency in 1979, then the 3 percent hazard rate
implies an expected total duration for the regime of about 57 years.28 In comparison, the

27

See U.S. Congressional Research Service (2003).
The Iraqi Baath party took power by way of a military coup in 1968. General Ahmed
Hassan al-Bakr became president and, shortly thereafter, prime minister and commanderin-chief of Iraqi military forces. At the time, Bakr was also secretary-general of the Baath
party and chairman of its powerful Revolutionary Command Council. Saddam Hussein
played a significant role in the coup and held considerable sway over Baath party, and
later Iraqi, security forces. The early stages of Saddam’s rise to power owe much to the
support he received from Bakr. Saddam accumulated power and influence throughout the
1970s, eventually eliminating or overshadowing all rivals, including Bakr. In August
1979, he persuaded Bakr to step aside and to designate Saddam as his successor. See
Coughlin (2005), especially chapters 3 to 5, for an account of these developments.
Although Saddam’s ruthlessness, propensity for violence, and fascination with military
force were evident long before he achieved the presidency and undisputed power within
Iraq, the nightmarish quality of the regime was not easily foretold. For most ordinary
Iraqis who did not directly challenge the regime or the Baath party, the 1970s were a
decade of rising prosperity. Some outside observers saw the early Baathist government
as one of the most progressive regimes in the Middle East.
28

21

Soviet Union survived 69 years after its founding in 1922 until its dissolution in 1991,
including more than four decades under a policy of containment by the West. The
containment of North Korea has involved a large U.S. military presence on the Korean
Peninsula for more than 50 years.29 These historical facts are consistent with our
assumption of a 3 percent hazard rate for peaceful regime change in Iraq.30

3. U.S. Military, Reconstruction and Humanitarian Costs under War
3.1. Incremental Appropriations versus Economic Costs
News reports and commentary on the economic costs of the Iraq war typically focus
on incremental appropriations in government budgets. In September 2002, for example,
the Democratic Caucus of the House Budget Committee (HBC) issued a report that
projected a new war in Iraq would increase U.S. budget costs by $47 to $93 billion for
military operations alone, not counting the costs of an extended occupation. A report
issued by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) in the same month reached similar
conclusions.31 In March 2003, the Bush Administration requested supplemental spending

29

As of March 2003, there were 37,000 U.S. military personnel stationed in South Korea
and another 45,000 in nearby Japan. See Robert Burns (AP Military Writer), “Rumsfeld:
Move U.S. Troops from Korea DMZ,”AP Online, March 6, 2003, available at
www.austin360.com/aas/news/ap/ap_story.html/Intl/AP.V0317.AP-US-TroopsKorea.html. The United States also relies on additional military resources to contain and
deter North Korea. For example, Burns writes that “In response to recent North Korean
moves to reactivate its nuclear weapons program, the Pentagon this week is sending 12
B-52 bombers and 12 B-1 bombers from U.S. bases to Guam, within striking distance of
the Korean peninsula.”
30
A more sophisticated treatment of regime change would allow the hazard rate to be
nonstationary and to depend on the precise character of the containment policy. We
would welcome such an analysis, but it is beyond the scope of this study.
31
See U.S. HBC (2002) and U.S. CBO (2002). The HBC and CBO have also issued
several additional reports on the costs of the Iraq war since September 2002.
22

authority of $62.6 billion, mostly to fund U.S. war efforts in Iraq.32 These and other
budget projections and budget requests are heavily reported by the news media and
widely interpreted as measuring the actual or projected economic costs of the U.S
resources devoted to the Iraq war. This interpretation is incorrect.
The economic costs of military resources are appropriately measured in terms of
what they cost to produce (production cost) or the value they provide in their next-best
use (opportunity cost). In contrast, CBO (2002) captures only “the incremental costs of
deploying a force to the Persian Gulf (the costs that would be incurred above those
budgeted for routine operations)…”33 Likewise, “All of the costs described in the [HBC
(2002)] report represent incremental costs – those that would not have occurred but for
the military operation.”34 These incremental budget effects fail to capture the full cost of
producing the military resources deployed in the Iraq war. For example, CBO “estimates
reflect only the costs of aircraft flying hours and ship steaming days above those
normally provided in DoD’s regular appropriations.”35 Depreciation costs and normal
maintenance costs for military hardware devoted to the Iraq war are also omitted from the
CBO and HBC projections, as are the costs of training U.S. military forces. The
32

See Executive Office of the President (2003). It was widely understood at the time that
additional requests for spending authority related to the Iraq war would be forthcoming.
See, for example, “What Price War? It’s Too Soon to Tell, But Expect Final Tab to Be
High” by David Firestone in the 7 April 2003 edition of the New York Times.
33
See the cover letter from the CBO Director to the ranking members of the House and
Senate Budget Committees that accompanies the September 2002 CBO report. Similarly,
the body of the report states on page 2 that “CBO’s estimates represent the incremental
costs that DoD [Department of Defense] could incur above the budgeted costs of routine
operations. As a result, the estimate excludes items such as the basic pay of active-duty
military personnel but includes the monthly pay for reservists recalled to full-time duty.
Similarly, the estimates reflect only the costs of aircraft flying hours and ship steaming
days above those normally provided in DoD’s regular appropriations.”
34
HBC (2002), page 28.
35
CBO (2002), page 2.
23

“incremental costs” in budget documents also fail to reflect opportunity costs, except
under the extreme view that U.S. military resources have zero value in their next-best
use. These same points apply to the incremental appropriations that the Bush
administration sought and obtained from Congress in connection with the Iraq war. In
short, cost measures based on budget requests and budget projections fail to capture the
full economic costs of the military resources devoted to the war.
A focus on “incremental costs” also results in misleading cost comparisons across
deployment scenarios. For example, the CBO and HBC reports exclude the basic pay of
active-duty military personnel in their cost projections but include pay for reservists
called to full-time duty. As a result, deployment scenarios that involve greater reliance
on reserve troops appear costlier than otherwise identical scenarios that rely more heavily
on active-duty personnel. Table 3 illustrates the point in starker fashion, drawing on
CBO (2003a) cost projections for alternative options to deploy additional forces in Iraq.
The CBO assigns zero “incremental costs” to option (d), which involves a withdrawal of
forces from the Sinai Peninsula, Bosnia, Kosovo and Okinawa, “because the savings that
would accrue from withdrawing forces from those other commitments would largely
offset the costs of sustaining additional forces in Iraq.” Such “savings” are true savings
only if those forces generate zero benefits in their current deployment or any other
alternative deployment. Put differently, it would be unwise to conclude from Table 3 that
(d) is the least costly, or most desirable, option simply because it triggers the lowest
incremental budgetary costs. A focus on “incremental costs” may be useful for
government budgeting and planning purposes, but it does not deliver sensible measures
for the economic costs of the military resources devoted to the Iraq war. By the same

24

logic, these “incremental costs” do not provide a sensible basis for comparing the
economic costs of the military resources required under war and containment.
3.2. Measuring the Direct Economic Costs of War
We seek to measure the full production costs of the projected military resources
devoted to the Iraq war and postwar occupation; any additional transport, munitions and
supply costs required to prosecute the war and carry out the occupation; the projected
cost of casualties incurred by U.S. military forces; and projected costs for humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction aid. Our cost calculations consider the military scenarios
sketched out in CBO (2002). Because this document focuses on war and its near-term
aftermath, we provide additional economic cost figures for longer term occupation and
peacekeeping roles by U.S. forces. We consider costs for the United States only.
With respect to military resources, we focus on production costs rather than
opportunity costs for two reasons. First, a production cost approach parallels our
treatment of containment costs and thereby facilitates an apples-to-apples cost
comparison between the two policy options. Second, direct measurement of (historical)
production costs is more straightforward and less reliant on subjective judgments than
efforts to measure the opportunity costs of military resources. Nevertheless, there are
potential problems with a production cost approach. For example, if a country
accumulates an oversized military relative to its national security goals, then historical
production costs are likely to exceed the opportunity cost of ready military resources. In
this case, a production cost approach to a particular military operation would overstate its
true economic cost (i.e., opportunity cost). We do not think this case applies to the
United States in the wake of 9/11 and an expanding set of U.S. security concerns. More

25

plausibly, the U.S. military is at least temporarily undersized relative to its national
security goals, in part because of the Iraq war.36 In this situation, historical production
costs may understate opportunity costs.
3.3. Initial Deployment, Major Combat, and Redeployment
Table 4 summarizes military force requirements in the major combat phase of a war
in Iraq, as projected in the two war scenarios considered by CBO (2002). Both scenarios
envision a much larger, more ground-intensive force than the one deployed under
containment. The Heavy Air Option involves 253 thousand troops deployed in theater
and 2,500 aircraft; the Heavy Ground Option involves 367 thousand troops and 1,500
aircraft. Both options involve sixty Navy battle force ships, including five carrier battle
groups.
Based partly on these CBO projections, Table 5 provides estimates for the capital
value of deployed military equipment during the combat phase of an Iraq war. Capital
values for Naval Vessels and (fixed-wing) Aircraft are estimated by the same method as
in Table 2. Capital values for ground equipment (including helicopters) reflect the recent
experience of Army troops and Marines engaged in Afghanistan, Kuwait and Iraq, as
detailed in notes to the table. Our estimated capital value for the military equipment
required during the combat phase of a war in Iraq is $263 billion under the Heavy Ground
Option and $291 billion under the Heavy Air Option.

36

This view is consistent with news reports that U.S. Army and Marine forces have been
stretched thin by an extended engagement of ground forces in the Iraq theater. Concerns
about the ability of the U.S. Army to meet the force requirements of an extended
occupation of Iraq also arose prior to the March 2003 invasion. For example, CBO
(2002, page 5) states that “Army forces would be unable to support [normal] rotations for
a prolonged 200,000-person occupation.”
26

Table 6 reports data on the projected cost of an Iraq war by phase of engagement and
type of costs. The cost figures in Table 6 reflect upward adjustments to the figures in
CBO (2002) to account for basic pay of active-duty military personnel and the additional
user costs of capital not captured in the CBO figures. Based on our calculations, the
projected costs of the U.S. military resources devoted to an Iraq war – initial deployment,
major combat, and redeployment – range from $46 to $80 billion depending on force
option and duration of major combat. As also indicated in the table, our projected costs
are 56 to 67 percent greater than the CBO projections for the same scenarios. Thus, our
adjustments to capital and labor costs have a major impact on projected costs relative to
the CBO figures.37
3.4. Postwar Occupation, Reconstruction Aid and Humanitarian Assistance
Table 7 summarizes several other projected costs associated with war and forcible
regime change in Iraq. Panel A shows projected costs for the deployment and use of
ground troops, naval forces and air forces during a postwar occupation. We construct
these projections using the same approach (Method 1) as in Section 2.1.2 for containment
costs. Relative to containment, however, we apply a much higher value for the user cost

37

Despite these adjustments, the figures in Table 6 are lower than the costs implied by
the methods of Section 2.1. To see this point, consider the Heavy Air Option with two
months of major combat. The sum of Personnel and Personnel Support Costs, Operations
Support Including Munitions, and Transport to and from Theater is $34.3 billion in this
scenario according to Table 6. Applying the Method 1 cost per person-year of $226,000
– which covers personnel and their support, some operations support, and the rotation of
personnel into and out of theater – yields a cost of $38.1 billion for an eight-month
engagement (initial deployment, major combat, redeployment). The reasons for this
discrepancy are unclear to us. Perhaps large engagements involve significant scale
economies not present under containment. Or, perhaps we have overstated the costs of
containment relative to those of initial deployment, major combat and redeployment. If
so, and because we rely on Method 1 to compute the costs of occupation, we also
overstate the cost of postwar occupation relative to the initial war phase.
27

of capital on ground equipment, and we allow user costs to vary with operations tempo.
These assumptions capture the fact that depreciation, maintenance and operating costs are
sensitive to operations tempo, as detailed in CBO (2005b). A “high” operations tempo in
Table 7 is intended to reflect a postwar situation that involves a significant insurgency,
whereas a “low” operations tempo is intended to reflect one that primarily involves
peacekeeping operations and the maintenance of stability. Occupation scenarios with a
high operations tempo also entail extra munitions costs.38
Table 7 does not impose any particular assumption about the level of U.S. military
forces engaged during a postwar occupation of Iraq. Rather, the entries in Panels A and
B provide information about projected annual costs for a given level of military resources
– such as 100,000 armed forces in theater and their equipment, supplies, munitions, and
so on. For example, the last row of Panel A implies that the U.S. cost is $62.8 billion per
year for an occupation force of 200,000 military personnel operating at a high tempo.39
In the analysis below, we scale the figures for occupation costs up or down in proportion
to the size of the armed forces engaged, while maintaining fixed ratios of ground troops
to other personnel. The figures for “Occupation costs per 100,000 armed forces in
theater” in Table 7 involve a ratio of ground troops to Navy and Air Force personnel that
is twice as high as in the Heavy Air Option.40

38

Panel B shows projected occupation costs based on Method 2 and using the All-in
Costs per Person-Year reported in Table 2. Method 2 yields much larger costs than
Method 1, as before.
39
Relative to the projection in CBO (2002), our per-person cost figure during occupation
is 39 percent greater at a high operations tempo and 26 percent greater at a low tempo.
40
Relative to containment, the ratio of ground troops to naval personnel is more than
seventy times higher in an occupation according to our calculations and projections. The
ratio of ground troops to Air Force personnel is about nineteen times higher in an
occupation.
28

The projected costs for humanitarian assistance and postwar reconstruction aid are
drawn from three sources. Nordhaus (2002) projects U.S. costs for humanitarian
assistance to the Iraqi people in the range of 1 to 10 billion dollars over a period of two to
four years. HBC (2002) projects U.S. costs for reconstruction aid in the range of 9.2 to
18.4 billion dollars over a period of ten years. An update in HBC (2003), issued six
months after the Iraq invasion, projects much higher U.S. reconstruction costs in the
range of $28.3 to $73.3 billion. As of July 5, 2005, actual U.S. budget allocations for the
Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Fund total about $18.4 billion, which includes more than
$5 billion in allocations for security and law enforcement activities such as training and
equipping Iraqi security forces. Cumulative Fund outlays amount to $6.3 billion as of
June 28, 2005, largely for security services and law enforcement.41
3.5. U.S. Casualties
To project the cost of casualties sustained by U.S. military personnel in an Iraq war,
we rely on the estimates in Wallsten and Kosec (2005). Their estimates are designed to
capture the economic value of lost lives, the welfare losses suffered by injured soldiers,
and the lifetime medical costs of treating injuries sustained in Iraq. In Panel D of Table 7,
we report a projected cost of $6.9 billion per 1,000 U.S. fatalities. This figure, drawn
from Wallsten and Kosec, reflects the midpoint estimate for the value of a statistical life
in the literature reviewed by Viscusi and Aldy (2003). Based on the experience of U.S.
forces through August 25, 2005, the Iraq engagement has involved 7.153 injuries per
fatality. Wallsten and Kosec classify these injuries by severity and assign welfare costs
based on estimates of the willingness to pay to avoid injury. They add lifetime medical

41

U.S. Department of State (2005).
29

costs for injury treatment to obtain the economic cost of injuries. Their estimates imply a
cost of $9.0 billion per 7,153 injuries.
3.6. War Scenarios
Table 8 describes several scenarios for an Iraq war that we consider in the present
value cost analysis. The scenarios differ in key respects: length of major combat phase;
duration, size and operations tempo of a postwar U.S. occupation force; fatalities and
injuries sustained by U.S. forces; and U.S. outlays for humanitarian assistance and
postwar reconstruction aid. For all scenarios, initial deployment commences in
December 2002, major combat commences in March 2003, and redeployment of the
invasion force takes three months from the end of major combat and is followed
immediately by occupation. Fatalities occur at a rate proportional to troop levels during
occupation, and injuries occur at the rate of 7.153 per fatality.
These scenarios capture a broad range of pre-invasion views about the likely
outcome of a military intervention in Iraq.42 Scenario 1, the most hopeful, entails a twomonth major combat phase, a small-scale occupation that ends by December 2005, one
thousand U.S. fatalities, and relatively modest outlays for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction aid. This scenario is consistent with the view that the Iraqi people would
welcome a U.S.-led invasion force as liberators – initially and after euphoria over
Saddam’s overthrow wanes – and that regime change and reconstruction would proceed
smoothly with little interference from terrorists, insurgents or outside powers. Scenarios
2 through 6 entail a progressively longer occupation, bigger occupation force, higher
operations tempo during occupation, greater casualties, and larger outlays for
42

See Packer (2005), especially Chapter 4, for an account of influential pre-invasion
views about the likely course of a postwar occupation in Iraq.
30

humanitarian assistance and reconstruction. The length of the major combat phase also
increases. Two variants each of Scenarios 4 and 5 differ in postwar reconstruction costs.
Scenarios 1 to 3 describe considerably more favorable outcomes than Scenarios 4 and
5, which are in turn much more favorable than Scenario 6. In particular, Scenario 6
envisions an occupation force of 200,000 U.S. military personnel in theater through
September 2007 and a smaller force level through 2013, with forces engaged at a high
operations tempo throughout. Scenario 6 also entails 7,000 U.S. fatalities, about 50,000
U.S. injuries, and $60 billion in undiscounted costs for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction aid. Scenario 7 describes an even worse outcome: a dangerous new
regime emerges in Iraq after a long and costly occupation, and the U.S. reverts to its prewar containment policy.

4. War Versus Containment: Direct U.S. Costs
4.1. Valuing the Policy Options
War and containment are two strategies for responding to the threats posed by a
dangerous regime in Iraq. Under each strategy, the United States (and other intervening
powers) incurs a stream of costs over time to produce benefits in the form of lowered
threats to national security. In this respect, war and containment can be seen as
alternative costly investments intended to produce a flow of future benefits. We initially
assume that the two policies are equally effective in dealing with the threats posed by a
dangerous regime. We also assume that at least one policy has a positive net present
value. Given these assumptions, the choice between policy options reduces to present
value cost comparisons. We seek to estimate the cost of establishing a stable regime in

31

Iraq that does not threaten the national security interests of the United States and that
does not engage in large-scale oppression of its own people or others.
We calculate the present value cost of containment as
∞
i =0

(Annual Containment Cost) (1 − λ ) R(i ),
i

(1)

where λ is the annual hazard rate for spontaneous regime change, and R (i ) is the
discount factor applied to containment costs incurred i periods hence. We use the annual
flow costs of containment reported in Table 2, and we assume that containment remains
in effect until Iraq undergoes a spontaneous regime change. Similarly, we calculate the
present value cost of the war scenarios in Table 8 as
∞
i =0

(War Costs)i R(i ).

(2)

To obtain the cost of occupation and casualties for the war scenarios, we rescale the flow
costs reported in Tables 6 and 7 based on force size, operations tempo and casualties.
In selecting a discount rate for the present value calculations, a sensible approach is
to use the real time cost of funds facing the U.S. government. As of early 2003, the real
annual yield on ten-year inflation-indexed U.S. Treasury bonds was about 2 percent.43
We use this figure as our baseline discount rate. An alternative approach relies on expert
opinions regarding the appropriate social discount rate for public policy decisions with
long-lived consequences. Weitzman (2001) surveys about 2,000 professional economists
on this issue and finds a mean discount rate of 4 percent. To accommodate the
heterogeneity in expert opinion, he also fits a model to the survey responses and obtains a
43

Sack and Elsasser (2004) provide evidence on the yields implied by inflation-indexed
U.S. Treasury securities. It is clear from their study that the difference between yields on
nominal U.S. Treasury securities and survey measures of inflationary expectations
implies a lower real cost of funds and, hence, a lower discount rate than the 2 percent
figure.
32

schedule for certainty-equivalent discount rates that declines with the time horizon – from
about 4 percent for 1 to 5 years hence to 3 percent for 6 to 25 years hence and 2 percent
for 26 to 75 years hence.44
The appropriate discount rate also depends on whether the costs incurred under a
given policy are correlated with the opportunity cost of government funds in future states
of the world. This opportunity cost is likely to be higher when economic growth is lower.
We see no obvious reason for future costs under containment or war to be correlated with
future growth in an important way, but some readers may hold a different view. Hence,
we also consider higher discount rates in the calculations below, in line with the view that
the costs associated with a given policy are concentrated in states of the world with a
relatively high opportunity cost of government funds.
4.2. Present Value Cost Results

Table 9 reports results for the containment policy. At a 2 percent discount rate on
future costs and a 3 percent annual hazard rate for regime change, the present value cost
of containment is $297 billion in our baseline scenario. If effective containment requires
extra military forces per the discussion in Section 2.2, the cost rises to nearly $400
billion. The precise cost also depends on the discount rate, the likelihood of spontaneous
regime change, and other details. Thus our analysis does not establish a precise value for
the economic cost of sticking with the containment policy. It does show that the
containment policy was an expensive option for the United States under a broad range of
reasonable assumptions. This conclusion holds even under the assumption, which we

44

The recent economics literature develops several rationales for declining discount rate
schedules. See Groom et al. (2004) for a review.
33

have maintained thus far, that containment would remain completely effective in
protecting U.S. national security interests.
Table 10 reports results for the war scenarios. At a 2 percent discount rate, the cost
of war ranges from $106 billion in Scenario 1 to $872 billion in Scenario 7.45 The
present value cost is $320 billion for Scenario 4(b), which involves an occupation force
that declines from 200,000 troops in September 2003 to zero in October 2008, $56 billion
in undiscounted costs for postwar aid, 4,000 fatalities and nearly 30,000 injuries. More
generally, Table 10 shows that the duration and size of the postwar occupation have a
profound effect on the overall cost of the war option. For example, the cost of Military
Resources Engaged in Occupation ranges from $35 billion in Scenario 1 to $153 billion
in Scenario 4 and $410 billion in Scenario 6. The intensity of postwar conflict also has a
large impact on U.S. costs related to casualties and reconstruction aid.
In sum, our analysis shows that both containment and war were costly policy options
for the United States. The analysis also identifies key factors that influence the cost of
each policy option. For example, the expected duration of a hostile regime in Iraq, absent
war, has a dramatic effect on the cost of containment. To see this point, consider our
baseline containment scenario with a 2 percent discount rate and a 3 percent hazard rate
for peaceful regime change. Raising the hazard rate to 5 percent lowers the cost of
containment from $297 billion to $212 billion. Lowering the hazard rate to 2 percent
raises the cost of containment to $371 billion. Hence, under the containment option,

45

Table 10 is based on the Heavy Air Option in CBO (2002). The Heavy Ground Option
involves an extra $11 billion to $16 billion in present value costs, depending on the
length of the major combat phase.
34

policies or developments that promote peaceful regime change generate large economic
benefits for the United States.
How costly will the Iraq intervention ultimately become for the United States, both
in absolute terms and relative to containment? As of January 2006, it appears quite
possible that the Iraq intervention will ultimately unfold along lines similar to Scenario
5(a), though perhaps with fewer U.S. casualties. At a 2 percent annual discount rate, the
projected cost of this scenario is $414 billion (in 2003 dollars) according to our analysis.
In comparison, the projected cost of containment in our baseline case is $297 billion. A
somewhat more pessimistic view about the cost of effective containment and the
likelihood of peaceful regime change yields containment costs similar to the $414 billion
figure. Thus, despite the undeniably high cost of the Iraq intervention, our analysis
indicates that containment may well have been equally costly for the United States.
It also appears possible (as of January 2006) that the Iraq intervention will unfold
along lines not too different from Scenario 6, though with fewer U.S. casualties. The
projected cost of Scenario 6 is $633 billion. It is hard to argue that continued containment
would have involved comparable or greater expected economic costs for the United
States than an intervention experience similar to Scenario 6, unless one dispenses with
the assumption that containment would be fully effective in protecting U.S. national
security interests. We take up that issue in Section 5.
4.3. Departures from Constant Supply Costs

In the cost calculations above, we assume constant supply costs within the relevant
range for all military inputs. This assumption is less appealing when war involves an
extended, intense engagement that leads to shortages of critical equipment, higher costs

35

of recruiting and retention, reductions in the combat effectiveness of U.S. troops, or an
impaired ability to meet other national security threats. News reports of body armor
shortages, under-armored transport vehicles, missed recruiting targets and large reenlistment bonuses suggest that the Iraq engagement has been big enough and long
enough to move the United States up the supply schedule for its ground forces. Cutting
the other direction are static scale economies achieved by large-scale operations and
dynamic scale economies that arise from learning by doing on the battle field. News
accounts suggest that U.S. military experience in the Gulf War of 1991 and later in
Bosnia, Kosovo and Afghanistan led to improvements in the combat effectiveness of U.S.
forces. The Iraq intervention is also likely to be a source of lessons, albeit hard-won, that
will improve the effectiveness of the U.S. military in potential future conflicts. Of
course, opponents can also draw lessons from battle field experience. On balance, it is
unclear whether these departures from constant supply costs are quantitatively
significant, and which way they cut. This is a ripe area for careful research.
4.4. Nation Building and Post-Occupation Deployments

Our analysis of the war scenarios in Table 8 is designed to assess the cost of
establishing a stable regime in Iraq that does not threaten the national security interests of
the United States and that does not engage in large-scale oppression of its own people or
others. Some advocates of the Iraq war have appealed to and argued for more ambitious
goals, e.g., transforming Iraq into a beacon of liberty in the Middle East and an exemplar
of market-based capitalism. These are worthy goals, but a serious effort to attain them
would probably involve significant additional costs for reconstruction aid and other
nation-building efforts. Achieving these goals would also yield benefits not factored into

36

our analysis. For these reasons, our analysis does not deliver an assessment of the more
ambitious nation-building goals in connection with the Iraq intervention.
A similar point applies to the longer term costs and benefits of a U.S. strategic
alliance with a new Iraqi regime. An analogy may be helpful in this regard. The United
States has maintained a significant military presence in Japan for more than sixty years
after the allied victory in World War II. It would be inappropriate to treat U.S. military
forces stationed in Japan decades after victory as part of the cost of victory. Instead, the
cost of these military forces should be weighed against their strategic benefits. Likewise,
if the United States maintains a military presence in Iraq after the defeat of insurgents and
the establishment of a stable, peaceful regime, it would be inappropriate to count those
forces as part of the cost of war in Iraq without also factoring in their benefits.

5. Concerns about Containment and Implications for the Cost Calculus
5.1. Concerns about Containment

Many war advocates argued that the Iraqi regime posed an unacceptable security risk
in a post-9/11 world. Shawcross (2004) stresses Saddam’s obsession with WMDs, his
demonstrated willingness to use them, and the dangers of his potential collaboration with
terrorists:
Now, in the early twenty-first century, threats have changed, and so must
the responses to them. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and of
terrorists who stalk from the shadows and are susceptible to no kind of
deterrence, alter the concept of imminent danger.
… [T]here was no doubt that Saddam, alone among the dictators, had long
shown an absolute obsession with obtaining such weapons [WMDs] and had
actually used them. He had also refused to accede to more than a decade of
international demands that he desist. There was ample reason to believe that he
already possessed biological and chemical weapons capacity and that he would

37

seek to restart his nuclear weapons program if he were able. He had the
knowledge and the intent – he lacked only the fissile material.
… [W]hether or not [Al Qaeda and Saddam] collaborated directly, the very
existence of a new global terrorist network made Iraq’s presumptive possession
of WMD much more threatening. Theoretically it offered Saddam (and others)
a way to attack the United States by proxy and perhaps without identification.
Prudent policymakers could not ignore the fact that Saddam and Osama bin
Laden shared a hatred of the United States. (Pages 69-70)
In fact, Saddam Hussein had a long history of harboring and supporting international
terrorists when it suited his purposes.46
Pollack (2002, p. xxiv) stresses doubts about whether it was feasible to sustain an
effective containment policy: “Perhaps the single most important reason why the United
States must act soon to adopt a new policy toward Iraq is that our old policy, the policy of
containment, is eroding.” In support of this conclusion, Pollack points to Iraq’s eviction
of U.N. weapons inspectors in the fall of 1998, rising discontent in Arab countries and
Muslim communities over the basing of American military forces in the Persian Gulf
region, the erosion of sanctions’ effectiveness over time, and declining international
support for containment.47
A related argument for pre-emptive action in 2003 stresses the potential for a future
military conflict with Iraq that would involve much higher costs. According to Pollack
(2002, pp. xv-xvi):
In the case of Iraq, if we do not act soon to topple Saddam Hussein’s
regime, we are likely to face a much worse conflict with Saddam down the road
after he has acquired nuclear weapons and advanced conventional weapons. An
invasion of Iraq in the near term, when Saddam has only a limited stockpile of
weapons of mass destruction and his conventional forces remain weak, is likely
to seem effortless and cost-free compared to a war with Saddam after he has
crossed the nuclear threshold. Given Saddam’s propensity to miscalculate, his
46

See, for example, chapter 7 in Coughlin (2005).
This assessment has not gone unchallenged. See Lopez and Cortright (2004), for
example.
47

38

penchant for aggression, and his willingness to absorb horrific punishment, it
would be a terrible mistake for the United States to allow him to acquire such
capabilities and risk war with a nuclear-armed Iraq…. This book argues that war
with Saddam’s Iraq is well nigh inevitable and that it would be far, far better for
the United States to face this challenge sooner rather than later.48
Shawcross (2004, pp. 71-73, 93, 115-116) develops a similar argument. He applauds
Israel’s bombing of Iraq’s Osirak nuclear reactor in 1981 because it set back Saddam’s
efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. He also asks whether pre-emptive action against Al
Queda and the Taliban regime in Afghanistan would have prevented the 9/11 attacks.
O’Hanlon (2002c) summarizes the state of affairs this way in September 2002:
Saddam continues to have chemical weapons in abundance and probably
biological agents as well, but we have already proved we can deter him from
using these weapons over the past dozen years, and there is no reason to think he
has transferred either type to al-Qaida. By contrast, a nuclear weapon is
something Saddam almost surely does not now have, but that he might someday
acquire – and that, if ever used, could clearly dwarf 9/11 in its effects. …
[L]etting Saddam get a nuclear weapon and then seeing what if anything he
might do with it is a social science experiment we can live without. Simply
having such a weapon could give Saddam “defensive cover” for aggression,
fundamentally changing the balance of power in the region.
That, in a nutshell, is the case for a pre-emptive war. Whatever one thinks
of this case, it should not depend on advocates producing a “smoking gun.”…
Saddam is trying to get the bomb… [and] it would make more sense to fight
before he had the bomb than after.
O’Hanlon also notes that “Iraq was disturbingly close – perhaps only months away –
from building a nuclear weapon at the time of Desert Storm” in 1991.
But unlike Pollack and Shawcross, O’Hanlon favors containment over war. He
wraps up his essay by stating that “Even a war skeptic such as me must acknowledge that
48

Pollack reiterated this argument shortly before the invasion of Iraq: “The choice we
have before us is we either go to war now or we will never go to war with Saddam until
he chooses to use a nuclear weapon and he chooses the time and place. The question for
me is not war or no war. It’s a question of war now, when the costs may be significant, or
war later when they may be unimaginable.” See “Some of Intellectual Left’s Longtime
Doves Taking the Role of Hawks” by Kate Zernike, 14 March 2003 issue of the New
York Times.
39

President Bush has a reasonable case when he describes the risk involved in Iraq’s
nuclear program. Rigorous inspections and disarmament would, to my mind, be an
acceptable solution. But to get that outcome, we may have to threaten war, threaten it
quite credibly.” O’Hanlon does not spell out the dimensions or costs of a credible threat.
These arguments by Shawcross, Pollack and O’Hanlon – and related arguments by
many others – partly turn on underlying views and implicit assumptions about the
prospective costs of war and containment. To help evaluate these arguments, we extend
our analytical framework to consider concerns related to the cost of credible threats, the
effectiveness of containment, and the likelihood and cost of future conflict with Iraq
under a policy of containment. In the same spirit, we also consider how the cost calculus
depends on the potential impact of the war-versus-containment choice on the likelihood
of major terrorist attacks on the United States.
5.2. Costly Credible Threats

There was widespread agreement prior to the Iraq invasion that an effective
containment policy required a rigorous program of inspections and disarmament. So
what did it take in the way of military resources to compel Iraqi compliance with an
effective inspections program? What constituted a credible threat forceful enough to
inspire Iraqi cooperation? Precise answers to these questions are not at hand, but the
historical record offers some guidance.
Iraq repeatedly resisted the U.N. weapons inspections process, a fact evident from
the many U.N. Security Council resolutions on the matter. On 1 November 1998 Iraq
halted all cooperation with U.N. weapons inspectors. Four days later, U.N. Security
Resolution 1205 demanded that Iraq “provide immediate, complete and unconditional

40

cooperation” with inspectors and warned of the threat to “international peace and
security” posed by non-cooperation.49 Later the same month, the United States aborted a
missile strike on Iraq when its government agreed to cooperate with the inspections
process. After the Iraqi government failed to follow through, the United States and
Britain launched Operation Desert Fox, an extensive four-day aerial bombardment of
Iraqi targets. The U.S. portion of the operation involved over 40,000 troops, 300 aircraft
and 40 ships.50 Despite its destructive intensity, Operation Desert Fox failed to compel
the readmission of U.N. weapons inspectors to Iraq.
In fact, weapons inspectors did not return to Iraq for four long years. It is instructive
to briefly recount the sequence of events leading up to their return. On 12 September
2002, President Bush addressed the United Nations, “challenging the organization to
swiftly enforce its own resolutions against Iraq. If not, Bush contends, the U.S. will have
no choice but to act on its own against Iraq.” On 11 October 2002, the U.S. Congress
authorized an attack against Iraq. On 8 November 2002, the U.N. Security Council
unanimously approved resolution 1441 calling for “tough new arms inspections on Iraq
and [providing] precise unambiguous definitions of what constitutes a ‘material breach’
of the resolution.” Resolution 1441 also warned that Iraq would face “serious
consequences” if it violated the resolution. By this point in time, the likelihood and
prospects of an Iraq war were major sources of concern and discussion throughout the
world. There was no doubt about the seriousness of the threat confronting the Iraqi

49

www.casi.org.uk/info/scriraq.html#1990.
See the press briefing by General Anthony Zinni at
http://www.defenselink.mil/transcripts/1998/t12211998_t1221fox.html.
50

41

regime. In the face of this rather considerable pressure, Iraq finally relented and allowed
U.N. weapons inspectors to return on 18 November 2002.51
This historical summary highlights two points. First, aerial bombardments on the
scale of Operation Desert Fox were insufficient to compel Iraqi compliance with a
rigorous inspections and disarmament regime. Second, not until the approach of a fullscale, regime-ending war did Iraq finally relent and permit the resumption of a viable
inspections program. Credible threats of this sort are costly to mount.
The same point applies to the occasional extra deployments required to deter Iraqi
aggression under the containment policy. For example, in October 1994 Iraqi forces
began massing near the border with Kuwait. The United States responded by rapidly
increasing troop levels in the Persian Gulf region to about 60,000 and by deploying
another 350 military aircraft and a carrier battle group to the region. Britain also
reinforced its military presence in the region. Faced with an impending attack by the
United States and Britain, Iraq withdrew its forces well away from the Kuwaiti border,
ending the confrontation. But two years later, in response to the mobilization of Iraqi
military forces and fears of an Iraqi attack on Jordan, Kuwait or Saudi Arabia, the United
States engaged in a similarly large deployment of military forces to the Persian Gulf
region.52

51

The timeline and quotations in this paragraph are drawn from
http://www.infoplease.com/spot/iraqtimeline2.html.
52
See chapter 3 in Pollack (2002) for brief accounts of these episodes.

42

In light of this historical record, consider a containment policy that relies on costly
credible threats, as needed, to compel compliance with inspections and disarmament and
to deter Iraqi aggression. The present value cost of containment now becomes
∞
i =0

(Annual Containment Cost) + p ( Credible Threat Cost ) (1 − λ ) R(i ),
i

(3)

where p is the probability that, in any given year, effective containment requires the
mounting of a credible threat. In calculating equation (3), we consider two values for the
cost of a credible threat, $13.05 billion and $26.1 billion. The latter figure is the sum of
deployment and redeployment costs under the Heavy Air Option (Table 6). We also use
the baseline annual containment costs of $14.54 billion (Table 2), a 2 percent annual
discount rate, and a 3 percent annual probability of peaceful regime change.
Figure 1 illustrates how the need for costly credible threats affects the present value
cost of containment. For comparison, the figure also shows the present value cost of war
under scenarios 5(a) and 6. As seen in Figure 1, the probability and cost of credible
threats have important effects on the cost calculus. For example, the cost of war in
scenario 5(a) exceeds the baseline containment cost by about $115 billion, but this gap
vanishes if effective containment involves a 22 percent chance of mounting a high-cost
threat in any given year. Similarly, war scenario 5(a) and an effective containment policy
are equally costly, if there is a 44 percent chance of mounting a low-cost threat.
5.3. Limited Wars

With some probability, an effective containment policy might require a limited war
against Iraq; i.e., a war that reverses or prevents some hostile action by Iraq but does not
proceed to forcible regime change, occupation and reconstruction. Contingencies that
might lead to limited war include Iraqi aggression against neighboring states, large-scale
43

slaughter of civilians by Iraqi security forces, and information that Iraq was on the verge
of acquiring or building a nuclear weapon. Limited war followed by the resumption of
containment implies a present value cost expression with the same form as equation (3).
The cost of a limited war replaces the credible threat cost in (3), and p now refers to the
probability of a limited war in any given year.
As illustrated in Figure 2, the prospects for limited war also have important effects
on the cost calculus. In constructing Figure 2, we assume that a limited war involves the
same level of military resources and U.S. casualties as Scenario 1 in Table 10 (excluding
the postwar costs and casualties). Recall that Scenario 1 involves the Heavy Air Option
with two months of major combat and 500 U.S. fatalities. Based on our earlier analysis,
the projected cost of such an engagement is $53.3 billion.53 Other assumptions
underlying Figure 2 are the same as in Figure 1.
As seen in Figure 2, containment is as costly as war scenario 5(a) when there is a 10
percent chance of a limited war in any given year. Containment is as costly as war
scenario 6 when there is a 31 percent chance of a limited war in any given year.
5.4. War and Forcible Regime Change, Now or Later?

Some argued for pre-emptive war and forcible regime change in Iraq on the grounds
that war was highly probable in any event and likely to be much costlier at a later date.
To assess the force of this argument, let P denote the probability of war and forcible
regime change in the next N years under a policy of containment, and suppose that the
undiscounted cost of a future war is m times the cost of an immediate war. Let pi denote
the probability of war in year i conditional on the survival of a dangerous Iraqi regime
53

The sum of costs for Initial Deployment, Major Combat and Redeployment plus the
cost for 500 U.S. fatalities and about 3,600 U.S. injuries.
44

through year i − 1. pi can be thought of as the conditional probability that the United
States faces a war of “necessity” with Iraq in year i.
If p0 = 0 in the initial year (2003), pi = p > 0 for the next N years and pi = 0
thereafter, the probability of a future war of necessity under a policy of containment is
P= p

N

(1 − λ − p)

i −1

=

p 1 − (1 − λ − p) N

λ+p

i =1

,

(4)

where λ is the annual hazard rate for peaceful regime change, as before. The present
value cost of the containment policy now becomes

( Annual Containment Cost ) 1 +
+ p m ( Cost of Immediate War )
+ (1 − λ − p ) N

∞
i = N +1

N

(1 − λ − p )i R(i )

i =1
N

(1 − λ − p )i −1 R(i )

(5)

i =1

( Annual Containment Cost ) (1 − λ )i − N R(i)

Figure 3 applies equation (5) to illustrate how the present value cost of the containment
policy varies with the probability and cost of a future war. We allow for a possible war
in the next ten years, i.e., through 2013. War costs are based on scenario 5(a), and annual
containment costs are set to the benchmark value in Table 9. As in Figures 1 and 2, we
assume a 2 percent discount rate and a 3 percent hazard rate for peaceful regime change.
Figure 3 show that the possibility of a future war can profoundly alter the cost
calculus. For example, if a future war is twice as costly as an immediate one, and the
probability of such a war in the next ten years exceeds 25 percent, then containment is
more costly than an immediate, pre-emptive war. If a future war is five times as costly
and occurs with probability greater than 8 percent in the next ten years, then containment
is more costly than immediate war. If a future war is five times as costly and occurs with

45

a 50 percent chance in the next ten years, then the present value expected cost of the
containment policy exceeds 1.1 trillion dollars.
We think this analysis helps to understand the wide divergence of opinion about the
wisdom of the Iraq war. The precise probability and cost of a future war with Iraq matter
greatly for the cost of containment, but there is no sure method for assessing the
probability and cost of a future war. Even modest differences of opinion about, say, the
probability of a future war translate into sizable differences in the costliness of
containment. From this perspective, it is unsurprising that the decision to invade Iraq in
2003 and overthrow the regime remains a matter of intense controversy.
Our analysis also highlights a problematic aspect of the oft-drawn distinction
between a war of “choice” and one of “necessity”. In particular, the analysis shows that a
war of “choice” can be highly desirable when it forecloses the possibility of a more costly
war of “necessity.” This statement continues to hold when the possibility of a war of
necessity is remote, provided that a future war is costly enough relative to an immediate
one. In this respect, there is no clean separation between a war of choice and one of
necessity. Of course, the mere possibility of a costly war of necessity at some future date
does not ensure that immediate war is the best policy choice.
5.5. Future Terrorist Attacks

Views also differ widely about the likelihood that the pre-war Iraqi regime would
support or facilitate a major terrorist attack against the United States. For some, this
danger became a major plank in the case for war. Others dismissed the possibility of
Iraqi participation in a terrorist attack against the United States. Indeed, many argued
that war in Iraq raised the likelihood of a major terrorist attack against the United States.

46

We do not try to settle these differences of opinion. Instead, we offer brief remarks about
the magnitude of the stakes.
To gauge the potential cost of a future terrorist attack, it is helpful to review the
economic scale of the 9/11 attack. Bram, Orr and Rapaport (2002) estimate direct costs of
the attack on the World Trade Center – “comprising earnings losses, property damage,
and the cleanup and restoration of the site” – of $33 billion to $36 billion. Their
calculations understate the direct costs, however, because they equate the value of lost
lives to the value of foregone earnings. In fact, as common sense suggests and economic
analysis shows, a lost life is worth more than foregone earnings. Murphy and Topel
(2005), for example, estimate the value of a human life to be about three times earnings
capacity. Tripling the Bram et al. estimate of lost earnings yields a figure of about $50
billion for the direct costs of the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center. This figure is
highly conservative as an estimate for the overall costs of 9/11, because it omits indirect
costs associated with disruption to the U.S. financial system and the regional economy in
the New York area. The economic costs of a future terrorist attack could be considerably
larger, especially if it involves chemical weapons, biological agents or nuclear weapons.
Suppose, for example, that a dangerous Iraqi regime raises the probability of a major
terrorist attack by 4 percentage points in any given year, and that the economic cost of
such an attack is $100 billion. These figures imply an expected cost from (additional)
terrorist attacks of $4 billion per year. Capitalizing this flow at the factor 1/(r + λ ) with
r = .02 and λ = .03 yields a present value cost of $80 billion. This is a sizable effect and

potentially large enough to tilt the scale in favor of war. Of course, if war raises the

47

probability of a major terrorist attack on the United States, then the effect cuts in favor of
the containment policy.54
5.6. An Integrated Treatment of Costly Threats, Wars and Terrorist Attacks

Costly threats, terrorist attacks, limited wars and a full-scale regime-changing war are
possible contingencies under a policy of containment. The analysis above considers
these contingencies one at a time; Table 11 considers all four at the same time. The table
shows present value containment costs for three new scenarios plus a scenario with no
contingencies as in Table 9. The table considers the baseline annual containment costs of
$14.5 billion and lower annual costs of $9.7 billion, annual discount rates of 2 and 6
percent, and an annual hazard for peaceful regime change of 3 percent. Our discussion
focuses on the baseline case with a 2 percent annual discount rate.
In the “optimistic” scenario, a hostile Iraqi regime has no effect on the likelihood of a
terrorist attack, but there is a 5 percent annual chance that the United States mounts a
costly threat and a 3 percent annual chance that it fights a limited war against Iraq. These
contingencies apply so long as a hostile Iraqi regime persists. There is also a 5 percent
chance that the United States fights a full-scale regime-changing war against Iraq at some
point in the next ten years in the optimistic scenario, where the undiscounted cost of such
a war is the same as for war Scenario 5(a) in Table 10. Factoring in these contingencies

54

Peaceful regime change under a policy of containment and forcible regime change as a
consequence of war need not have the same impact on the probability of a terrorist attack.
Hence, to quantify the present value cost of terrorist attacks under both policy options, it
is necessary to specify five parameters: the discount rate, the cost of a terrorist attack and
the attack probabilities under containment, peaceful regime change and forcible regime
change. One of the probabilities can be normalized to zero when calculating the net
impact of the war-versus-containment choice on the present value cost of terrorist attacks.
48

yields a present value containment cost of $346 billion for the optimistic scenario, as
compared to $297 billion when all contingencies have zero probability.
The “middle” scenario posits a greater probability of mounting a costly threat and a
greater probability of engaging in a regime-changing war. Credible threats and a regimechanging war are also more costly in the middle scenario. Finally, the middle scenario
posits that the annual probability of a major terrorist attack on the United States is 2
percentage points higher with a hostile Iraqi regime. The economic cost of such an
attack, if it occurs, is set to $100 billion. Factoring in these contingencies yields a present
value containment cost of $441 billion for the middle scenario.
The “pessimistic” scenario posits yet higher probabilities for all contingencies and
higher costs for threats, terrorist attacks and regime-ending wars. Factoring in these
contingencies yields a present value containment cost of $705 billion. We have
designated the assumptions that underlie this large cost figure as “pessimistic”, but they
seem well within the range of pre-war assessments offered by some knowledgeable
observers. This is not to say that these pre-war assessments were correct, but neither
were they easily dismissed. For those who held such views, or even more pessimistic
ones, continued containment was a highly unattractive option.

6. War versus Containment: Effects on Iraqi Economic Well-Being
6.1. The Economic Collapse under Saddam Hussein

After Saddam Hussein became President and secured his position as dictator in 1979,
the Iraqi population suffered a catastrophic collapse in living standards – largely as a
consequence of Saddam’s rule. Nordhaus (2002, page 53) estimates that Iraq’s real GDP

49

per capita (at 2002 prices) fell from around $9,000 in 1979 to $1,000-1,200 in 2001. The
upper figure for 2001 implies a staggering 87 percent decline in per capita output. The
most significant factors in the collapse were the devastating war with Iran in the 1980s,
draconian economic sanctions imposed on Iraq in response to its 1990 invasion of Kuwait
and its later refusals to comply with U.N. Security Council resolutions, and the
destruction of Iraq’s infrastructure during allied efforts to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait
in 1991. The militarization of Iraqi society, the diversion of resources to Saddam’s
palaces and monuments, and declines in the relative price of oil amplified the collapse in
Iraqi living standards.
After 1990, lost oil revenues alone were enormous. According to Nordhaus (2002,
page 53), “Under sanctions, oil production during the 1991-2002 period averaged 1.4
million bpd. Assuming Iraq could have produced 3 million bpd during this period, the
revenue shortfall since the first Persian Gulf War was about $150 billion.” The implied
average annual revenue shortfall of $12.5 billion is 40-50 percent as large as Iraq’s
estimated GDP in 2001. This figure for lost oil revenues is almost certainly too low, if
the comparison benchmark is a stable Iraqi economy with ready access to export markets
and international oil exploration and extraction technologies. Iraq’s oil production
peaked at more than 3.4 million bpd in 1979 and had been trending sharply upwards since

50

1973.55 Further, as Nordhaus (page 72) remarks, “Experts believe that, if restructuring
operations can operate effectively, Iraq’s production capacity can be raised to between 3
and 4 million bpd within two years…. Iraq has enormous reserves relative to its current
production … [and] has negotiated $40 billion of contracts with Russia, China, and
France to develop approximately 5 million bpd of new capacity.”
Much of Iraq’s greatly diminished output was diverted to an oversized military, an
apparatus of terror and repression and the relentless glorification of Saddam Hussein.
Pre-war Iraq employed nearly 500,000 persons in various intelligence, security and police
organizations and a total of nearly 1.3 million when the armed forces and paramilitary
units are included. All together, the various security organizations and military units
accounted for about one quarter of employment in pre-war Iraq.56 This militarization of
Iraqi society occurred principally under Saddam Hussein – the army rose from 180,000
men in 1980 to one million men (six percent of the population) in 1988.57 Despite the
sanctions imposed on Iraq after the Gulf War, the regime “embarked upon a series of
costly projects to build victory monuments and palaces for Saddam (fifty of them at last

55

Data on Iraqi oil production are available at
http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/international/petroleu.html#ProductionQ under the
heading, “OPEC Member Countries and Total OPEC, All Months, January 1973 –
Present (Thousand Barrels per Day) [xls].”
56
Data on the number of persons in security organizations and military units are drawn
from Pollack (2002, pages 116-117). Chris Foote supplied us with an unpublished table
from Iraq’s Ministry of Planning with employment data. The table shows total
employment of 4.6 million based on a 1997 census of Iraq and projected total
employment of 5.2 million in 2000.
57
Donnelly (2004), page 4.
51

count), which cost Iraq as much as another $2.5 billion per year…. Many of the fifty new
palaces Saddam has built for himself since the Gulf War have gold-plated faucets and
artificial rivers, lakes, and waterfalls that employ pumping equipment that could have
been used to address the country’s desperate water and sanitation problems.”58
The foregoing assessment based on pre-war data sources is broadly consistent with
the analysis in Foote et al. (2004), four economists who worked for the Coalition
Provisional Authority in Baghdad, and who had access to additional data on Iraq’s
economy. They estimate that real GDP per capita at constant 2002 prices fell by 60
percent from 1979 to 2001. Living standards fell much more because of two other factors
under the regime’s control – the militarization of Iraqi society and the diversion of output
to Saddam’s palaces and monuments – and because of declines in oil prices after 1979.
Based on this review of the evidence, we conclude that real income per capita fell by
roughly 75 percent as a consequence of Saddam’s rule and the regime he established.
6.2. Assessing the Impact of War and Regime Change

To assess the impact of regime change on Iraqi economic welfare, we consider an
extended transition period to a higher level of GDP per capita. During the transition,
output grows by enough to recover much or all of the declines in Iraqi GDP per capita
caused by Saddam’s misrule. Our analysis below treats GDP per capita as a measure of
living standards. However, since war and containment imply different time paths for

58

Pollack (2002), pages 131 and 135.
52

GDP per capita, we carry out the analysis in terms of economic “welfare”, which captures
current and future levels of GDP per capita.
6.2.1. Baseline Model

Let V T denote per capita welfare at the outset of transition, immediately after regime
change. The regime change may occur spontaneously or as the result of external
intervention (war). In the latter case, welfare is V T − W , where W denotes the direct onetime impact of war on GDP per capita. Let V S denote per capita welfare under the
current regime assuming no external intervention.
We make the following assumptions:
(A1) Prior to regime change, GDP per capita grows at annual rate g.
(A2) After regime change, GDP per capita grows at rate g plus, during an N-year
transition period, an additional rate h.
(A3) The extra component of the growth rate h during the transition period equals
M 1/ N − 1, where M is a multiple of initial output (just prior to regime change) that
captures the favorable long run effect of regime change on the level of GDP per
capita.
(A4) Absent external intervention, there is a probability λ in any give year of
spontaneous, peaceful regime change.
(A5) The discount rate applied to future income is a constant denoted by r.
Under these assumptions, per capita welfare at the outset of transition is

VT =

N
i =0

(1 + g )(1 + h)
M (1 + g ) N +1
+
.
1+ r
(1 + r ) N (r − g )

Given no external intervention, per capita welfare satisfies the following relationship:

53

(6)

V S = 1+ λ

V T (1 + g )
V s (1 + g )
+ (1 − λ )
.
1+ r
1+ r

(7)

The first term on the right side is GDP per capita at the initial output level, which we
have normalized to unity. The second term is the probability of a spontaneous regime
change multiplied by the present value of welfare under transition. The third term is the
continuation probability for the current regime multiplied by the present value of welfare.
Solving this equation for V S yields
VS =

1 + r + λV T (1 + g )
.
[(1 + r ) − (1 − λ )(1 + g )]

(8)

Using equations (6) and (8), we can compare the effects of war and containment on
Iraqi economic welfare. The ratio (V T − W ) / V S provides a convenient measure for the
impact of war relative to containment. When this ratio exceeds unity, war improves Iraqi
welfare relative to containment. Subtracting one from this ratio gives the impact of war
on Iraqi welfare, expressed as a percentage of initial welfare.
6.2.2. Model with Foregone Growth Prior to Regime Change

The baseline model of how regime change affects Iraqi welfare is conservative in the
sense that it assumes identical long term growth rates before and after regime change.
An alternative model allows for slower long term growth in the absence of regime
change. So consider an alternative model with growth rate g S under the initial regime.
For this model, assume that regime change brings about an N-year transition period to a
higher level of income per capita and a higher long term growth rate g ≥ g S . In
addition, assume that output growth foregone prior to regime change is never made up.
In other words, the catch up process after regime change recovers the drop in output per

54

capita under Saddam, but it does not return the economy to its initial baseline growth
path. This alternative model involves only slight modifications to the preceding
equations. In particular, the g terms in equations (7) and (8) are replaced by g S .
6.3. The Effect of War on Iraqi Welfare

We now use the model to project the effect of war on the average economic wellbeing of Iraqis. For our baseline case, we assume a 20-year transition period following
regime change. We set M = 4 based on the evidence that Iraqi living standards declined
by 75 percent or more under Saddam Hussein. Given N = 20 years, this choice for M
implies h = 7.18 percent per year. As before, we assume that the probability of
spontaneous regime change is 3 percent per year. We set the long-term growth rate at
g = 2 percent per year, and we set the annual discount rate on future income flows at
r = 5 percent. We assume that the destruction associated with war amounts to 50 percent

of a year’s GDP.
Plugging these values into the baseline model, we calculate that (V T − W ) / V S equals
about 1.5. That is, war raises Iraqi welfare by 50 percent relative to containment in the
baseline case. This is an enormous improvement in economic welfare. Table 12
quantifies the impact of war on Iraqi welfare for several alternative parameter choices.
The table shows that war leads to large gains in Iraqi welfare under a wide variety of
alternative parameter choices. Even in the least favorable case for war – involving
higher war costs, little catch up during the transition, and a high rate of peaceful regime
change – war leads to a substantial improvement in Iraqi welfare compared to a policy of
containment.

55

Table 13 quantifies the impact of war on Iraqi welfare in the model with foregone
growth prior to regime change. In contrast to the Table 12 results, we now assume that
regime change, whether peaceful or forcible, raises the long term growth of GDP per
capita by two percentage points. This modified model implies that war brings very large
welfare gains for Iraqis, ranging from 35 to 170 percent in Table 13. War has a more
favorable effect in Table 13 because regime change now has a positive effect on long
term growth.
The results in Tables 12 and 13 strongly suggest that war is an economic blessing for
Iraqis compared to the alternative policy of containment. How is this possible, given the
obvious destructive consequences of war? The answer has two parts. First, the Iraqi
economy was in terrible condition before the war, and it would have remained in a sorry
state under the policy of containment. Second, as we discussed above, economic wellbeing underwent an extraordinary collapse under Saddam Hussein. If, over the course of
a generation, Iraqis recover even half of the economic losses they suffered under Saddam
Hussein, then economic welfare will rise significantly as a consequence of forcible
regime change.

7. War versus Containment: Lost Iraqi Lives

This section briefly reviews evidence on Iraqi casualties in the 1991 Gulf War, the
number of premature Iraqi deaths from 1991 to 2003 under the containment policy, and
the broader record of war, death and repression under Saddam Hussein. Our account
draws heavily on Pollack (2002) and Welch (2002). After reviewing the evidence, we
56

reach a rough judgment as to whether continued containment would have saved Iraqi
lives compared to a policy of war and forcible regime change.
7.1. Lost Lives under Saddam Hussein

The regime of Saddam Hussein was a ghastly enterprise that brought death and
torture to hundreds of thousands of Iraqis and others. Pollack recounts the following:
200,000 Iraqi troops killed in battle during the 1980-1988 war with Iran, and
another 400,000 to 500,000 wounded. (Page 24) Iranian casualties were much
greater.
In reprisal for Kurdish assistance to the Iranians, the Iraqi regime slaughtered
Kurds and destroyed their homes in 1988 and 1989. “When the campaign
finally ended in 1989, some two hundred thousand Kurds were dead, roughly
1.5 million had been forcibly resettled, a huge swatch of Kurdistan had been
scorched by chemical warfare, and four thousand towns had been razed.”
(Page 20)
The Gulf War initiated by Saddam “probably caused no more than 10,000 to
30,000 Iraqi military casualties and another 1,000 to 5,000 civilian casualties.”
(Page 139)
In 1991, after the Gulf War, “anywhere from 30,000 to 60,000 Shi’ah were
killed in the suppression of the intifadah in the south.” (Page 51)
In 1992 and 1993, the regime drained about 4,500 square kilometers of
wetlands in the south. “In so doing, [the regime] created an ecological
catastrophe and destroyed the way of life of several hundred thousand Marsh

57

Arabs who had made their homes among the rushes and reeds for more than a
millennium.” (Page 125)
In addition, perhaps 200,000 or more Iraqis died after the 1991 Gulf War and
the postwar intifadah through some combination of sanctions and internal
repressions. (Pages 138-139) More than half of the premature deaths were
children under five.
The issue of child deaths under sanctions attracted much attention. Welch (2002)
provides an informative discussion and a helpful assessment of conflicting claims. He
cites Richard Garfield, Clinical Professor of International Nursing at Columbia
University, as the most credible source for estimates of how sanctions affected mortality
among Iraqi children.59 According to Welch,
Garfield concluded that between August 1991 and March 1998 there were
at least 106,000 excess deaths of children under 5, with a ‘more likely’ worstcase sum of 227,000. (He recently updated the latter figure to 350,000 through
this year.) Of those deaths, he estimated one quarter were ‘mainly associated
with the Gulf war.’ The chief causes, in his view, were ‘contaminated water,
lack of high quality foods, inadequate breast feeding, poor weaning practices,
and inadequate supplies in the curative health care system. This was the product
of both a lack of some essential goods, and inadequate or inefficient use of
existing essential goods.’… It seems awfully hard not to conclude that the
embargo on Iraq has been ineffective (especially since 1998) and that it has, at
the least, contributed to more than 100,000 deaths since 1990.
All told, the regime of Saddam Hussein killed or caused the deaths of well over
half a million Iraqis. Under the policy of containment after the Gulf War, a reasonable
estimate is that 200,000 or more Iraqis died prematurely at the hands of the regime or as a
direct consequence of its policies – including its refusal to comply with U.N. Security

59

See Garfield (1999a,b) for two of his original studies.
58

Council Resolutions and the diversion of oil revenues and other resources to construct
palaces and monuments.
Despite their sobering quality, the raw numbers fail to convey the sheer horror of
the regime. Pollack succinctly captures some of the horror in a gut-wrenching passage
(page 123) that tells of gouging out the eyes of children to force confessions from parents
and grandparents, lowering victims into huge vats of acid, cutting out the tongues of
regime critics, the systematic rape of women and girls in front of male relatives, and
other extreme forms of torture and abuse.
7.2. War and Containment Compared

How does the tally of human misery and repression under containment compare
to the likely consequences of war? Under the policy of containment in effect after the end
of the 1991 Gulf War, premature Iraqi deaths numbered at least 10,000 per year and
probably two or three times as many. If we discount future lost lives at a rate of two
percent per year, and assume a three percent annual hazard for spontaneous and peaceful
regime change, then a continuation of the containment policy could be expected to result
in another 200,000 to 600,000 dead Iraqis. In comparison, the Gulf War of 1990-91
killed as many as 35,000 Iraqis, mostly troops who died during a long and intensive aerial
bombardment by the United States and its allies.60 Iraqi troops might be expected to
adopt more effective tactics in reaction to their crushing defeat in the 1991 war. Or they
might be expected to fight harder in response to an invasion. Either way, a more

60

Pollack (2002), page 139.
59

effective response by Iraqi military forces would prolong combat and probably lead to
greater Iraqi casualties.
O’Hanlon (2002a, 2002b) looks to the 1989 U.S. invasion of Panama and the
1993 U.S. engagement in Somalia to assess the probable loss of lives in a 2003 Iraq war.
Scaling up from these conflicts, he estimates that “Iraqi troop losses might be expected to
be anywhere from 2,000 to 50,000, with civilian casualties in the same relative range.”
He stresses that a key unknown is the willingness of Iraqi troops to fight. He also
cautions that Iraqi use of chemical or biological weapons against U.S. troops or its own
population could substantially raise Iraqi casualties. However, even his most pessimistic
projections involve fewer fatalities than the 200,000 to 600,000 expected premature
deaths that we project under a continuation of the containment policy.
There is a great deal of uncertainty about the number of premature Iraqi deaths
under both war and containment. We think the weight of evidence points to a greater
Iraqi death toll from a continuation of the pre-war containment policy than from a policy
of war and forcible regime change. Perhaps the strongest reason to question this
assessment is the possibility that a post-war Iraq could devolve into an extended and
large-scale civil war. This possibility cannot be ruled out. What can be ruled out in light
of the evidence is that the leading alternative to war involved little loss of Iraqi lives.

60

8. Concluding Remarks

Forcible regime change in Iraq has proved to be a costly undertaking. As of January
2006, it appears likely that the Iraq intervention will ultimately unfold along a path that
implies present value costs for the United States in the range of 410 to 630 billion in 2003
dollars. These figures reflect a 2 percent annual discount rate. They capture the
estimated economic costs of U.S. military resources deployed in the war and postwar
occupation, the value of lost lives and injuries sustained by U.S. soldiers, the lifetime
medical costs of treating injured soldiers, and U.S. outlays for humanitarian assistance
and postwar reconstruction. Pre-invasion views about the likely course of the Iraq
intervention imply present value costs in the range of $100 to $870 billion. Military
resources devoted to postwar occupation account for more than half the total costs except
in optimistic scenarios that envision a short occupation, little postwar conflict and a
smooth reconstruction effort.
The high cost of the Iraq intervention is sometimes seen as a compelling argument
against the decision to forcibly overthrow the ruling order and install a new regime. This
argument is deficient because it ignores the costs of alternative responses to the national
security and humanitarian concerns presented by the pre-war Iraqi regime. A wellfounded verdict on the Iraq intervention requires, at a minimum, an evaluation of what
these alternatives would cost. We tackle this issue by assessing the costs of sticking with
the pre-war containment policy.
Containment required the continuous engagement of a potent U.S. military force in
southern Turkey, the Middle East and the Persian Gulf. The United States devoted
roughly 28,000 troops, 30 naval vessels, 200 military aircraft and other equipment to

61

Iraqi containment efforts prior to the pre-war buildup. We estimate the economic cost of
these military resources to be about $14.5 billion per year. Based on our assessment of
the likely duration of a dangerous regime in Iraq, absent external intervention, this annual
flow translates into an expected present value of nearly $300 billion. Hence, containment
was also a costly option for the United States, even under the favorable assumption that it
would be completely effective in achieving its national security goals.
Advocates for forcible regime change in Iraq expressed several concerns about the
pre-war containment policy. Some stressed an erosion of political support for the
containment policy that threatened to undermine its effectiveness and lead to a much
costlier conflict with Iraq in the future. Others stressed the difficulty of compelling Iraqi
compliance with a rigorous process of weapons inspections and disarmament, widely
seen as a critical element of containment. And others stressed the potential for Iraqi
collaboration with international terrorist groups. To evaluate these concerns, we model
the possibility that an effective containment policy might require the mounting of costly
threats and might lead to a limited war or a full-scale regime-changing war against Iraq at
a later date. We also consider the possibility that the survival of a hostile Iraqi regime
raises the probability of a major terrorist attack on the United States. We draw on our
empirical analysis to assess the potential costs of these contingencies, but their
probabilities are especially difficult to assess with confidence.
We show that any one of these contingencies can sharply raise the expected cost of
the containment policy. We also develop an integrated analysis that simultaneously
captures several possible contingencies under a policy of containment. The integrated
analysis focuses on three scenarios chosen to capture a range of views about the

62

likelihood and cost of the contingencies. Factoring the contingencies into the analysis
yields present value costs for the containment policy in the range of roughly $350 to $700
billion. These large sums are in the same ballpark as the likely costs of the Iraq
intervention seen from the vantage point of early 2006. Thus, even with the benefit of
partial hindsight, it is difficult to gauge whether the Iraq intervention is more costly than
containment.
We also consider the consequences of the war-versus containment choice in two
other respects: the economic well-being of Iraqis, and the loss of Iraqi lives. Based on our
analysis, we conclude that the war will lead to large improvements in the economic wellbeing of most Iraqis relative to their prospects under the policy of containment. This
conclusion follows from some basic observations. First, the Iraqi economy was in terrible
condition before the war, and it would have remained in a sorry state under the policy of
containment. Second, the regime of Saddam Hussein was an economic failure of
tremendous proportions. The available evidence suggests that real income per capita fell
by roughly 75 percent as a consequence of Saddam’s misrule. In addition, much of Iraq’s
greatly diminished output was diverted to an oversized military, an apparatus of terror
and repression and the relentless glorification of Saddam. Third, the removal of
sanctions, the expansion of petroleum exports, large-scale reconstruction aid, and the
reintegration of Iraq’s economy into the world economy provide a strong basis for
economic gains – even in a society with serious institutional weaknesses. If, over the
course of a generation, Iraqis recover even half of the economic losses they suffered
under Saddam Hussein, then they will be significantly better off in material terms as a
consequence of forcible regime change.

63

The economic failures of the Saddam Hussein regime were not its greatest crimes.
The regime brought torture, repression, displacement and death to huge numbers of Iraqis
and others. We review some of the evidence in this regard, drawing heavily on work by
others. All told, the regime killed or caused the deaths of more than 500,000 Iraqis.
Under the policy of containment after the 1991 Gulf War, a reasonable estimate is that at
least 200,000 Iraqis died prematurely at the hands of the regime or as a direct
consequence of its policies, including its refusal to comply with U.N. Security Council
Resolutions and its diversion of oil revenues and other resources to palaces and
monuments. Had containment remained in effect, the historical record suggests that
premature Iraqi deaths would have continued indefinitely at the rate of 10,000 to 30,000
per year. There is, of course, a great deal of uncertainty about the number of premature
Iraqi deaths under either war or containment, but we think the weight of evidence points
to a greater Iraqi death toll from a continuation of the pre-war containment policy.
Perhaps the strongest reason to question this assessment is the possibility that a post-war
Iraq could devolve into an extended and large-scale civil war. This possibility cannot be
ruled out. What can be ruled out in light of the evidence is that the leading alternative to
war involved little loss of Iraqi lives.
The question of how to deal with “tyrants, rogue states and terrorists who threaten
not only their own people but also others” is a profoundly difficult one. The stakes,
human and economic, are enormous. The policy options are complex and fraught with
uncertainty. And sound decision-making requires a daunting range of inputs and
analysis. Yet, precisely because the stakes are so high and the decisions are so difficult,
it is essential to systematically evaluate alternatives as an input to decision making and

64

the formulation of national security policy. Our study is an effort to apply a systematic
approach to the evaluation of the two leading policy options on the table prior to the Iraq
war.

65

References
Bilmes, Linda and Joseph E. Stiglitz (2006) “The Economic Cost of the Iraq War: An
Appraisal Three Years after the Beginning of the Conflict.” (Available at
www2.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/jstiglitz/cost_of_war_in_iraq.pdf.)
Bram, Jason, James Orr and Carol Rapaport (2002) “Measuring the Effects of the
September 11 Attack on New York City,” Economic Policy Review, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, November.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James D. Morrow, Alastair Smith and Randolph M. Siverson
(2003) The Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Center for Defense Information (1998) “Fact Sheet: Cost of U.S. Military Action Against
Iraq,” 22 December 1998. (Available at
www.cdi.org/issues/iraq/costs_Dec1998.html.)
Collier, Paul, V.L. Elliot H, Havard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Querol and
Nicholas Sambanis (2003) Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and
Development Policy. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank and Oxford University
Press.
Coughlin, Con (2005) Saddam Hussein: His Rise and Fall. New York: Harper Perennial.
Davis, Steven J., Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (2003) “War in Iraq versus
Containment: Weighing the Costs,” University of Chicago. (Available at
gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/steven.davis/research/.)
Donnelly, Thomas (2004) Operation Iraqi Freedom: A Strategic Assessment.
Washington, D.C.: The AEI Press.

66

Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget (2003) Request for
FY 2003 Supplemental Appropriations on 25 March. (Available at
www.cfo.doe.gov/budget/billrept/fy03/presbud_supp.pdf.)
Foote, Christopher, William Block, Keith Crane and Simon Gray (2004) “Economic
Policy and Prospects in Iraq,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, no. 3
(Summer), 47-70.
Garfield, Richard (1999a) Morbidity and Mortality among Iraqi children from 1990
through 1998: Assessing the impact of the Gulf War and economic sanctions.
Occasional Papers, Fourth Freedom Forum, Goshen Indiana, July.
Garfield, Richard (1999b) Health and Wellbeing in Iraq: Sanctions and the oil for Food
Program. Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems, University of Iowa.
Groom, Ben, Cameron Hepburn, Phoebe Koundouri and David Pearce (2004) “Declining
Discount Rates: The Long and Short of It,” University College London.
Hess, Gregory D. (2003) “The Economic Welfare Cost of Conflict: An Empirical
Assessment,” CESifo Working Paper 852. (Availale at www.CESifo.de.)
Lopez, George A. and David Cortright (2004) “Containing Iraq: Sanctions Worked,”
Foreign Affairs (July/August).
McKibbin, Warwick J. and Andrew Stoeckel (2003) “The Economic Costs of a War in
Iraq,” 3 March. (Available at
www.brookings.edu/views/papers/mckibbin/20030307.pdf.)
Moseley, Michael (2003) Operation Iraqi Freedom – By the Numbers, Assessment and
Analysis Division, 30 April. (Available at

67

www.globalsecurity.org/military/library/report/2003/uscentaf_oif_report_30apr20
03.pdf.)
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (2005) “The Value of Health and Longevity,”
NBER Working Paper 11405.
Nordhaus, William (2002) “The Economic Consequences of a War with Iraq” in War
with Iraq: Costs, Consequences and Alternatives, American Academy of Arts &
Sciences, 2002.
O’Hanlon, Michael (2002a) “Counting Casualties: How Many People Would Die in an
Iraqi War?” Slate, 25 September.
O’Hanlon, Michael (2002b) “Overthrowing Saddam: Calculating the Costs and
Casualties.” Iraq Memo 1, The Brookings Institution. www.brook.edu.
O’Hanlon, Michael (2002c) “Saddam’s Bomb: How close is Iraq to having a nuclear
weapon? Slate, 18 September.
Packer, George (2005) The Assassins’ Gate: America in Iraq. New York: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux.
Pollack, Kenneth M. (2002) The Threatening Storm: The Case for Invading Iraq. New
York: Random House.
Sack, Brian and Robert Elsasser (2004) “Treasury Inflation-Indexed Debt: A Review of
the U.S. Experience,” Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York (May), 47-63.
Shawcross, William (2004) Allies: Why the West Had to Remove Saddam. New York:
Public Affairs.

68

U.S. Bureau of the Census (2005) Statistical Abstract of the United State. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (2003) Interim Progress Report on the Activities of the
Iraq Survey Group [Kay Report], October(?).
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (2004) Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD [Duelfer Report], 30 September.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2000) “Budgeting for Naval Forces: Structuring
Tomorrow’s Navy at Today’s Funding Level,” October. (Available at
www.cbo.gov/showdoc.cfm?index=2603&sequence=3.)
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2001) “The Effects of Aging on the Costs of
Operating and Maintaining Military Equipment,” August. (Available at
www.cbo.gov.)
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2002) “Estimated Costs of a Potential Conflict with
Iraq,” September. (Available at www.cbo.gov.)
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2003a) “An Analysis of the U.S. Military’s Ability to
Sustain an Occupation of Iraq,” September. (Available at www.cbo.gov.)
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2003b), Letter from the CBO Director to
Congressman John M. Spratt, Jr., Ranking Member of the Committee on the
Budget, U.S. House of Representatives, 28 October. (Available at www.cbo.gov.)
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2005a) “The Effects of Reserve Call-Ups on Civilian
Employers,” May 2005. (Available at www.cbo.gov.)

69

U.S. Congressional Budget Office (2005b) “The Potential Costs Resulting from Increased
Usage of Military Equipment in Ongoing Operations,” 6 April. (Available at
www.cbo.gov.)
U.S. Congressional Research Service (2003) “North Korea’s Nuclear Weapons
Program,” updated August 27. (Available at
http://fas.org/spp/starwars/crs/IB91141.pdf.)
U.S. Department of Defense (2000a) “National Defense Budget Estimates for FY 2001.”
(Available at
www.dod.mil/comptroller/defbudget/fy2001/fy2001_greenbook.pdf.)
U.S. Department of Defense (2000b) “Selected Manpower Statistics, Fiscal Year 2000.”
(Available at http://web1.whs.osd.mil/mmid/m01/fy00/m01fy00.pdf.)
U.S. Department of Defense (2001) “Overseas Contingency Operations Transfer Fund:
FY 2001 President’s Budget Submission.” (Available at
www.dod.mil/comptroller/defbudget/fy2001/budget_justification/pdfs/overseas/fy
01pb_overseas.pdf.)
U.S. Department of the Navy, Office of the Budget (2001) “Highlights of the Department
of the Navy FY 2002 Budget.” (Available at
http://navweb.secnav.navy.mil/pubbud/02pres/highbook/02pb_highlights.pdf.)
U.S. Department of State (2005) “Section 2207 Report on Iraq Relief and Reconstruction,
Status of Funds,” Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, July. (Available at
www.state.gov/p/nea/rls/rpt/2207/jul2005/html/48779.htm.)

70

U.S. General Accounting Office (1991) “Southwest Asia: Cost of Protecting U.S.
Interests,” Report NSIAD-91-250, August. (Available at
http://archive.gao.gov/d19t9/144832.pdf.)
U.S. House Budget Committee, Democratic Caucus (2002) “Assessing the Cost of
Military Action Against Iraq: Using Desert Shield/Desert Storm as Basis for
Estimates,” 23 September, 2002. (Available at
www.house.gov/budget_democrats/analyses/spending/iraqi_cost_report.pdf)
U.S. House Budget Committee, Democratic Caucus (2003) “The Cost of War and
Reconstruction in Iraq: An Update,” 23 September, 2003. (Available at
www.house.gov/budget_democrats/analyses/spending/iraqi_cost_report.pdf)
U.S. Senate Committee on the Armed Services (2000) Statement of General Tommy R.
Franks on 19 September. (Available at www.fas.org/news/iraq/2000/09/iraq000919a.htm.)
U.S. Senate Committee on the Armed Services (2002) Prepare Testimony of Secretary of
Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld on 2 February. (Available at
www.defenselink.mil/speeches/2002/s20020205-secdef4.html.)
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy (2003) “The Value of Statistical Life: A Critical
Review of Market Estimates throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 27, no. 1, pages 5-76.
Wallsten, Scott and Katrina Kosec (2005) “The Economic Costs of the War in Iraq,”
AEI-Bookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies working paper 05-19,
September.

71

Weitzman, Martin L. (2001) “Gamma Discounting,” American Economic Review, 91, no.
1 (March), 260-271.
Welch, Matt (2002) “The Politics of Dead Children: Have sanctions against Iraq
murdered millions?” ReasonOnline, March. (Available at
reason.com/0203/fe.mw.the.shtml.)

72

Table 1. Annual User Costs of Capital for U.S. Military Equipment
A. Estimated Rates of
Depreciation, Operating and
Maintenance Costs
(1) Straight-Line Depreciation

(2) Normal Rate of O&M Spending
in Peacetime Use (Includes Fuel)
(3) Extra Depreciation and
Maintenance Costs for In-Theater
Equipment (Excludes Fuel)
(4) Sum of lines (1), (2) and (3)
B. Cost of Capital: Containment
(5) Sum of Depreciation,
Maintenance and Operating Costs
Applied to the Containment Policy
(6) Opportunity Cost of Capital
(7) Real User Cost of Capital
Applied to the Containment Policy
– Sum of lines (5) and (6)
C. Additional Capital Cost: War
(8) Prewar Build-Up and Postwar
Redeployment
(9) Major Combat Phase
D. Cost of Capital: Occupation
(10) Postwar Occupation, No
Major Insurgency
(11) Postwar Occupation, Major
Insurgency

Army
Equipment
4.5
1.7
16.9

As a Percent of Capital Value
Air
Marines
Force
Navy
Equipment Aircraft Aircraft
4.4
2.5 –
3.7
3.3
1.7
1.0 –
1.4
1.3
14.3
0.6 –
0.5
0.8

Navy
Ships
2.8
1.1
0.5

23.1

20.5

4.0 –
5.4

5.6

4.4

12.0

12.0

7.0

7.0

5.5

2.0
14.0

2.0
14.0

2.0
9.0

2.0
9.0

2.0
7.5

6.5+

6.5+

6.8+

6.8+

5.6+

22.2+

22.2+

7.3+

7.3+

6.1+

16.0

16.0

8.0

8.0

7.5

24.0

24.0

9.0

9.0

7.5

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in CBO (2000), CBO (2001) and CBO
(2005b, Tables 2 to 5).
Notes:
1. Except for Navy ships, straight-line depreciation rates in line (1) are based on
equipment lifetimes reported in CBO (2005b). The figures are value-weighted
means over different types of equipment. The straight-line depreciation rate for
Navy ships is calculated as (8.5/300) based on the annual shipbuilding rate needed
to sustain a 300-ship Navy, as reported in CBO (2000).

73

2. According to CBO (2001, page 5): “[Operations and Maintenance] O&M
spending for equipment includes the costs of the parts and fuel used by military
units, as well as the costs incurred in maintaining equipment at large centralized
maintenance facilities called depots. Parts include what are termed
‘consumables,’ such as washers, filters, and gaskets, and ‘depot-level reparables’
(DLRs), such as spare parts, avionics, and engine components. Major overhauls
at depots, which are public (DoD) or private (contractor) repair facilities, involve
major inspection and repair of weapon systems; the costs for them include both
material and civilian labor costs. The cost of military personnel engaged in
operating and maintaining the equipment are not included in O&M spending.”
3. Data from page 1 and Figure 1 of CBO (2001) indicate that O&M spending on
capital goods accounts for 7.4% of defense expenditures, which amounts to 39%
of procurement spending. Applying the steady-state assumption yields an O&M
spending rate equal to 39% of straight-line depreciation costs. Assuming that the
ratio of O&M spending on capital goods to straight-line depreciation costs is the
same for all types of military equipment yields the entries in line 2.
4. The extra rate of depreciation and maintenance in line (3) is calculated as the
“increase in annual depreciation” for in-theater equipment divided by the value of
the equipment, as reported in CBO (2005b). These estimates are based on U.S.
experience in Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan in recent years. For Army and
Marines equipment, the extra rate of depreciation includes an annual two percent
loss rate for in-theater equipment. For Navy ships, we assume that the extra rate
of annual depreciation and maintenance costs amount to 0.5% of the capital value.
Depreciation rates for Army and Marines equipment are much higher in theater,
because the equipment is used much more intensively. For example, miles per
truck in theater are ten times as high as in peacetime use. Note that line (3) does
not capture extra fuel costs due to a higher operations tempo for in-theater
military equipment.
5. Line (5) reports our figure for the sum of depreciation, maintenance and operating
costs for the military equipment devoted to containment. For Army and Marines
equipment (mostly ground equipment), we use a much lower figure than line (3),
because the operating tempo of ground equipment under containment is lower
than the one reflected in lines (3) and (4).
6. The opportunity cost of capital in line (6) reflects a real interest rate on
government debt of two percent. See Section 4.1 in the text.
7. Lines (8) and (9) report additional user costs of capital that we apply to military
equipment deployed in an Iraq war over and above the costs for operations
support projected by the CBO (2002). That is, the entries in lines (8) and (9) are
not intended to capture the full user cost of capital in an Iraq war. Rather, they
capture the portion that, in our judgment (based principally on other CBO
sources), is missing from the prewar projections in CBO (2002).
8. For Army and Marines (ground) equipment, line (8) is the sum of straight-line
depreciation in line (1) and the opportunity cost of capital in line (6). For aircraft
and ships, we also add the normal rate of O&M spending in line (2) less 0.3
percent for fuel usage during peacetime operations.

74

9. For Army and Marines (ground) equipment, line (9) is a weighted average of the
Army and Marines entries in line (4), less 0.3 percentage points for fuel usage
during peacetime operations. We weight the Army entry three times as heavily as
the Marines entry. For aircraft and ships, line (9) is the sum of lines (4) and (6),
less 0.3 percentage points for fuel usage during peacetime operations.
10. The real user cost of capital in lines (10) and (11) are educated guesses based on
adjustments to line (4) for fuel consumption and operations tempo. These figures
include two percentage points for the opportunity cost of capital.

75

Table 2. Annual Costs of U.S. Military Resources Devoted to Containment,
Summary of Calculations
A. Summary of Cost Calculations – Method 1
Ground
Equipment Aircraft
Capital Value (Billions of 2003 Dollars)
1.5
16.2
Real User Cost of Capital in Percent
14.0
9.0
Per Year From Table 1, Line (8)
Annual Capital Costs (Billions)
0.21
1.46

Number of Military Personnel in Theater
Annual Cost Per Person (Thousands of 2003 $)
Annual Labor Costs (Billions of 2003 $)

Naval Vessels
40.4
7.5
3.03
28,164
226
6.37

Annual Cost of Expended Munitions (Billions of 2003 $)

0.2

Capital, Labor and Munitions Costs (Billions of 2003 $)

11.26

Navy (30 ships)
Air Force
Army

B. Summary of Cost Calculations – Method 2
Number of
All-in Costs
Personnel
Per PersonTotal Costs
In Theater
Year (2003 $)
(Billions of 2003 $)
16,117
620,463
10.00
8,457
734,893
6.21
3,590
443,846
1.59
All Forces
17.81

C. Annual Containment Cost Figures Used in Policy Comparison
Baseline case – average of Method 1 and Method 2 cost
14.54
Higher costs, to account for extra forces – one-third higher than
19.38
baseline case
Lower costs, to account for dual-use nature of deployment –
9.69
one-third lower than baseline case

Source: CBO (2000, 2002) and authors’ calculations using data, estimates and
assumptions described in the text and Table 1.

76

Table 3. Incremental Budgetary Costs under Alternative
Deployment Options for Extra Troops in Iraq
Deployment
Option

(a) Create two new
Army divisions

Extra
Forces
for Use
in Iraq
18,000 –
23,000
(after 3-5
years)

(b) Eliminate rapid
reaction
requirement and
18,000 –
(c) use Army
23,000
National Guard
units
(d) Withdraw forces
from the Sinai
9,000 –
Peninsula, Bosnia,
11,000
Kosovo, and
Okinawa

Incremental Budgetary Costs
(Billions of 2004 $)
Upfront

Annual

18.0 – 19.4

9.5 – 10.1

N.A.

3.6 – 4.2

“… could have significant diplomatic and political
consequences,…[but] this action would probably not
result in substantial incremental costs, because the
savings that would accrue from withdrawing forces
from those other commitments would largely offset
the costs of sustaining additional forces in Iraq.”

Source: “An Analysis of the U.S. Military’s Ability to Sustain an Occupation of Iraq,”
United States Congressional Budget Office, September 2003.

77

Table 4: Summary of Projected Military Force Requirements for War in Iraq,
Major Combat Phase, Two CBO Scenarios

Army
Marines
Navy
Air Force
Special Ops
Total Personnel

Heavy Ground
Heavy Air
Option
Option
Personnel in Theater, Thousands
213
93
45
25
63
63
34
60
12
12
367
253
Heavy Ground Equipment
800
300

Tanks
Carrier Battle Groups
Amphibious Ready Groups
Surface Action Groups
Total Navy Battle Force Ships
Attack and Transport Helicopters
Marine Air Wings
Navy Carrier Air Wings
Air Force Fighter Wings
Air Force Bombers
Total Aircraft

5
1
1
60

Naval Forces

5
1
1
60

Aircraft

800
500
1
1
5
5
5 1/3 wings
10 wings
384 combat planes 720 combat planes
72
72
1,500
2,500

Source: “Estimated Costs of a Potential Conflict with Iraq,” United States Congressional
Budget Office, September 2002.
Notes:
1. According to CBO (2002), each Air Force tactical fighter wing “represents a force
with sufficient aircraft to ensure that 72 combat planes can be sustained and
supported.” CBO (2002) does not report exact figures for the number of combat
aircraft in Marine Air Wings and Navy Carrier Air Wings.
2. It is unclear whether helicopters are included in the CBO figures for “total
aircraft.” Moseley (2003) reports that 1,666 U.S. aircraft (excluding helicopters)
actually participated in Operation Iraqi Freedom, including some aircraft that
supported operations but did not deploy into theater. The 1,666 figure includes
655 fighters and 51 air force bombers.

78

Table 5. Estimated Capital Values of Deployed Military Equipment
During War in Iraq, Two CBO Scenarios, Billions of 2003 Dollars

Heavy Ground Option
Heavy Air Option

Ground Equipment,
Including Helicopters
72.3
27.9

Aircraft
109.6
182.6

Naval
Vessels
80.8
80.8

All
Equipment
262.7
291.4

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in CBO (2000, 2002, 2005b).
Notes:
1. Capital values for Aircraft and Naval Vessels are estimated by applying the
method described in Section 2.1.2 of the text to the force requirements listed in
Table 4. For this purpose, we assume that the figure for “Total Aircraft” reported
in Table 4 is exclusive of helicopters.
2. Capital values for All Equipment are based on the recent experience of U.S.
ground troops. According to Table 2 in CBO (2005b), Army equipment use in
theater in Afghanistan, Kuwait and Iraq during 2005 has a capital value of 31.34
billion 2005 dollars for 100,000 to 150,000 troops. Using the midpoint value for
number of troops and deflating by 5 percent to express in 2003 dollars yields
$238,781 for the value of “Ground Equipment, Including Helicopters” per Army
personnel in theater. Similar calculations using data in Table 3 of CBO (2005b)
yield $154,286 per Marines personnel. (In computing this figure, we exclude the
value of fighters and tanker aircraft operated by the Marines, because they are
included under “Aircraft.”) We multiply the per person equipment values by the
corresponding number of Army and Marines personnel listed in Table 4 to obtain
the capital value of “Ground Equipment, Including Helicopters.” For Special
Operations personnel, we use the per-person equipment value for Marines.

79

Table 6: Estimated Costs of a Projected War in Iraq in Billions of 2003 Dollars:
Initial Deployment, Major Combat Phase, and Redeployment
A. Heavy Ground Option: Costs by Type and Phase of Engagement
Initial
First Month
Each
Deployment
of Combat
Additional
Month
(Three Months)
Of Combat
Personnel and
7.7
2.5
2.5
Personnel Support
Operations Support,
5.4
7.1
5.4
Including Munitions
Transport to and
2.8
0.7
0.7
from Theater
Additional Capital Costs
4.2
2.4
2.4
Sum
20.1
12.8
11.1
B. Heavy Air Option: Costs by Type and Phase of Engagement
Deployment
First Month
Each
(Three Months) of Combat
Additional
Month
Of Combat
Personnel and
5.3
1.8
1.8
Personnel Support
Operations Support,
4.2
6.2
4.7
Including Munitions
Transport to and
1.9
0.5
0.5
from Theater
Additional Capital Costs
4.7
2.0
2.0
Sum
16.1
10.5
9.0

Redeployment
(Three
Months)
7.7
1.5
1.5
2.9
13.6
Redeployment
(Three
Months)
5.3
1.1
1.0
2.6
10.0

C. Undiscounted Total Costs of Initial Deployment, War and Redeployment
From
CBO (2002)
Ratio of A
Panels
Projections
and B to CBO
A and B
(2002)
Heavy
Two Months
57.5
36.3
1.58
Ground
Three Months
68.6
43.6
1.57
Option
Four Months
79.6
50.9
1.56
Heavy
Two Months
45.6
27.3
1.67
Air
Three Months
54.6
33.4
1.63
Option
Four Months
63.6
39.5
1.61

Sources: CBO (2002) and authors’ calculations.

80

Notes:
1. For “Personnel and Personnel Support”, we adjust the corresponding entries in
Tables 3 and 4 of CBO (2002) by adding an estimate for the basic pay of activeduty military personnel. The adjustment equals the number of projected activeduty military personnel in CBO (2002, Table 2) multiplied by $51,223/12 per
month. See footnote 8 in the text for our derivation of the average basic pay
figure per full-time equivalent military personnel.
2. According to CBO (2002, Tables 3 and 4), “Operations Support” includes “all
incremental costs related to the operation and maintenance of air, land, and sea
forces involved in the Persian Gulf. It includes costs associated with the
incremental increase in flying hours and steaming days, such as costs for
increased fuel consumption and repair parts. Operations support also include the
costs of equipping and maintaining ground troops and purchasing equipment, as
well as costs associated with command, control, communications, and
intelligence. In addition, the category covers force reconstitution, which includes
the replacement of munitions stocks and repair or replacement of damaged
equipment, and the incremental cost of increased depot maintenance for items
such as aircraft, tanks, and ships.”
3. “Additional Capital Costs” are computed by applying the entries in lines (8) and
(9) of Table 1 to the Capital Value estimates in Table 5. We assume that all
equipment is engaged for three months during the deployment phase, that naval
vessels and ground equipment are engaged for three months during the
redeployment phase, and that aircraft are engaged for one month during the
redeployment phase.

81

Table 7: Estimated Costs of a Projected War in Iraq in Billions of 2003 Dollars:
Postwar Occupation, Casualties, Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance
A. Postwar Occupation Costs – Method 1
Per 100,000 Ground Troops in Theater,
Including Capital Costs on Ground Equipment
Naval Forces, one-fifth of force level during major
combat phase (12 ships, 6,276 personnel)
Air Forces, one-fifth of force level under Heavy
Ground Option (300 aircraft, 12,686 personnel)
Total occupation costs for ground troops, naval forces
and air forces (118,962 armed forces)
Occupation costs per 100,000 armed forces
in theater
B. Postwar Occupation Costs – Method 2
Occupation costs per 100,000 armed forces in theater
C. Reconstruction Aid and Humanitarian
Assistance
Humanitarian Assistance
Reconstruction Aid Per HBC (2002)
Reconstruction Aid Per HBC (2003)
D. Cost of U.S. Casualties
Per 1,000 U.S. Fatalities
Per 7,153 U.S. Injuries

Operations
Tempo
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High

2003 $,
Billions
26.4
29.3
2.6
2.6
4.8
5.4
33.9
37.3
28.5
31.4

Time
Frame
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual
Annual

NA

48.4

Annual

2003 $,
Billions
1 – 10
9.2 – 18.4
28.3 – 73.3

Time Frame
Over 2 – 4 years
Over 10 years
Over 10 years

2003 $, Billions
6.9
9.0

Sources: HBC (2002, 2003), Nordhaus (2002), Viscusi and Aldy (2003), Wallsten and
Kosec (2005) and authors’ calculations.
Notes:
1. Panel A: Postwar occupation costs for Ground Troops in Theater are the sum of
labor costs per person from Table 2 Panel A ($226,000 per person year) plus
capital costs. Drawing on Table 5, we use a capital value of $238,781 per person
for ground equipment. We apply a user cost of capital of 16 percent per year
from Table 1 line (11) at a low operations tempo and 24 percent at a high
operations tempo. In the high op-tempo case, we add another $10,000 per person
year for munitions.
2. Panel A: Postwar occupation costs for Naval Forces are the sum of capital costs
for naval vessels and labor costs for naval personnel. Applying the same figure
for capital value per ship as in Table 2 and a user cost of capital of 7.5 percent per
year yields annual capital costs of $1.2 billion. Appling the same ratio of naval
personnel to naval vessels as in Section 2.1 for the containment policy, and using

82

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.

a figure $226,000 per year for personnel yields annual labor costs of $1.4 billion.
Summing the capital and labor costs yields $2.6 billion.
Panel A: Postwar occupation costs for Air Forces are the sum of capital costs for
fixed-wing aircraft and labor costs for Air Force personnel. Applying the same
figure for capital value per aircraft as in Table 2 and the user cost figures for
aircraft from lines (10) and (11) of Table 1 yields annual capital costs of $1.9 –
2.2 billion, depending on operations tempo. Applying the same ratio of Air Force
personnel to fixed-wing aircraft as in Section 2.1 for the containment policy, and
using a figure $226,000 per year for personnel yields annual labor costs of $2.9
billion. We sum the capital and labor costs to derive the figures reported in the
table, adding another $300 million for munitions under a high operations tempo.
Panel A: “Occupation costs per 100,000 armed forces in theater” are calculated as
“Total occupation costs” divided by 118,962 armed forces.
Panel B: “Occupation costs per 100,000 armed forces in theater” are calculated
using the All-in Costs per Person-Year for Army, Navy and Air Force personnel
reported in Panel B of Table 2. The force composition (ground troops, naval
personnel, air force personnel) is the same as in Panel A.
Panel C: The projected cost range for Humanitarian Assistance is from Nordhaus
(2002, page 67), and the projected cost ranges for Reconstruction Aid are from
U.S. House Budget Committee (2002, page 22) and (2003, page 2).
Panel D: The figure of $6.9 million per fatality is the midpoint value of a
statistical life in the studies reviewed by Viscusi and Aldy (2003), as reported in
Wallsten and Kosec (2005) and adjusted to 2003 dollars. Based on experience
through August 25, 2005 for U.S. military personnel and contractors, the Iraq
engagement has involved 7.153 injuries per fatality. Wallsten and Kosec classify
these injuries by severity into several categories and assign welfare costs based on
estimates of the willingness to pay to avoid injury. They add lifetime medical
costs for injury treatment to obtain the economic cost of injuries, discounting
future medical costs at 5 percent annual rate.

83

Table 8: Alternative Scenarios for a Projected War in Iraq

Length
Undiscounted
Size of Occupation Force,
of Major
Cost of
U.S. Fatalities
Duration, and Operations
Combat
Humanitarian
Scenarios,
Major
Tempo
Phase
Assistance
Ordered by Costliness
Combat Occupation
(1) Short war, occupation
2 months 100,000 troops initially,
500
500
$1 billion
of two and one-third years,
declining linearly to zero in
over 2 years
little post-war conflict
January 2006, low op tempo
500
1,000
$2 billion
(2) Short war, three-year
2 months 150,000 troops initially,
over 3 years
occupation, greater postdeclining linearly to zero in
war conflict
September 2006, high op tempo
through December 2004
800
2000
$4 billion
(3) Medium war, three-year 3 months 150,000 troops initially,
over 3 years
occupation, small
declining linearly to zero in
insurgency
October 2006, high op tempo
through September 2005
1,000
3,000
$6 billion
(4) Medium war, five-year 3 months 200,000 troops initially, then
over 4 years
occupation, larger
declining linearly to zero in
insurgency; two
October 2008, high op tempo
reconstruction cost levels
through September 2006
3 months 200,000 troops through October 1,000
4,000
$6 billion
(5) Same as (4) except for
over 4 years
bigger occupation force
2006, then declining linearly to
and more casualties; two
zero in October 2008, high op
reconstruction cost levels
tempo through September 2006
2,000
5,000
$10 billion
(6) Longer war, ten-year
4 months 200,000 troops for four years,
over 4 years
occupation, major
then declining linearly to zero
insurgency
in November 2013, high op
tempo
(7) Same as (6) but regime change fails and containment resumes in 2014 at baseline cost level in Table 2, Panel C.

84

Undiscounted
Cost of
Reconstruction
Aid
$9.2 billion
over 5 years
$12 billion
over 5 years
$15 billion
over 5 years
(a) $30 billion
over 7 years
(b) $50 billon
over 10 years
(a) $40 billion
over 7 years
(b) $75 billon
over 10 years
$50 billion
over 10 years

Common assumptions for Table 8 scenarios:
1. Initial deployment commences in December 2002, major combat commences in March 2002, and redeployment concludes
three months after the end of major combat.
2. Costs of initial deployment, major combat and redeployment of forces engaged in major combat as specified in Table 6.
3. Occupation force levels and costs commence immediately following redeployment phase. For example, if the major combat
phase lasts two months, then post-war occupation costs commence in August 2003.
4. Fixed ratio of ground troops to Navy and Air Force personnel during occupation phase, as specified in Panel A of Table 7.
5. Occupation costs as specified in Panel A of Table 7.
6. Fatalities occur at a constant rate during the major combat phase, and they occur at a rate proportional to the number of troops
in theater during the occupation phase.
7. Cost of fatalities and injuries as specified in Panel D of Table 7, with a fixed ratio of 7.153 injuries per fatality.
8. Humanitarian assistance and reconstruction aid dispensed at a constant level over the indicated time frame.

85

Table 9: Present Value Cost of Military Resources Required for Continued
Containment, as of 2003

Containment
Scenario
Baseline
Case
Extra forces
and higher costs
Dual-use
deployment and
lower costs

Annual Cost
Based on
Average of
Method 1 and 2
14.54

Present Value Cost, Billions of 2003 Dollars
Gamma
Exponential Discounting,
Annual Discount Rate
discounting
with µ = .04
.02
.04
.06
and σ = .03
297
216
171
247

19.38

395

288

228

329

9.69

198

144

114

164

Source: Authors’ calculations and sources listed in Table 2.
Notes:
1. Annual costs are computed as the average of the Method 1 and Method 2 cost
calculations summarized in Table 2. Relying on Method 1 only yields annual and
present value cost figures that are 22.5 percent smaller.
2. The present value cost of containment is calculated according to equation (1) with
λ = .03 and exponential or gamma discounting, as indicated. λ is the annual
hazard rate of spontaneous transition from a dangerous to a benign regime in Iraq.
3. Under exponential discounting, R(i ) = (1 + r )− i for i = 0,1, 2,.... Under gamma
discounting, R(i ) = 1 + iσ 2 / µ

−z

, where z = ( µ / σ ) 2 . The gamma discounting

parameters are drawn from Weitzman (2001). The implied effective discount rate
is 4 percent per year initially and declines for more distant years.
4. The impact of expected regime duration can be read from Table 8 by recognizing
that, to a close approximation, the present value cost of containment under
exponential discounting depends on the sum of the hazard rate and the discount
rate. For example, the present value cost of containment at a hazard rate of .03
and a discount rate of .04 is nearly the same as the present value cost at a hazard
rate of .05 and a discount rate of .02.

86

Table 10: Present Value Cost of War in Iraq as of 2003, Alternative Scenarios

Scenario
1
2
3
4(a)
4(b)
5(a)
5(b)
6
7

Present Value Cost at 2% Annual Discount Rate, Billions of 2003 Dollars
Initial
Military
Reconstruction
Deployment,
Resources
U.S.
Aid And
Major Combat,
Engaged in
Fatalities
Humanitarian
Total
Redeployment
Occupation And Injuries
Assistance
106
45.4
34.6
15.8
9.8
152
45.4
70.2
23.3
13.5
187
54.3
71.4
43.3
18.3
302
54.3
152.6
61.2
34.1
320
54.3
152.6
61.2
51.6
414
54.3
239.7
75.9
43.5
445
54.3
239.7
75.9
74.5
633
63.3
409.5
105.0
55.5
872
63.3
409.5
105.0
55.5

Scenario
1
2
3
4(a)
4(b)
5(a)
5(b)
6
7

Present Value Cost at a 6% Annual Discount Rate, Billions of 2003 Dollars
Initial
Military
Reconstruction
Deployment,
Resources
U.S.
Aid And
Major Combat,
Engaged in
Fatalities
Humanitarian
Total
Redeployment
Occupation And Injuries
Assistance
103
45.1
32.9
15.8
9.2
146
45.1
66.2
22.3
12.6
179
53.9
67.0
41.3
17.2
284
53.9
140.0
57.2
30.9
296
53.9
140.0
57.2
44.5
380
53.9
216.7
69.9
39.3
404
53.9
216.7
69.9
64.0
552
62.6
347.4
93.5
48.2
642
62.6
347.4
93.5
48.2

Source: Authors’ calculations.
Notes:
1. See Table 8 for scenario descriptions and assumptions.
2. The table shows present value costs for the Heavy Air Option. The present value
costs of Initial Deployment, Major Combat and Redeployment are about $11
billion to $16 billion higher for the Heavy Ground Option.
3. Present value calculations use a monthly time unit and exponential discounting.

87

Table 11: Present Value Cost of Containment Allowing for Costly Credible Threats,
Terrorist Attacks and Future Wars, Billions of 2003 Dollars

Contingencies
Costly
Annual probability of
Credible
mounting threat
Threats
Cost of mounting threat
Limited
Annual probability of
Wars
fighting limited war
Cost of fighting
Terrorist
Annual probability,
Attacks
relative to case with a
peaceful Iraqi regime
Economic cost of attack
RegimeProbability of war in next
Changing ten years
War
Cost, multiple of costs for
war scenario 5(a)
Present Value Cost of Containment
Baseline, $14.54 billion per year plus
contingencies at a 2% discount rate
Lower costs of $9.69 billion per year
plus contingencies at 2% discount rate
$14.54 billion per year plus
contingencies at a 6% discount rate
$9.69 billion per year plus
contingencies at 6% discount rate

No Con- Optimistic Middle Pessimistic
tingencies Scenario Scenario Scenario
0
.05
.10
.15
-0

13.05
.03

26.1
.03

26.1
.05

-0

53.3
0

53.3
.02

53.3
.05

-0

-.05

100
.10

250
.15

--

1

1.5

2

297

346

441

705

198

251

351

620

171

205

269

437

114

150

216

386

Source: Authors’ calculations
Note: The present value calculations are carried out using an expanded version of
equation (5) in the text with λ = .03 . Regime change, whether peaceful or forcible,
eliminates the possibility of additional threats or wars and reduces the (relative)
probability of terrorist attacks to zero.

88

Table 12: Impact of War on Iraqi Economic Welfare, Baseline Model

Scenario
Description
Baseline Case
Slow long-run
growth
Higher War Cost
Less Catch Up After
Regime Change
More Catch Up
After Regime
Change
Higher Rate of
Peaceful Regime
Change
Lower Rate of
Peaceful Regime
Change
Highly Unfavorable
Case for War
Highly Favorable
Case for War

4
4

λ, Annual
Probability
Of Peaceful
Regime
Change
.03
.03

Impact of War
on Iraqi
Welfare
As Percent of
Initial Welfare
49.8
62.8

.02
.02

4
2

.03
.03

49.0
25.1

0.5

.02

7

.03

65.6

0.5

.02

4

.07

24.5

0.5

.02

4

.02

66.8

1

.02

2

.07

12.2

0.25

.02

7

.02

91.5

War
Cost,
Years
of GDP
0.5
0.5

g, Long
term
output
growth
rate
.02
0

1
0.5

M, Catch Up
As Multiple
Of Initial
GDP

Note: All calculations use exponential discounting with an annual discount rate of r = .05
on future income. The effective discount rate under containment, inclusive of the regime
change probability, is r + λ .

89

Table 13: Impact of War on Iraqi Economic Welfare, Model with Foregone Growth

Scenario
Description
Baseline Case
Higher War Cost
Less Catch Up After
Regime Change
More Catch Up After
Regime Change
Higher Rate of Peaceful
Regime Change
Lower Rate of Peaceful
Regime Change
Highly Unfavorable
Case for War
Highly Favorable Case
for War

Impact of War on
Iraqi Welfare
As Percent of
Initial Welfare

4
4
2

λ, Annual
Probability
Of Peaceful
Regime
Change
.03
.03
.03

0.5

7

.03

122.3

0.5

4

.07

49.9

0.5

4

.02

134.8

1

2

.07

35.0

0.25

7

.02

170.0

War
Cost,
Years of
GDP

M, Catch Up
As Multiple
Of Initial GDP

0.5
1
0.5

100.7
99.8
67.3

Note: All calculations use a long term growth rate after regime change of g = .02, a long
term growth rate prior to regime change of g S = 0, and an annual discount rate on future
income flows of r = .05. . The effective discount rate under containment, inclusive of the
regime change probability, is r + λ .

90

Figure 1: Present Value Cost of War Compared to Containment
with Costly Credible Threats, Billions of 2003 Dollars

Cost
650

War Scenario 6

600

Containment with High
Cost of Mounting a
Credible Threat

550
500
450
400

War Scenario 5 (a)
Containment with Low Cost
of Mounting a Credible Threat

350
300
250
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Annual Probability of Need for Credible Threat

91

0.4

0.5

Figure 2: Present Value Cost of War Compared to Containment with
Possibility of a Limited War, Billions of 2003 Dollars

Cost
650

War Scenario 6

600
550
500

Containment with Possibility
of a Limited War

450
400

War Scenario 5 (a)

350
300
250
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

Annual Probability of Limited War

92

0.25

0.3

Figure 3: Present Value Cost of Immediate War Compared to
Containment With Possibility of a Future War, Billions of 2003 Dollars

Cost

m = (future war cost) / (immediate war cost)

1000
900

Containment
with m=5

800

Containment
with m=2

700
600
500

War Scenario 5 (a)

400
300

Containment with m=1

200
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Probability of War in Next 10 years

93

0.6

0.7

0.8

