                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       TESTING PORTFOLIO EFFICIENCY WITH CONDITIONING INFORMATION

                                            Wayne E. Ferson
                                            Andrew F. Siegel

                                         Working Paper 12098
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12098


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964) implies that a market portfolio should be mean
variance efficient. Multiple-beta asset pricing models such as Merton (1973) imply that a combination of the
factor portfolios is minimum variance efficient (Chamberlain, 1983; Grinblatt and Titman, 1987). The
consumption CAPM implies that a maximum correlation portfolio for consumption is efficient (Breeden,
1979). More generally, any stochastic discount factor model implies that a maximum correlation portfolio
for the stochastic discount factor is minimum variance efficient (e.g., Hansen and Richard, 1987). The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Wayne E. Ferson and Andrew F. Siegel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Testing Portfolio Efficiency with Conditioning Information
Wayne E. Ferson and Andrew F. Siegel
NBER Working Paper No. 12098
March 2006
JEL No. C12, C51, C52, G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop asset pricing models' implications for portfolio efficiency when there is conditioning

information in the form of a set of lagged instruments. A model of expected returns identifies a

portfolio that should be minimum variance efficient with respect to the conditioning information.

Our tests refine previous tests of portfolio efficiency, using the conditioning information optimally.

We reject the efficiency of all static or time-varying combinations of the three Fama-French (1996)

factors with respect to the conditioning information and also the conditional efficiency of

time-varying combinations of the factors, given standard lagged instruments.


Wayne E. Ferson
Department of Finance
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Fulton Hall 330B
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808
and NBER
fersonwa@bc.edu

Andrew F. Siegel
Department of Finance
University of Washington
Box 353200
Seattle, WA 98195-3200
asiegel@u.washington.edu
                                                  1


Introduction

    Testing the efficiency of a given portfolio has long been an important topic in empirical

asset pricing. The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964) implies that a market

portfolio should be mean variance efficient. Multiple-beta asset pricing models such as Merton

(1973) imply that a combination of the factor portfolios is minimum variance efficient (e.g.,

Chamberlain, 1983; Grinblatt and Titman, 1987). The consumption CAPM implies that a

maximum correlation portfolio for consumption is efficient (Breeden, 1979). More generally,

stochastic discount factor models imply that a maximum correlation portfolio for the stochastic

discount factor is minimum variance efficient (e.g., Hansen and Richard, 1987).

    Classical efficiency tests, as studied by Gibbons (1982), Jobson and Korkie (1982),

Stambaugh (1982), MacKinlay (1987), Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) and others, ask if a

tested portfolio lies “significantly” inside a sample mean variance boundary. These studies form

the boundary from fixed-weight combinations of the tested asset returns. However, many studies

in asset pricing now condition on predetermined variables to model conditional expected returns,

correlations and volatility, and portfolio weights may be functions of the predetermined

variables. This paper considers tests of portfolio efficiency in the presence of such conditioning

information.

    Recent studies using conditioning information expand the set of returns by including a

specific collection of ad-hoc “dynamic strategies” based on the information. For example, the

“factors” or assets’ returns may be multiplied by lagged instruments, as in Shanken (1990),

Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), Cochrane (1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996) or Ferson and

Schadt (1996). This “multiplicative” approach corresponds to dynamic strategies whose portfolio

weights are linear functions of the lagged instruments. In this paper we develop tests of

efficiency where the dynamic strategies include all possible portfolios formed from a given set
                                                     2


of returns, with weights that may be any well-behaved function of the given conditioning

information. This expands the set of portfolio returns to the maximum possible extent, thereby

using the conditioning information efficiently.

    Our paper contributes more to the literature than the specific efficiency tests. We develop a

new framework for testing asset pricing theories in the presence of conditioning information.

Our framework uses the concept of “unconditional” efficiency as defined by Hansen and Richard

(1987). We refer to this concept, using more descriptive language, as efficiency with respect to

the information, Z. We develop the framework by analogy to well-known results for testing

portfolio efficiency when conditioning information is ignored. Along the way, we present

generalizations for a number of classical results.

    The primary empirical motivation for our refinement of the way conditioning variables are

employed is to use the information efficiently. This is important in view of recent evidence

calling into question the usefulness of standard lagged instruments, once bias and sampling

errors are accounted for (e.g. Ghysels (1997), Carlson and Chapman (2000), Goyal and Welch

(2003, 2004), Simin (2003), Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin, 2003).           Another motivation is

tractability. In a multiplicative approach, with N asset returns and L lagged instruments, a NL x

NL covariance matrix must be inverted. In our approach the matrices are N x N. The third

motivation is robustness.     As discussed below, our approach should be robust to certain

misspecifications. We find that the multiplicative approach, using standard instruments and

adjusting for sampling errors, typically has no more ability to reject models than tests that ignore

the conditioning information altogether. Our tests that use the same information efficiently

perform better. We find that the new tests can reject efficiency in settings where traditional tests

do not.
                                                         3


    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 further motivates tests of minimum

variance efficiency with respect to conditioning information and presents the main ideas. Section

2 develops the tests. The data are described in Section 3 and section 4 presents the empirical

results. The robustness of the results is addressed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.



1. Asset Pricing, Portfolio Efficiency and Conditioning Information

    Empirical work in asset pricing is often motivated by the fundamental valuation equation:



                                           E {mt +1 Rt +1 Z t } = 1 ,                              (1)

where Rt+1 is an N-vector of test asset gross returns, Zt is the conditioning information, a vector

of observable instrumental variables in the public information set at time t, mt+1 is a stochastic

discount factor, and 1 is an N-vector of ones. Most asset pricing models imply a specification for

the stochastic discount factor.

    A common approach to testing an asset pricing model is to examine necessary conditions of

(1) using a method like the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM, see Hansen, 1982). For

example, multiplying both sides of (1) by the elements of Zt and then taking the unconditional

expectations leads to a multiplicative approach:

                                  E{mt +1 (Rt +1 ⊗ Z t )} = E{1 ⊗ Z t } .                          (2)

Equation (2) asks the stochastic discount factor to “price” the dynamic strategy payoffs,

Rt +1 ⊗ Z t , on average, where E{1 ⊗ Z t } are the average prices. However, the multiplicative

approach in Equation (2) captures only a portion of the information in Equation (1).

    Equation (1) is equivalent to the following holding for all bounded integrable functions f(.):

                                  E{mt +1 [Rt +1 f (Z t )]} = E{1 f ( Z t )}.                      (3)
                                                                 4


Clearly, Equation (2) is a special case of (3), which may be seen by stacking (3) while taking

 f ( Z t ) to be each of the instruments in turn. Thus, Equation (2) asks the stochastic discount

factor to price only a subset of the strategies allowed by Equation (3).

        In this paper we develop tests of asset pricing models based on the following version of

Equation (3):

                                E{mt +1 x' ( Z t ) Rt +1 } = 1   ∀x( Z t ) : x' ( Z t )1 = 1 .                   (4)

Equation (4) uses all portfolio weight functions x(Z) in place of the general functions in Equation

(3), subject only to the restrictions that the weights are bounded integral functions that sum to

1.0.      Equation (4) follows by multiplying (1) by the elements of the portfolio weight vector

x( Z ) and summing, using the fact that the weights sum to 1.0, then taking the unconditional

expectation.1

        While studies of conditional asset pricing typically use Equation (2), our objective is to

move to Equation (4). There are several strong motivations. The first is to use the information in

Z t efficiently. The intuition is that if we ask the model to price a larger set of dynamic strategies,

a smaller set of mt +1 ’s can do the job, so the tests will be able to reject more models. Equation

(4) requires the asset pricing expression to hold for all portfolio strategies using Z t , whereas

Equation (2) is restricted to the particular ad hoc strategy in which Z t is used multiplicatively.




    1
      Because of the portfolio weight restriction, Equation (4) is an implication of, not equivalent to (3). However,
in practice (4) is unlikely to leave out much, compared with (3). In Equation (4), the portfolio weights almost
always to sum to 1.0 at each realization of Z. In equation (3), since both sides of the equation may be arbitrarily
scaled by a constant, the unconditional expectation of the portfolio weights sums to 1.0 without loss of generality
(see Abhyankar, Basu and Stremme, 2002). Restricting to weights that almost always sum to 1.0 in Equation (4)
allows us to work with portfolio returns and portfolio efficiency concepts, as opposed to asset prices and payoffs.
Working with prices and payoffs, it would be necessary in any event, to normalize the prices to achieve stationarity
for empirical work.
                                                  5


    The second motivation for using Equation (4) is tractability. While it may seem difficult to

work in the infinite-dimensional space of all possible x(Z), closed-form solutions in Ferson and

Siegel (2001) provide tractable expressions from which we construct the tests. Implementing the

solutions with N test assets requires NxN covariance matrices, whereas the multiplicative

approach requires us to invert matrices with the dimension of (R⊗Z).

    The third motivation for our approach is potential robustness. Ferson and Siegel (2001)

show that the expressions we use in our tests are likely to be robust to extreme observations.

Ferson and Siegel (2003) apply these expressions to the Hansen-Jagannathan (1991) bounds and

find evidence of robustness in that setting. Bekaert and Liu (2004) argue that equation (4) is

inherently robust to misspecifying the conditional moments of returns. The intuition is that with

misspecified moments, the “optimal” x(Z) derived by Ferson and Siegel (2001) and used in our

tests, is suboptimal. However, it remains a valid, if now ad-hoc, dynamic strategy. Thus the tests

may sacrifice power, but remain valid. The key to obtaining these advantages is the relation of

Equation (4) to the concept of minimum variance efficient portfolios.



A. Stochastic Discount Factors and Portfolio Efficiency

    Minimum variance efficient portfolios are those which have minimum variance among

portfolios with the same mean return. Stochastic discount factor models are related to portfolio

efficiency because a specification for the stochastic discount factor indicates a portfolio that

should be minimum-variance efficient. Consider first the special case where there is no

conditioning information, and the asset pricing equation is E (mR) = 1 . The following results are

well known. Given portfolio return Rm, there exists a stochastic discount factor of the form

m = a + bRm , if and only if Rm is minimum variance efficient. An example is the classical CAPM

of Sharpe (1964), as discussed by Dybvig and Ingersoll (1982). There exists a stochastic
                                                      6


discount factor that is linear in a k-vector of benchmark returns or “factors,” R B : m = A + B ′RB ,

if and only if some combination of the factor returns is minimum variance efficient. This is the

case of an exact k-factor beta pricing model, as discussed by Grinblatt and Titman (1987),

Shanken (1987), and Ferson and Jagannathan (1996). Finally, if the stochastic discount factor is

a fixed function of observable data and parameters: m = m( X , θ) , a portfolio that maximizes the

squared correlation with m( X , θ) must be minimum variance efficient. Examples include the

consumption-based model of Lucas (1978) and Breeden (1979), and its more recent

generalizations. See Ferson (1995) for a review of these results.

    We extend these examples to the context of Equation (4). We show that a specification of

the stochastic discount factor implies that particular portfolios are minimum variance efficient

with respect to the information Z, as defined below. Using Equation (4), we then develop tests of

the hypothesis that a portfolio is efficient in this sense.



B. Portfolio Efficiency with Respect to Conditioning Information

    We first define efficiency with respect to the information, Zt. Consider a portfolio of the N

test assets in Rt +1 , where the weights that determine the portfolio at time t are functions of the

information, Z t . The gross return on such a portfolio with weight x ( Z t ) , is x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1 . The

restrictions on the portfolio weight function are that the weights must sum to 1.0 (almost surely

in Zt), and that the expected value and second moments of the portfolio return are well defined.

Consider now all possible portfolio returns that may be formed, for a given set of test asset

returns Rt+1 and given conditioning information, Zt. This set determines a mean-standard

deviation frontier, as shown by Hansen and Richard (1987). This frontier depicts the

unconditional means versus the unconditional standard deviations of the portfolio returns. A
                                                                     7

portfolio is defined to be efficient with respect to the information Zt, if and only if it is on this

mean standard deviation frontier.

Proposition 1:    Given N test asset gross returns, Rt+1, a given portfolio with gross return R p ,t +1

                  is minimum-variance efficient with respect to the information Zt if and only

                  if Equation (5) is satisfied (equivalently, Equation (6) is satisfied) for all

                  x( Z t ) : x' ( Z t )1 = 1         almost        surely,        where         the   relevant   unconditional

                  expectations exist and are finite:

                  Var ( R p ,t +1 ) ≤ Var  x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1  if E ( R p ,t +1 ) = E  x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1             (5)
                  E  x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1  = γ 0 + γ1Cov  x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1 ; R p ,t +1  .                             (6)

    Equation (5) states that R p ,t +1 is on the minimum variance boundary formed by all possible

portfolios that use the test assets and the conditioning information. Equation (6) states that the

familiar expected return - covariance relation from Fama (1973) and Roll (1977) must hold with

respect to the efficient portfolio. In Equation (6), the coefficients γ 0 and γ1 are fixed scalars that

do not depend on the functions x(.) or the realizations of Z t .



C. Efficiency with Respect to Information and Stochastic Discount Factors

    Most asset pricing models specify some function for the stochastic discount factor. As a

special case, linear factor models say that m is linear in one or more factors. Proposition 2 shows

that when there is conditioning information, Z, testing linear stochastic discount factor models in

Equation (4) amounts to testing for the efficiency of a portfolio of the factors with respect to Z.

Proposition 2:    Given {Rt+1, Zt} and a stochastic discount factor mt+1 such that Equation (4)

                  holds, then if mt +1 = A + B' RB ,t +1 , where RB ,t +1 is a k-vector of benchmark

                  factor returns, and A and B are a constant and a fixed k-vector, there exists a
                                                           8


                  portfolio, R p ,t +1 = w′RB ,t +1 , w'1 = 1 , where w is a constant N-vector, and R p ,t +1 is

                  efficient with respect to the information Zt.

Proof:            See the Appendix for all proofs.

    We now consider the case of a general m = m( X , θ) , and allow for time-varying weights in

the efficient portfolio of factors. This requires the definition of portfolios that are maximum

correlation with respect to Z.

Definition:       A portfolio RP is maximum correlation for a random variable, m, with

                  respect to conditioning information Z, if:

                           ρ 2 (R p , m ) ≥ ρ 2 [x' ( Z ) R, m] ∀x( Z ) : x' ( Z )1 = 1 ,                   (7)

                  where ρ2(.,.) is the squared unconditional correlation coefficient.

Proposition 3     If a given m satisfies Equation (4), then a portfolio RP that is maximum

                  correlation for m with respect to Z must be minimum variance efficient with

                  respect to Z.

    Proposition 2 is clearly a special case of Proposition 3, because if mt+1 is linear in RB,t+1, a

linear regression maximizes the squared correlation. More generally, given a stochastic discount

factor, m, we can test the model by constructing a portfolio that is maximum correlation for m

with respect to Z, and testing the hypothesis that the portfolio is efficient with respect to Z.

Methods for constructing a maximum correlation portfolio with respect to Z are described below.

         With the preceding results we can consider a case where the stochastic discount factor is

linear in k factor-portfolios, allowing for time-varying weights.

Corrollary        Given { Rt +1 , Z t } and a stochastic discount factor mt+1 such that Equation (4)

                  holds, then if a maximum correlation portfolio for mt +1 with respect to Zt has

                  nonzero weights only on the k-vector of benchmark factor returns RB ,t +1 , an
                                                      9


                  efficient-with-respect-to-Z portfolio of the factor returns RB ,t +1 is efficient with

                  respect to Z in the full set of test asset returns.

    With conditioning information, efficient portfolios generally have time-varying weights.

The situation described in the Corrollary is a “dynamic” version of mean variance intersection,

as developed by Huberman, Kandel and Stambaugh (1987). For example, one hypothesis that

we consider below is that some combination (that depends on Z) of the three Fama and French

(1996) factors is a mimicking portfolio for a stochastic discount factor. The test is to find the

efficient, time-varying combination of the Fama-French factors and see if it is efficient with

respect to Z in the sample of test assets.



D. Discussion

    The presence of conditioning information impacts asset pricing models based on stochastic

discount factors in three general ways. First, conditioning information relates to the set of

payoffs we ask the model to price. Second, conditioning information relates to the specification

of the functional form of the SDF. Third, the asset pricing statement, Equation (1), would

ideally apply to conditional moments given a public information set Ω, but an empiricist can

only measure Z, a proper subset of Ω.

    The first issue with respect to conditioning information is the set of payoffs that we ask the

model to price. By using the given conditioning information Z in different ways we generate

different payoffs from the test assets, R. As explained above, our approach asks the model to

price all portfolios x(Z)’R, where x(Z)’1 = 1. We thereby expand the set of payoffs, relative to

approaches that ignore Z or use portfolio functions that are linear in Z or ad-hoc functions of Z.

Expanding the set of payoffs, we restrict the set of m’s that can price those payoffs. Our tests

should therefore reject models that previous approaches would not reject.
                                                           10

        The second related issue is the functional form of the SDF. Different asset pricing models

imply different functional forms. Our maximum correlation approach can handle general

functions of measurable data, m( X ,θ ) . If we reject the efficiency with respect to Z, of a

portfolio that has maximum correlation with m( X ,θ ) with respect to Z, we reject the hypothesis

that E(m(X, θ )R│Z) = 1 . By iterated expectations, we therefore reject the model that says

E( m( X ,θ )R Ω ) = 1.

        The third issue arises because the asset pricing theory says E(mR|Ω)=1, but the full

information set Ω cannot be measured. There are two cases. In the first case, the SDF is a

known function of measurable data and parameters and we can test E(mR|Z) = 1, a necessary

condition which follows from the law of iterated expectations. The inability to measure all of Ω

results only in a potential loss of power in this case.

        A more difficult case arises when the SDF, m(Ω), is a function of unobservable parts of Ω.

In this case it is not known how to test a model that says E(m(Ω)R|Ω) = 1. While it remains true

that E(m(Ω)R|Z)=1, that is no help if m(Ω) can not be measured.2 Hansen and Richard (1987)

describe a version of this problem in terms of portfolio efficiency. Consider a conditional version

of the CAPM in which m(Ω) = a(Ω) + b(Ω)Rm and the market portfolio Rm is conditionally

efficient given Ω (meaning minimum conditional variance given Ω subject to the conditional

mean return given Ω). Hansen and Richard show that the conditional efficiency of Rm given Ω

does not imply conditional efficiency given Z. If we can only observe Z we can test the

efficiency of Rm using Z, but such a test does not allow us to reject the conditional CAPM.




    2
      Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) develop an SDF given by m* = E(m|R) and they show how to form the
projection m*. However, m* can not be used to test the original model because it prices the returns by construction.
                                                  11

Cochrane (2001) calls this the “Hansen-Richard critique.” By analogy with the Roll (1977)

critique that the CAPM can’t be tested because we can’t measure the market portfolio, the

Hansen-Richard critique implies that the conditional CAPM can’t be tested (even if we could

measure the market portfolio) because we can’t measure all the information, Ω . This problem is

by no means unique to our paper. In the spirit of virtually all empirical studies, we therefore

focus on cases where the SDF is assumed to depend on measurable data only.



E. Testing Conditional Efficiency

    Our approach is to test (unconditional) efficiency with respect to Z. An alternative approach

is to test the conditional efficiency given Z, of a portfolio RP. While such tests do not imply

inferences about the efficiency given Ω , tests of conditional efficiency given observable

instruments Z have nevertheless been of historical interest in the asset pricing literature. Hansen

and Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons and Ferson (1985) test conditional efficiency given Z,

restricting the functional forms of conditional means and betas. Campbell (1987) and Harvey

(1989) restrict the form of a market price of risk. Shanken (1990) tests conditional efficiency

restricting the form of the conditional betas. Tests of conditional efficiency given Z may be

handled in our framework, as a specification of the functional form for m( X ,θ ).

    The conditional efficiency of a portfolio RP given Z is equivalent to the existence of an SDF,

m=a(Z) + b(Z)RP, where a(Z) and b(Z) are particular functions of the conditional first and

second moments of RP and a zero-beta portfolio for RP. We can also test for the conditional

efficiency given Z of a combination of K factor-returns, RB. In this case m = A(Z) + B(Z)’RB,
                                                           12

again with particular coefficients.3 With our approach we test conditional efficiency given Z by

constructing the maximum correlation portfolio to this particular m with respect to Z. The

maximum correlation portfolio, call it R*p , should be efficient with respect to Z. Note that R*p

will be different from RP when the coefficients a(Z) or b(Z) are time varying as functions of Z.

Rejecting the efficiency of R*P with respect to Z rejects the conditional efficiency of RP given Z.

This is an example of how conditional efficiency (given Z) does not imply unconditional

efficiency (with respect to Z) of the same portfolio. However, conditional efficiency does

identify a portfolio that should be efficient with respect to Z, and this implication can be tested.



2. Testing Efficiency


A. When There is no Conditioning Information

     Classical tests for the efficiency of a given portfolio involve restrictions on the intercepts of

a system of time-series regressions. If rt is the vector of N excess returns at time t, measured in

excess of a risk-free or zero-beta return, and rp ,t is the excess return on the tested portfolio, the

regression system is

                                        rt = α + βrp ,t + ut ; t = 1,L , T ;                                    (8)

where T is the number of time-series observations, β is the N-vector of betas and α is the N-

vector of alphas. The portfolio rp is minimum-variance efficient only if α=0.




    3
      The coefficients are: A(Z) = [1 + Σj λj E(RBj│Z)/var(RBj│Z)]/E(Ro│Z) and Bj(Z) = -λj /[E(Ro│Z)var(RBj│Z)],
where λj = E(RBj – R0│Z) and R0 is the conditional zero-beta return for RB (that is, Cov (RoRp│Z) = 0). When RBj =
Rp we have the single-factor coefficients. (See Ferson and Jagannathan, 1996).
                                                              13


     It is well known that the classical test statistics for the hypothesis that α=0 in Equation (8)

can be written in terms of the squared Sharpe ratios of portfolios (e.g., Jobson and Korkie, 1982).

Consider the Wald Statistic:

                                                −1       Sˆ 2 ( R ) − Sˆ 2 ( R p ) 
                        W = T αˆ Cov ( αˆ )  αˆ = T                             ~& χ 2 ( N )              (9)
                                                         1 + Sˆ 2 ( R p ) 
                                                                                   

where α$ is the OLS or ML estimator of α and Cov( α$ ) is its asymptotic covariance matrix. The


term Sˆ 2 ( R p ) is the sample value of the squared Sharpe ratio of R p : S 2 ( R p ) =  E ( rp ) / σ ( rp )  .
                                                                                                                 2




The term Ŝ 2 ( R ) is the sample value of the maximum squared Sharpe ratio that can be obtained

by portfolios of the assets in R (including RP):

                                                         [ E( x ′r )] 2 
                                          S ( R ) = max 
                                            2
                                                                         .                                    (10)
                                                     x
                                                          Var (  x ′r ) 

The Wald statistic has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with N degrees of freedom.

     Since the Sharpe ratio is the slope of a line in the mean-standard deviation space, Equation

(12) suggests a graphical representation for the Wald statistic in the sample mean standard

deviation space. It measures the distance between the sample frontier and the location of the

tested portfolio, inside the frontier. Kandel (1984), Roll (1985), Gibbons, Ross and Shanken

(1989) and Kandel and Stambaugh (1987,1989) develop this interpretation.



B. Tests with Conditioning Information

     To illustrate using conditioning information efficiently, we employ statistics similar to the

classical statistic, as in Equation (9). When conditioning information is used, the asymptotic

distribution of the statistic in (9) is not known to be chi-squared, and there are many alternative

statistics that we could use. Some of these may have better sampling properties. Thus, by
                                                         14

moving to Equation (4) and conditioning information we raise some new statistical questions for

future research. Our examples focus on the classical-looking statistic as a natural extension of

the literature.

     Classical tests that ignore conditioning information restrict the maximization in Equation

(10) to fixed-weight portfolios, where x is a constant vector. In contrast, efficient portfolios with

respect to the information Z maximize the squared Sharpe ratio over all portfolio weight

functions, x ( Z ) . Maximizing over a larger set of weights we get a larger maximum Sharpe

ratio. The Appendix describes the closed-form solutions from Ferson and Siegel (2001), for the

portfolio weight functions that maximize the squared Sharpe ratio.

     Jobson and Korkie (1982) show that the test statistic in Equation (9) may be interpreted as

the relative performance of the portfolio of the test assets that is the “most-mispriced” by RP .

This portfolio is also called the “active” portfolio by Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) and the

“optimal orthogonal portfolio” by MacKinlay (1995). We use a version of this portfolio in our

                                                                              −1
empirical examples. The portfolio has weights proportional to Cov ( αˆ )  αˆ in the classical case

with no conditioning information. With conditioning information the portfolio’s weight function

is time-varying. We derive the most mispriced portfolio for a general case with an arbitrary fixed

“zero-beta” rate, γ0.

         Consider any portfolio formed from the test assets with weights xP as RP,t+1=xP’Rt+1,

where xP may depend on Zt. The portfolio has unconditional expected return E(xP’Rt+1)=µP and

variance Var(xP’Rt+1) = σp2. The most mispriced portfolio, RC, with respect to RP maximizes

αc2 / σ c2        where         σ c2       is     the   variance   of   RC,        µ c = E ( Rc )   and

α c + µ c − [ γ o + ( µ p − γ o )σ cp / σ p 2 ]   is the alpha of RC with respect to RP, where

σ cp = Cov( Rc , R p ) . Let RS be the portfolio return that maximizes the squared Sharpe ratio in
                                                     15


(10) over all portfolio weight functions x(Z), when the excess returns r ≡ R - γ 0 . The portfolio

RS has unconditional mean return µ s and variance, σ s .
                                                           2




Proposition 4: The most mispriced portfolio RC with respect to a given portfolio RP, may be

                 found as a fixed linear combination of RP and the efficient-with-respect to Z

                 portfolio, RS, that maximizes the squared Sharpe ratio for a given zero beta rate,

                 γ 0 , as:

                                    µS − γ 0           µP − γ 0 
                                             
                                                R S  −             RP
                                        σ 2
                                                            σ 2
                                                                       ,
                              RC =       S                   P
                                                                                              (11)
                                       µS − γ 0   p     µ  −  γ o 
                                                  −             
                                        σS   σP 
                                             2                 2




                 or

                                         σ               σ SP     
                              RC =  RS − SP2 RP        1 − 2    .                     (12)
                                         σP                  σP    

       Proposition 4 extends the concept of the “active” or “optimal orthogonal” portfolio to the

setting of efficiency with respect to given conditioning information.        The most mispriced

portfolio RC has weights that depend on Z; these are presented with the proof in the Appendix.

Note that the portfolio RC is uncorrelated with RP, according to Equation (12). The most

mispriced portfolio is the projection of RS, orthogonal to RP, normalized so that the weights sum

to 1.0. The portfolio RP may be found by starting with RS and then removing its component that

is correlated with RP. A combination of RP and its most-mispriced RC is an efficient portfolio

with respect to Z.
                                                       16

C. Empirical Strategy

    Our empirical examples compare the classical approach using no conditioning information,

the multiplicative approach to conditioning information, and the efficient use of the conditioning

information. The specifics depend on the example.

    When we test the efficiency of a given portfolio, RP, then Sˆ 2 ( R p ) is formed using the

sample mean excess return and sample variance of RP. Ŝ 2 ( R ) differs according to the way

conditioning information is used. When there is no conditioning information we use the fixed-

weight solution to (10). When the information is used multiplicatively, we define an expanded

set of returns as Rˆ t = R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 , where Rft is the one-month Treasury bill return for

month t. We then proceed as in the previous case, using the returns R̂t in place of Rt. When the

                                                                                           )
information is used efficiently, Sˆ 2 ( R) is formed using the sample mean and variance of x ′( Z) R
      )
where x( Z ) is the sample version of the optimal solution from Ferson and Siegel (2001)

described in the Appendix.

    We evaluate the tests using simulations.             To generate data consistent with the null

hypothesis that a given portfolio RP is efficient, we replace its return with a portfolio that is

efficient, based on the specification of the asset-return moments in the simulation. With this

substitution, we then construct the test statistic using the artificial data in the same way that we

get the sample value of the statistic in the actual data. The details are discussed in the Appendix.



3. The Data


    To model the conditioning information, we use a number of lagged variables that have long

been prominent in the conditional asset pricing literature. These include: (1) the lagged value of
                                                           17

a one-month Treasury bill yield (see Fama and Schwert (1977), Ferson (1989), Breen et al.

(1989) or Shanken, 1990); (2) the dividend yield of the market index (see Fama and French,

1988); (3) the spread between Moody's Baa and Aaa corporate bond yields (see Keim and

Stambaugh, (1986) or Fama, 1990); (4) the spread between ten-year and one-year constant

maturity Treasury bond yields (see Fama and French, 1989) and (5); the difference between the

one-month lagged returns of a three-month and a one-month Treasury bill (see Campbell, 1987).

       We provide results using two alternative methods of grouping common stocks into

portfolios. The first sample comprises twenty five industry portfolios (from Harvey and Kirby,

1996) measured for the period February, 1963 to December, 1994.4 The portfolios are created by

grouping common stocks according to their SIC codes and forming value-weighted averages

(based on beginning-of-month values) of the total returns within each group of firms. Table 1

shows the industry classifications for the 25 portfolios, and summary statistics of the returns.

       The second grouping follows Fama and French (1996). Individual common stocks are

placed into five groups according to their prior equity market capitalization, and independently

into five groups on the basis of their ratios of book value to market value of equity per share.

This 5 by 5 classification scheme results in a sample of 25 portfolio returns. These are the same

portfolios used by Ferson and Harvey (1999), who provide details and summary statistics.

       This project has matured over a length of time, providing the opportunity to investigate the

results over a “hold-out” sample.             The hold-out sample period is January, 1995 through

December, 2002. We use 25 size x book-to-market and Industry portfolios from Kenneth French




   4
       We are grateful to Campbell Harvey for providing these data.
                                                         18

and update the other series with fresh data.5 The hold-out sample results are interesting in view

of recent evidence, cited above, that some of the lagged instruments may have lost their

predictive power for stock returns in recent data. Table 1 illustrates this, reporting the adjusted

R-squares from regressing the industry returns on the lagged instruments over the 1963-1994

period and the 1995-2002 sample. The R-squares are substantially lower in the more recent

period.



4. Empirical Results


A. Inefficiency of the SP500 Relative to Industry Portfolios

     Table 2 summarizes results for the 25 industry portfolios for the 1963-94 period, three ten-

year subperiods and the holdout sample, 1995-2002. The tested portfolio, R p , is the SP500. We

use the average of the one-month Treasury bill to determine the zero-beta rate. In Panel A there

is no conditioning information. Substituting the sample values of Sˆ 2 ( R p ) and Sˆ 2 ( R) into (9)

gives the sample value of the test statistic. Referring to the asymptotic distribution, which is chi-

squared with 25 degrees of freedom, the right-tail p-value is 0.48 for the full sample and

0.14 − 0.39 in the subperiods. The test produces little evidence to reject the hypothesis that the

SP500 is efficient in the industry portfolio returns over 1963-1994. During the holdout sample

period the sample Sharpe ratios are substantially higher, and so is the value of the test statistic.

The asymptotic p-value of the test is 0.001 for this period.




     5
      We use a subset of the 48 value-weighted industry portfolios provided by French to match the definitions in
Table 1. We confirm that the matched industry returns produce similar summary statistics and regression R-
sequences on the lagged instruments as our original data, over the 1963-1994 period.
                                                     19

    Panel A of Table 2 also reports 5% critical values and empirical p-values for the tests based

on Monte Carlo simulation assuming normality, and based on a resampling approach that does

not assume normality. Consistent with Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) the Wald Test rejects

a correct null hypothesis too often when the asymptotic distribution is used. The empirical p-

values are larger than the asymptotic p-values in each subperiod, and the full sample period. The

smallest empirical p-value in the panel is 0.43. Thus, when we correct for finite sample bias

there is no evidence against the efficiency of the market index in the industry portfolios, given

that no conditioning information is used in the tests.

    Panel    B    of   Table     2   summarizes      tests   using    the    “multiplicative”    returns,

Rˆ t = R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 . With 25 industry portfolios, the market return and five instruments

plus a constant, there are 156 “returns.” One disadvantage of the multiplicative approach is that

the size of the system quickly becomes unwieldy. It is not possible to construct the Wald Test for

the ten year subperiods, as the sample covariance matrix is singular.

    Over the full sample period the value of the Wald Test statistic using the multiplicative

returns is 348.6. The asymptotic p-value is close to zero. However, we expect a finite-sample

bias and the simulations confirm the bias. Based on the empirical p-values the tests reject the

efficiency of the SP500 at either the 2% (Monte Carlo) or 40% (resampling) levels. Thus, the

finite sample results are highly sensitive to the data generating process. This makes sense,

because even if Rt is approximately normal, the products of returns and the elements of Zt-1 are

not normal, and the Monte Carlo simulation assumes normality. We therefore place more trust in

the resampling results. Correcting for finite sample bias with the resampling scheme, we find no

evidence to reject the efficiency of the market index in the set of dynamic strategy returns that

use the conditioning information multiplicatively.
                                                   20

    Using the conditioning information Z efficiently, Panel C expands the tests to include all

portfolios that may be functions of the information. With the efficient portfolio solutions the

size of the covariance matrices to be inverted does not increase with the use of conditioning

information, so results for the subperiods can be obtained. This illustrates the tractability of our

approach, compared to the multiplicative approach. The value of the statistic given by Equation

(9) is 161.84 in the full sample, 164.98 − 203.29 in the ten-year subperiods and 148.2 in the

holdout sample. The empirical p-values are 0.5% or less in the full sample and each ten-year

subperiod, and 4.4% in the holdout sample. The results also are fairly robust to the method of

simulation (Monte Carlo or resampling). Thus, we can reject the hypothesis that the market

index is mean variance efficient when the conditioning information is used efficiently. The tests

that use the conditioning information efficiently can reject the model when the multiplicative

approach cannot. We even find marginal rejections during the holdout sample period, where

Table 1 illustrated that the predictive power of the lagged instruments is relatively low.

    Figure 1 illustrates the test, showing the sample frontier of fixed-weight portfolios that

ignore the conditioning information and the efficient frontier with respect to Z. The test statistics

are related to the differences between the squared slopes of the lines drawn through the SP500

versus the lines tangent to the frontiers. The figure shows how the efficient use of conditioning

information produces a larger test statistic.
                                                  21


              Sample Mean Excess

                                                            Dynamic Portfolio Strategies, x(Z)
       Sample Efficient,
       with Respect to
       Information, Z

                                                               Fixed-Weight Portfolios
       Sample Efficient,
       No Conditioning
       Information
                                                SP500

                                                                      Sample Standard Deviation




       Figure 1. The test statistic for the efficiency of the SP500 compares the squared
       slope of the line through the tested portfolio with the line through the sample
       efficient portfolio. As the slopes diverge, the test statistic is larger. Testing for
       efficiency with respect to the information, Z, the test statistic is larger than when
       the information is ignored.


B. Alternative Test Assets

    Recent studies use portfolios grouped on firm size and book-to-market ratios, and find that a

market index is not efficient in these returns (e.g. Fama and French, 1992). Table 3 presents

results where the portfolios are grouped on size and book-to-market. The full sample and

holdout results for industries from Table 2 are repeated in the right hand column for comparison

purposes.

    In panel A of Table 3 there is no conditioning information. Consistent with previous studies,

the efficiency of the SP500 is rejected in the size x book-to-market portfolio design for the 1963-

1994 period. However, in the 1995-2002 period, the efficiency of the market index is not
                                                    22

rejected when the finite sample bias in the statistics is corrected. This is consistent with a

weakening of the size and book-to-market effects after 1994.

    In panel B of Table 3, the test assets are the multiplicative returns. The asymptotic p-values

suggest rejections of the efficiency hypothesis, but the resampling results indicate a strong,

finite-sample bias. The empirical p-value based on resampling is 4.4% with the 25 size × book-

to-market portfolios over the 1963-1994 sample.

    In panel C the test assets are all portfolios of the form x′ ( Z t −1 ) Rt . The resampling p-values

are 0.3% or less in the size x book-to-market design, including the 1995-2002 subsample. Thus,

once again we find that efficiency can be rejected with our approach, in settings where the

classical approach does not reject efficiency. The results show that expanding the set of dynamic

strategies using our results makes a substantial difference, even in the size x book-to-market

portfolio design.



C. Expanding the Mean Variance Boundary

    The evidence so far shows that the market index return lies “significantly” inside the mean-

variance boundaries when the conditioning information is used efficiently. However, these

results only indirectly address the question of inferences about the mean variance boundaries

themselves. These inferences relate to questions like mean variance intersection and spanning.

If the Sharpe ratio of a given portfolio is estimated with greater precision than the maximum

Sharpe ratio in a set of returns, as seems likely, then we may be able to draw inferences about

efficiency for a given portfolio and yet be unable to draw reliable inferences about the efficient

frontiers themselves.

    In this section we ask if the use of conditioning information expands the mean variance

boundary. Table 4 presents the tests. Here we replace the market index with a portfolio of the
                                                     23


test assets whose weights are proportional to Σ/ −1µ , where Σ/ is the unconditional covariance

matrix and µ the mean vector, that determines the excess returns of the test assets in the

simulations.    This is a portfolio on the “population” mean-variance boundary with no

conditioning information. We then test the efficiency of this portfolio instead of the SP500, as in

the previous tables. Of course, tests using no conditioning information find the portfolio to be

efficient. In panel A the mean variance boundary is constructed using the multiplicative

approach. The resampled p-values are 0.464 and 0.686, thus providing no evidence that the

multiplicative approach expands the boundary. These results are consistent with studies such as

Carlson and Chapman (2000) that question the usefulness of the standard lagged instruments in

the multiplicative design.

    In Panel B of Table 4 the test assets are all portfolios of the form x′ ( Z t −1 ) Rt . In the 1963-94

period the resampled p-values are 0.1% and 2.5% for the two portfolio grouping methods,

showing that when the conditioning information is used efficiently the mean variance boundary

is expanded. However, in the holdout sample we do not reject the null hypothesis. This is

consistent with the low explanatory power of the lagged variables during the holdout sample, as

indicated in Table 1. While the efficiency of the market index can be rejected during this period,

the maximum Sharpe ratio on the fixed-weight frontier is closer to the efficient-with-respect-to-Z

boundary than is the market index.

    The tests of Table 4 have an interesting interpretation when they are applied to the size x

book-to-market portfolios and the market index. Fama and French (1996) construct three factors

designed to capture the average returns of portfolios grouped by size and book-to-market, the

Fama-French “3 factor model.” If these factors describe the cross-section of expected returns, a

combination of the factors is efficient. A fixed combination of these factors cannot produce a

higher Sharpe ratio than the fixed-weight maximum in a sample that includes the three factor
                                                    24

portfolios. Logically speaking then, the tests in Table 4 reject a fortiori a static (fixed-weight)

version of the Fama-French 3-factor model over 1963-94, but not for 1995-2002. However,

given that the statistical noise involved in estimating the maximum Sharpe ratio for 26 test assets

will differ from that involving three factors, it is interesting to examine the multifactor models

explicitly.



D. Testing Static Combinations of the Fama-French Factors

     This section presents tests of the efficiency of a fixed-weight combination of the three Fama

and French factors. The hypothesis may be started as m = a + b1Rm + b2RHML + b3RSMB, where

the coefficients are fixed over time. Rm is the gross return of the market index. RHML is the one-

month Treasury bill gross return plus the excess return of high book-to-market over low book-to-

market stocks, and RSMB is similarly constructed using small and large market-capitalization

stocks. In testing this model we replace the first and 25th portfolios in the industry or size x

book-to-market design with the returns RHML and RSMB, to insure that the factor portfolios are a

subset of the tested portfolio returns.

     Table 5 presents the tests. In Panel A there is no conditioning information. Based on the

asymptotic p-values we would reject the efficiency of the Fama-French factors at the 5% level,

except in the size x book-to-market portfolio design over 1963-1994. However, adjusting for

finite sample bias the only rejection occurs for the industry portfolios. Fama and French (1997)

also find that their factors don’t explain industry portfolio returns very well.

     In Panel B the multiplicative approach to conditioning information is used. The resampled

p-values strongly reject the model for 1963-94. This is consistent with studies such as Ferson

and Harvey (1999) who find that the Fama-French factors do not explain ad-hoc dynamic
                                                   25

strategy returns over a similar sample period. Once again, we cannot examine the multiplicative

approach over the holdout sample because the covariance matrices are too large to invert.

    Panel C of Table 5 presents the tests relative to the efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontier. The

tests confirm the value of using the conditioning information efficiently. We observe strong

rejections of the static version of the Fama-French model, both over 1963-1994 and in the 1995-

2002 sample, and for both portfolio designs. The test results are consistent with the intuition that

Sharpe ratios can be estimated with greater precision on a smaller number of assets (the Fama

French factors in Table 5) than they can on a larger number of assets (the 26 portfolios in Table

4). Thus, the tests using the conditioning information efficiently can reject the Fama French

factors even when they could not reject the hypothesis that the mean variance boundary fails to

expand, as during the 1995-2002 sample.



E. Testing Dynamic Multifactor Models

    The empirical results so far show that the efficient use of conditioning information expands

the mean variance boundary of monthly portfolio returns for the sample before 1995, even when

a multiplicative approach does not, and that the stock market index and fixed combinations of

the Fama-French factors lie inside the expanded boundary, even during the 1995-2002 holdout

sample. This section illustrates tests of multifactor and conditional benchmarks with time-

varying weights.

    The theory indicates two versions of multifactor benchmarks in the presence of conditioning

information. Let RB denote the vector of benchmark factor returns (eg., a market index and the

Fama-French factors). The first example specifies m(Z) = a + b w’(Z)RB, where a and b are

constants and w’(Z) 1 = 1. In the language of Huberman, Kandel and Stambaugh (1987), this

says there is mean-variance “intersection” of the efficient-with-respect-to-Z boundary formed
                                                            26

from RB and the boundary of all the test assets, including RB. Equivalently, the dynamic

portfolio w’(Z)RB is efficient and there is a single-beta pricing model for the unconditional mean

returns of all portfolios of the form x ′( Z )R , based on the portfolio w’(Z)RB. We refer to this as

the hypothesis of “dynamic intersection.”

     The second examples implies a multifactor benchmark m(Z) = A(Z) + B(Z)’RB, where A(Z)

and B(Z) are the previously-specified scalar and vector-valued functions of the conditional

moments of returns and the zero-beta rate (see footnote 3). This says that a time-varying

combination of the factor portfolios is conditionally minimum variance efficient given Z.

Equivalently, there is a k-beta pricing relation for the conditional mean returns based on the k-

vector of factor portfolios, RB. According to this model, a maximum correlation portfolio with

respect to Z for A(Z) + B(Z)’RB, will be efficient with respect to Z. A special case is a

conditional CAPM, when k=1 and RB is the market return.

     Note that, for a given choice of benchmark factors, the hypotheses of conditional efficiency

and dynamic intersection are related. Both hypotheses specify that a particular time-varying

combination of the benchmark assets should be efficient with respect to Z.                              Conditional

efficiency specifies that the combination involves all of the test assets through the maximum

correlation portfolio. Dynamic intersection restricts the coefficients of the combination to be

zero, except for the factor portfolios, but allows the nonzero weights to vary over time to

maximize the Sharpe ratio.6



     6
        Dynamic intersection in general is stronger than conditional efficiency. Dynamic intersection says that the
efficient-with-respect-to-Z boundaries share a common point. Efficient-with-respect-to-Z portfolios must also be
conditionally efficient, as shown by Hansen and Richard (1987). Conditional efficiency says the conditional
boundaries have a common point for each realization of Z. The tangency to the common point is a particular zero-
beta rate that may vary with Z over time. Thus, dynamic intersection at a given zero-beta or risk-free rate does not
imply conditional efficiency given the same risk-free rate. It follows that rejections of conditional efficiency with a
given risk-free rate do not imply a rejection of dynamic intersection.
                                                     27

     Table 6 summarizes the tests for dynamic intersection. The tests ask if the efficient-with-

respect-to-Z frontier formed from all portfolios of the three Fama-French factor returns touches

the efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontier of the test assets at a point tangent to the risk-free rate.

The sample values of the test statistics are smaller, in very case, than the values in Table 5. This

is because a time-varying combination of the Fama-French factors has a larger maximum Sharpe

ratio in the sample than a fixed-weight combination. The simulations reveal that that the 5%

critical values of the test statistics are fairly close to those in Table 5; slightly larger in the 1963-

94 samples and slightly smaller in the 1995-2002 samples. The p-values of the test statistics in

Table 6 are not as small as the values in Table 5. Still, the hypothesis of dynamic intersection is

strongly rejected for the 1963-94 sample. with p-values of 0.1% or less.

     During 1995-2002 the tests in Table 6 marginally reject intersection, with p-values of 3.9%

in the industry portfolio design and 5.5% in the size and book/market design. In Panel A of

Table 5, when no conditioning information was used, the p-values for the tests of intersection

were 7.7% and 15.7%. Thus, the evidence against the hypothesis that a combination of the three

Fama-French factors can touch the boundary of the test assets is stronger, even during the 1995-

2002 period, when the conditioning information is used efficiently.

     Table 7 presents tests of the conditional efficiency of the market index and of a combination

of the three Fama-French factors. We reject both models over 1963-1994 in both portfolio

designs. The bootstrapped p-values are 1.2% or less. We also reject conditional efficiency in

the 1995-2002 sample period, with p-values of 1.6% or less. Thus, when the conditioning

information is used efficiently our tests can reject conditional versions of both the CAPM an the

Fama-French three-factor model.
                                                    28


5. Robustness

    This section discusses the robustness of the results. The tests of portfolio efficiency were

illustrated under the assumptions that the conditional mean returns are linear functions of the

instruments and the conditional covariance matrix is fixed. While this is a common set of

assumptions, there are many ways to model conditional moments and future research should use

or framework under alternative specifications. It is important to understand that the rejections of

efficiency in our examples are in some sense robust to misspecified conditional moments. We

test the efficiency of a given portfolio in sets of returns constructed from the test assets using the

conditioning information. If we use the correct specification the solutions for x ( Z ) are optimal

and therefore include all portfolio functions. If we incorrectly specify the conditional moments

the portfolio weights x ( Z ) are not optimal, but they still generate valid dynamic strategy

returns. With the wrong conditional moments we essentially test efficiency in a smaller set of

constructed returns, but if we reject efficiency on the subset, it implies rejection on the larger set

of returns. Therefore, if we reject efficiency of a given portfolio with incorrectly specified

conditional moments, it implies a rejection when the conditional moments are correct.

    The robustness to misspecified moments does not apply when the tests use a maximum

correlation portfolio as the tested portfolio. In these cases, if we get the moments wrong the

portfolio is not maximum correlation, and there is no reason that it should be minimum variance

efficient. Thus, our rejections of the conditional models in Table 7 could reflect a misspecified

data generating process. However, Ferson, Siegel and Xu (2005) shows that the weights of the

portfolios that maximize correlation with respect to Z share a “robustness” to extreme

observations, similar to that of the efficient-with-respect-to-Z solutions. Thus it should be

interesting for future research to explore the properties of these tests under alternative data

generating processes.
                                                   29

    While the rejections for a given portfolio are theoretically robust to incorrectly

parametrizing the conditional moments, the results of our simulations may be sensitive to the

parameters. We conduct experiments to assess this sensitivity. We use a sample of simulated

data to estimate alternative parameter values, and then recalibrate the simulations with these

parameters. Repeating this experiment 100 times we obtain information on how sensitive our

empirical p-values are to variation in the parameters. We consider the test for the efficiency of

the SP500. The initial simulated sample produces Monte Carlo p-values of 0.59, 0.02 and 0.00

for the fixed-weight, multiplicative and efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontiers, respectively. After

100 experiments the mean p-values are 0.579, 0.027 and 0.000, with standard deviations equal to

0.015, 0.005 and 0.000, respectively. Thus, the results do not appear highly sensitive to variation

in the simulation parameters.

        Finally, in our empirical examples we use the average Treasury bill return as the fixed

risk-free rate. We provide the analytical results for a general zero-beta rate. The empirical

results may be sensitive to the choice of the zero beta rate. Therefore, it should be interesting in

future research to apply our framework in a setting where the zero beta rate is a parameter to be

estimated, perhaps by extending results in Kandel (1984).



6. Summary and Conclusions

    We develop a new framework for testing asset pricing models in the presence of lagged

conditioning information. The approach requires a model’s stochastic discount factor (SDF) to

correctly price all the dynamic portfolio returns that may be constructed from a set of test assets,

where the portfolio weights may be functions of the conditioning information. By requiring the

SDF to price a large set of payoffs, the tests can reject models that previous approaches would

not reject.
                                                 30

    Our tests examine the (unconditional) mean variance efficiency of a portfolio with respect

to the conditioning information, a version of efficiency studied previously by Hansen and

Richard (1987) and Ferson and Siegel (2001). We show how different specifications for a

model’s SDF identify portfolios that should be efficient with respect to the conditioning

information. If we reject the efficiency of the portfolio, we reject the asset pricing model. We

illustrate the approach with versions of the Capital Asset Pricing model, the Fama-French (1996)

factors, and a dynamic version of mean-variance intersection (Huberman, Kandel and

Stambaugh, 1987).

    Using a standard set of lagged instruments and test portfolios, the efficiency of the SP500

index and all combinations of the Fama-French factor returns are rejected. In the same setting,

the commonly-used “multiplicative” approach to conditioning information does not significantly

expand the mean variance boundary, when compared with ignoring the conditioning information

altogether.   A holdout sample illustrates that the predictive power of the lagged variables

declines after 1995, but even during this period the efficient use of the conditioning information

enhances the results.
                                                                  31


Appendix

Efficient Portfolio Solutions

    The portfolio weights for efficient portfolios in the presence of conditioning information are

derived by Ferson and Siegel (2001). First consider the case with N risky assets with returns R

and a riskless asset returning R f . In N×1 column-vector notation, we have

                                                      R = µ(Z ) + ε                                                          (13)

The noise term ε is assumed to have conditional mean zero given Z and nonsingular conditional

covariance matrix Σ/ ε ( Z ) . The conditional expected return vector, µ ( Z ) , is permitted to have a

singular or nonsingular (unconditional) covariance matrix, so there can be any number of

conditioning variables.

    Define portfolio P by letting the 1×N row vector x′ ( Z ) = ( x1 ( Z ) ,..., xN ( Z ) ) denote the

portfolio share invested in each of the N risky assets, investing (or borrowing) at the riskless rate

the amount 1 − x' ( Z )1 , where 1 = ( 1,...,1 )' denotes the column vector of ones. The observed

return on this portfolio will be R f + x' ( Z )( R − R f 1 ), with unconditional expectation and

variance (after computing conditional expectations given Z to eliminate the random noise terms)

as follows:

                                          µp= Rf + E[x’(Z)(µ(Z)-Rf 1)]                                                       (14)

              σ P2 = E  x' ( Z ) (µ ( Z ) − R f 1)(µ ( Z ) − R f 1)′ + Σ ε ( Z ) x( Z ) − (µ p − R f )2              (15)
                                                                                        

                                              [                    ]
                                        = E x' ( Z )Q −1 x( Z ) − (µ p − R f      )2




where we have defined the N×N matrix

                                                             −1
                    
                          [                         
       Q = Q( Z ) =  E ( R − R f 1)( R − R f 1)′ Z     ]             [
                                                                  = ( µ ( Z ) − R f 1)( µ ( Z ) − R f 1)′ + Σ ε ( Z )   ]
                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                                                             (16)
                                                   
                                                                   32

Define the constant ζ as follows:

                                            ζ=E[(µ(Z)-Rf1)’Q(µ(Z)-Rf1)]                                               (17)

Theorem 1. (Ferson and Siegel, 2001) Given the unconditional expected return µP, N risky

assets, and a riskless asset, the unique portfolio having minimum unconditional variance is

determined by the weights:

                                                    µP − R f
                                       x' ( Z ) =
                                                       ζ
                                                             [( µ ( Z ) − R f 1)] Q .
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                                                      (18)


The portfolio variance is

                                                                        1     
                                              σ P2 = ( µ P − R f ) 2     − 1 .                                    (19)
                                                                        ζ     

Proof. See Ferson and Siegel (2001).

    When      there     is      no         riskless       asset,        we        define       portfolio   P   by   letting

x′ = x′ ( Z ) = ( x1 ( Z ),..., xN ( Z ) ) denote the shares invested in each of the N risky assets, with the

constraint that x' 1 = 1 . The return on this portfolio, RP = x′ ( Z ) R , has expectation and variance

as follows:

                                                µ P = E  x′ ( Z ) µ ( Z )  ,


                                       {                                                   }
                             σ 2P = E x′ ( Z ) µ ( Z ) µ′ ( Z ) + Σ/ ε ( Z )  x ( Z ) − µ 2P .                    (20)

Define the matrix Λ=Λ(Z)={E(RR’│Z)}-1= {µ(Z)µ(Z)’+ Σ ε(Z)}-1 and define the following

portfolio constants:

                                                                 1 
                                                      δ 1 = E         ,                                           (21)
                                                                1' Λ1 

                                                              1' Λµ ( Z ) 
                                                    δ 2 = E               ,                                       (22)
                                                              1' Λ1 
                                                                  33


                                                                  Λ11' Λ          
                                       δ 3 = E  µ ' ( Z ) Λ −            µ ( Z ) .                     (23)
                                                                  1' Λ1           

Theorem 2. (Ferson and Siegel, 2001) Given N risky assets and no riskless asset, the unique

portfolio having minimum unconditional variance and unconditional expected return µP, is

determined by the weights:

                                             1' Λ µ P − δ 2               Λ11' Λ 
                               x' ( Z ) =         +         µ' ( Z ) Λ −                                  (24)
                                            1' Λ1    δ3                   1' Λ1 



The efficient-with-respect to Z frontier determined by these weights is a parabola relating the

variance of return, σ 2 , and the mean return, µ , as σ 2 = aµ 2 + bµ + c , where the constants are:

                         a = ( 1 − δ 3 ) / δ 3 , b = −2δ 2 / δ 3 and c = δ 1 + δ 22 / δ 3 .



Proof of Proposition 2

     By the definition of covariance, E  mt +1 x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1  = 1 implies


                                                  {                                     }
                         E  x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1  = 1 − Cov  mt +1 , x′ ( Z t ) Rt +1  / E ( mt +1 ) .   (25)

Now, using mt+1 = A + B′RB,t+1, we find that Equation (6) is satisfied, with R p ,t +1 = w′RB ,t +1 ,

w ≡ B /(1' B ), γ0 = [A + B′E(RB,t+1)]-1, and γ 1 = −γ 0 (1' B) .




Proof of Proposition 3

     Regress m on RP using a simple regression: m = a + bRP + u , where without loss of

generality a and b are constants and E (u ) = E ( uRP ) = 0 . If RP is maximum correlation, then the

error also satisfies: E [ux ' ( Z ) R ] = 0∀x( Z ) : x' ( Z )1 = 1 . (If this were not true for some x( Z ) , then

x′( Z ) R would enter the regression with a nonzero coefficient, contradicting the assumption that
                                                              34

RP is maximum correlation.) Now, substitute the regression into (4) to obtain

E {( a + bRP + u ) x′( Z ) R} = 1 = E {( a + bRP ) x′( Z ) R} ∀x( Z ) : x' ( Z )1 = 1 . Proposition 2 now

establishes that RP is efficient with respect to Z.



Theorem 3:        (Ferson, Siegel and Xu, 2005). The solution, xm ( Z ) to the maximization:

                                     Max ρ 2 [x' ( Z )R , F ] s.t. x' ( Z )1 = 1 ,                  (26)
                                       x( Z )



                  where F is any random variable, is given by:

                                Λ1          Λ11' Λ 
                  xm ( Z ) =        +  Λ −        { −λ1 µ ( Z ) − λ 2 E( RF Z )}, where          (27)
                               1' Λ1        1' Λ1 

         γ 1(Z) = 1/(1' Λ 1), γ µ(Z) = 1' Λ µ(Z)/(1' Λ 1), γ F(Z) = 1' Λ E(RF′|Z)/(1' Λ 1),


                     Ω (Z) = [ Λ - Λ 1 1' Λ /(1' Λ 1)], γ µµ(Z) = µ(Z)' Ω (Z)µ(Z),


                  and γ µF(Z)= µ(Z)' Ω (Z)E(RF′|Z), where:


                                                   − γ 1 [ E( F ) − γ µF ] + γ µ γ F
                         λ1        =
                                                γ µ [ E( F ) − γ µF ] + γ F [ γ µµ − 1 ],


                                                       − γ 1 [ γ µµ − 1 ] − γ µ
                                                                                  2

                         λ2        =
                                                γ µ [ E( F ) − γ µF ] + γ F [ γ µµ − 1 ],


                  and:


                              γ 1 = E( γ 1 ( Z )), γ µ = E( γ µ ( Z )), γ F = E( γ F ( Z ))


                                 γ µµ = E( γ µµ ( Z )), and γ µF = E( γ µF ( Z )),
                                                             35

Proof of Proposition 4

         Observe that α C ≡ µ C − [ γ 0 + ( µ P − γ 0 )σ CP / σ P2 ] depends on the portfolio RC only

through its mean and covariance with RP. It follows that RC must have minimal variance among

all portfolios with its mean and covariance with RP. From Ferson, Siegel and Xu (2005, Eq. 6)

the optimal weights xC(Z) corresponding to RC are given by:

                                        Λ1   
                                               Λ11′ Λ 
                            xC ( Z ) =     + Λ−           [ aµ ( Z ) + bE( RR P Z )] ,                            (28)
                                        ′        ′
                                       1 Λ1   1 Λ1 

where a and b are constants. We evaluate the final term using RP = R′xP(Z):

                                  Λ11′Λ                                    Λ11′Λ  −1
                           b Λ −            E( RR ′ Z )x P ( Z ) = b Λ −         Λ x P ( Z )
                                    1′Λ1                                    1′Λ1 
                                           Λ11′ x P ( Z )                    Λ1
                           = b x P ( Z ) −                 = bx P ( Z ) − b
                                               1′Λ1                         1′Λ1

which we may substitute into the expression for xC to obtain:

                                              Λ1          Λ11′Λ 
                            xc = ( 1 − b )        + a Λ −        µ ( Z ) + bx P ( Z ) .                         (29)
                                             1′Λ1          1′Λ1 

Comparing equations (24) and (29), we conclude that the most mispriced portfolio must be

formed by combining an efficient-with-respect-to-Z portfolio with RP.

         Without loss of generality we represent the efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontier using the

following two portfolios.          Let R0 denote the efficient portfolio with (unconditional) mean

µ 0 = γ 0 and unconditional variance σ 02 . Note that the covariance between R0 and RS is σ 0 S = 0

as R0 is a zero-beta asset for RS.

         Consider the system of three assets (R0, RS, RP), which has mean vector ( γ 0 , µ S , µ P ) and

alpha vector α ′ = ( α 0 ,α S ,α P ) = ( −( µ P − γ 0 )σ 0 P / σ P2 , µ S − γ 0 − ( µ P − γ 0 )σ SP / σ P2 ,0 )   with

respect to RP. The covariance matrix for these assets is
                                                                 36


                                                      σ 02       0          σ 0P 
                                                                                  
                                                  V = 0         σ   2
                                                                     S       σ SP                                     (30)
                                                     σ 0 P      σ SP        σ P2 
                                                     

Note that the efficient-with-respect to Z frontier and portfolio RP are all accessible as fixed-

weight portfolios within this system.

           We maximize the mispricing by maximizing the squared Sharpe ratio within an

isomorphic                        system                  of                   assets              defined                as

( R 0+ , R S+ , R P+ ) = ( R 0 − γ 0 + α 0 , R S − µ S + α S , R P − µ P ) , constructed so that the alphas of

the    original          system       are    equal        to   the           means      in   the   isomorphic        system:

E( R0+ , RS+ , RP+ ) = ( α 0 ,α S ,0 ) and we define the zero beta rate in the isomorphic system to be

zero. Note that the variances for any fixed portfolio weight function will be the same in the

original and the isomorphic system, and that the portfolio alpha in the original system is equal to

the portfolio mean in the isomorphic system (because of linearity for both means and alphas).

Thus the mispricing α C2 / σ C2 of a portfolio in the original system is equal to its squared Sharpe

ratio µ C2 / σ C2 in the isomorphic system. It follows that the most mispriced portfolio weights xC

are proportional to V-1 α .

           The portfolio R0 has zero weight in the most mispriced portfolio. When we multiply the

first row of V-1 by α , the result is proportional to

 σ S2 σ SP       0 σ SP 0              σ S2 
            ,−               ,                ( α 0 ,α S ,0 ) = α 0 ( σ S2σ P2 − σ SP
                                                                                    2
                                                                                       ) + α S σ 0 Pσ SP
σ       σ 2
                σ        σ  2
                                σ      σ      
 SP       P      0P        P     0P     SP 

  [                               ]
= − ( µ P − γ 0 )σ 0 P / σ P ( σ S σ P − σ SP
                           2     2 2        2
                                                      [                                      ]
                                                ) + µ S − γ 0 − ( µ P − γ 0 )σ SP / σ P2 σ 0 Pσ SP
= [− ( µ   P                  ]                                          [                                   ]
               − γ 0 )σ 0 Pσ S2 + ( µ S − γ 0 )σ 0 Pσ SP = −σ 0 Pσ S2 ( µ P − γ 0 ) − ( µ S − γ 0 )σ SP / σ S2 = 0

where the last equality follows from the fact that RS is efficient with a zero-beta rate of γ 0 and

thus must price R P : µ P = γ 0 + ( µ S − γ 0 )σ SP / σ S2 .
                                                                            37


         Since R0 does not appear in the most mispriced portfolio, we may maximize α C2 / σ C2

over the restricted isomorphic system ( RS+ , R P+ ) .                              The optimal weights (wS,wP)′ will be

proportional to

                   −1                                −1
 σ S2   σ SP           α S  σ S2          σ SP         σ P2   σ SP  µ S − γ 0 − ( µ P − γ 0 )σ SP / σ P2 
                        =                                                                              
σ
 SP     σ P2           α P  σ SP         σ P2        σ
                                                           SP     σ S2                 0                   
                                                                                                                
                   −1
  σ S2 σ SP
=                       [µ                                           ]  
                                 − γ 0 − ( µ P − γ 0 )σ SP / σ P2 σ P2 
                                                                               1       
                                                                                       
                                                                                     2 
                                                                         − σ SP / σ P 
                             S
  σ SP σ P2

hence (wS,wP) is proportional to (1, − σ SP / σ P2 ), which established Equation (12) after

normalization.                       To       establish            Equation        (11),      substitute       for   σ SP   using

µ P = γ 0 + ( µ S − γ 0 )σ SP / σ S2 .



Evaluating the Tests by Simulation

     We conduct simulation experiments to evaluate the test statistics. Consider first a case with

no conditioning information. In Monte Carlo experiments we draw random samples from a

normal distribution with mean vector and covariance matrix set equal to the maximum likelihood

(ML) estimates from our data. Under the null hypothesis the fixed-weight portfolio R p should be

minimum variance efficient. We therefore replace R p in the simulations by a fixed-weight

portfolio whose weights maximize the Sharpe ratio at the ML estimates. Thus, each artificial

sample is drawn from a population in which the tested portfolio R p is efficient.

     The Monte Carlo results may be sensitive to the assumption of normally distributed data.

We therefore resample from the original data instead of a normal distribution, using a parametric

bootstrap approach. For example, a regression of returns on the lagged conditioning information

defines the conditional mean function and the matrix of sample residuals. We choose randomly
                                                     38

selected rows, with replacement, from the matrix of the sample residuals; the number of draws

matches the length of the time series in the relevant subperiod. We use the conditional mean

functions, evaluated at the simulated Z, and add the independently resampled residuals

(unexpected returns) to obtain the simulated returns.

    When conditioning information is involved the distribution of Z is taken from the empirical

distribution of the 5 lagged instruments. In order to capture the strong serial dependence of these

instruments we model Zt as a vector AR(1) process. The sample AR (1) coefficient matrix is a

parameter of the simulation. We resample from the matrix of residuals from the AR(1) model

and build the time series of the Zt’s recursively in each simulation trial.

    Under the null hypothesis the artificial samples are drawn from a population in which the

tested portfolio RP is efficient with respect to Z.          The precise manner in which this is

accomplished depends on the situation. When the null hypothesis places a given portfolio on the

efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontier, we simply replace the tested portfolio return with the time-

varying combination of test assets that is ex ante efficient given the data generating process

(Tables 2 through 4). When the null hypothesis specifies that a fixed weight combination of

factors is efficient, we replace the first factor with the ex ante efficient portfolio (Table 5).

     The Corrollary to Proposition 3 describes the case of dynamic intersection. In this case we

exploit the most mispriced portfolio of Proposition 4 in order to generate data that satisfy the null

hypothesis. We first form a portfolio that is efficient with respect to Z within the set of k-1 of the

factor portfolios for the given data generating process. This portfolio, call it Rk-1, will be

inefficient in the full set of assets. We then use Proposition 4 to compute the most mispriced

portfolio by Rk-1. A combination of Rk-1 and the most-mispriced portfolio is efficient in the full

sample of test assets given the data generating process. We replace the k-th factor with the most

mispriced portfolio. With this replacement, the k factor-portfolios satisfy the null hypothesis that
                                                        39

they are efficient in the full set of test assets (Table 6). When the null hypothesis specifies the

conditional efficiency of a combination of the benchmark returns, RB, we satisfy the null

hypothesis by replacing the conditional mean functions of the test assets with the expressions

implied       by        the       equivalent         conditional         beta       pricing        restriction:

µ ( Z ) = γ o + Σ kj =1 β j ( Z )E [ R Bj − γ 0 Z ] , where Bj(Z) is the vector of conditional betas on the j-th

benchmark return (Table 7).

    Each simulation experiment produces 1,000 artificial samples, and we estimate the relevant

test statistic on each sample. The empirical 5% critical value is the value above which 5% of the

1,000 statistics lie. The empirical p-value is the fraction of the 1,000 statistics that are larger than

the value obtained in the original sample. The logic is that if this p-value is small, it is unlikely

that the sample statistic comes from a population in which the null hypothesis is true.
                                                 40


References

Abhyankar, Abhay, Devraj Basu and Alexander Streme, 2002, Portfolio efficiency and discount

       factor bounds with conditioning information: An empirical study, working paper,

       Warwick Business School.

Bekaert, Geert, and Jun Liu, 2004, Conditioning Information and Variance Bounds on Pricing

       Kernels. Review of Financial Studies 17, 339-378.

Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption

       and Investment Opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.

Breen, William, Lawrence R. Glosten and Ravi Jagannathan, 1989, Economic significance of

    predictable variations in stock index returns, Journal of Finance 44, 1177-1190.

Carlson, Murray, and David A. Chapman, 2000, Conditioning information and tests of

    unconditional pricing models, working paper, University of Texas.

Chamberlain, Gary, 1983, Funds, factors and diversification in arbitrage pricing models,

    Econometrica 51, 1305-1324.

Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of a production based asset pricing model, working

    paper, Journal of Political Economy.

Cochrane, John H., 2001, Asset pricing, Princeton University Press.

Dybvig, Philip and Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr., 1982, Mean variance theory in complete markets,

    Journal of Business 55, 233-252.

Fama, Eugene F., 1973, A note on the Market Model and the Two-parameter model, Journal of

    Finance 28, 1181-1185.

Fama, Eugene F., 1990, Stock returns, expected returns, and real activity, Journal of Finance 45,

    1089-1108.
                                                  41

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns.

    Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected stock returns,

    Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-50.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected returns, Journal

    of Finance 47, 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing

    anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55-87.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry Costs of Equity, Journal of Financial

    Economics 43, 15-193.

Fama, Eugene F. and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of

    Financial Economics 5, 115-146.

Ferson, Wayne E., 1989, Changes in expected security returns, risk and the level of interest rates,

    Journal of Finance 44, 1191-1218.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1999, Conditioning variables and the cross-section

    of stock returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1325-1360.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Ravi Jagannathan, 1996, Econometric Evaluation of Asset Pricing

    Models, The Handbook of Statistics, Edited by G.S. Maddala and C.R. Rao, Volume 14

    (Chapter One), pp.1-30.

Ferson, W. E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in changing

    economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-462 (June).

Ferson, Wayne E., Sergei Sarkissian and Timothy Simin, 2003, Spurious regressions in Financial

    Economics? Journal of Finance 58, 1393-1414.
                                                  42

Ferson, Wayne E. and Andrew F. Siegel, 2001, The efficient use of conditioning information in

    portfolios. Journal of Finance 56, 967-982.

Ferson, Wayne E. and Andrew F. Siegel, 2003, Stochastic discount factor bounds with

    conditioning information, Review of Financial Studies 16, 567-595.

Ferson, Wayne E., Andrew F. Siegel and Pisun Xu, 2005, Mimicking portfolios with

    conditioning information, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (forthcoming).

Ferson, Wayne. E., 1995, Theory and empirical testing of asset pricing models. Handbooks in

    OR & MS, Vol. 9, Chapter 5. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Ghysels, Eric, 1997, On Stable Factor Structures in the Pricing of Risk: Do tome-varying betas help

    or hurt? Journal of Finance 53-549-573.

Gibbons, Michael R., 1982, Multivariate tests of Financial models, Journal of Financial Economics

    10, 3-27.

Gibbons, Michael R. and W.E. Ferson, 1985, Testing Asset Pricing Models with Changing

    Expectations and an Unobservable market Portfolio, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 217-

    236.

Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a given

    portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121-1152.

Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, 2003, Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios.

    Management Science 49, No. 5(March).

Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, 2004, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity

    premium prediction, working paper, Emory University.

Grinblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titman, 1987, The Relation Between Mean-Variance Efficiency and

    Arbitrage Pricing, Journal of Business 60, 97-112.
                                                     43

Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,

    Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

Hansen, L.P, and R.J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk Aversion speculation in forward foreign exchange

    markets: An econometric analysis of Linear Models, in J.A. Frenkel, ed. Exchange Rates

    and International Macro Economics, University of Chicago Press.

Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market data for models of

    dynamic economies. Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.

Hansen, L. P., and S. F. Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning information in deducing testable

    restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models. Econometrica 55, No. 3, 587-613.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing

    models, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289-318.

Harvey, Campbell R. and Chris Kirby, 1996, Analytic tests of factor pricing models, working

    paper, Duke University, Durham, N.C.

Huberman, Gur, Shmuel Kandel, and Robert Stambaugh, 1987, Mimicking portfolios and exact

    arbitrage pricing, Journal of Finance 42, No. 1, 1-9.

Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the Cross-section of

    expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.

Jobson, J.D., and Bob Korkie, 1982, Potential performance and tests of portfolio efficiency,

    Journal of Financial Economics 10, 433-466.

Kandel, Shmuel A., 1984, The likelihood ratio test statistic of mean variance efficiency without a

    riskless asset, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 575-592.

Kandel, Shmuel A. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1989, A mean-variance framework for tests of

    asset pricing models, Review of Financial Studies 2, 125-156.
                                                   44

Kandel, Shmuel A. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, On Correlations and Inferences about

    Mean-Variance Efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 61-90.

Kandel, Shmuel A. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1996, On the predictability of stock returns: An

    asset allocation perspective, Journal of Finance 51, 385-424.

Keim, Donald B. and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the bond and stock

    markets, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.

Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica 46, 1429-45.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1987, On Multivariate Tests of the CAPM. Journal of Financial

    Economics 18, 341-371.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the CAPM, Journal

    of Financial Economics 38, 3-28.

Roll, Richard R., 1985, A note on the geometry of Shanken's CSR T2 test for mean/variance

    efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 349-357.

Roll, Richard, 1977, A critique of the asset pricing theory's tests - part 1: On past and potential

    testability of the theory, Journal of Financial Economics 4, 129-176.

Shanken, Jay, 1987, Multivariate Proxies and Asset Pricing Relations: Living with the Roll Critique,

    Journal of Financial Economics 18, 91-110.

Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation, Journal of

    Econometrics 45, 99-120.

Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions

   of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.

Simin, Timothy, 2003, The Poor Predictive Performance of Asset Pricing Models, work paper,

   Pennsylvania State University.
                                                 45

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1982, On the exlusion of assets from tests of the two-parameter model,

   Journal of Financial Economics 10, 235-268.
                                                                     46




Table 1. Monthly Industry Returns


Monthly returns on 25 portfolios of common stocks are from Harvey and Kirby (1996). The portfolios are
value-weighted within each industry group. The industries and their SIC codes are in the following table.
Mean is the sample mean of the gross (one plus rate of) return, σ is the sample standard deviation and ρ1 is
the first order autocorrelation of the monthly return. R 2 is the adjusted coefficient of determination in
percent from the regression of the returns on the lagged instruments. The sample period is February of 1963
                                                        2
through December of 1994 (383 observations). RHOLDOUT           is for the 1995-2002 holdout sample (96
observations). Negative adjusted R-squares are reported as 0.0.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Industry                     SIC codes                         Mean           σ            ρ1         R2
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                          RHOLDOUT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1    Aerospace                     372, 376                         1.0107       0.0644       0.13        9.9            1.1
2    Transportation                40, 45                           1.0094       0.0648       0.08        9.1            0.0
3    Banking                       60                               1.0086       0.0631       0.10        4.3            2.4
4    Building materials            24, 32                           1.0097       0.0608       0.09       10.4            0.0
5    Chemicals/Plastics            281, 282, 286-289, 308           1.0094       0.0525      -0.01        8.0            2.5
6    Construction                  15-17                            1.0109       0.0760       0.16       10.2            0.0
7    Entertainment                 365, 483, 484, 78                1.0135       0.0662       0.14        5.7            0.0
8    Food/Beverages                20                               1.0117       0.0449       0.05        6.6            0.2
9    Healthcare                    283, 384, 385, 80                1.0113       0.0524       0.01        2.4            0.0
10   Industrial Mach.              351-356                          1.0089       0.0587       0.05        8.2            0.0
11   Insurance/Real Estate         63-65                            1.0095       0.0581       0.15        6.4            2.3
12   Investments                   62, 67                           1.0097       0.0453       0.05        8.7            4.1
13   Metals                        33                               1.0075       0.0610      -0.02        4.5            0.2
14   Mining                        10, 12, 14                       1.0108       0.0535       0.01        7.2            0.3
15   Motor Vehicles                371, 551, 552                    1.0095       0.0584       0.11       10.6            0.0
16   Paper                         26                               1.0095       0.0536      -0.02        6.9            2.4
17   Petroleum                     13, 29                           1.0102       0.0518      -0.02        4.4            0.0
18   Printing/Publishing           27                               1.0114       0.0586       0.21       11.3            0.0
19   Professional Services         73, 87                           1.0111       0.0693       0.13        8.4            2.8
20   Retailing                     53, 56, 57, 59                   1.0106       0.0597       0.15        8.7            3.7
21   Semiconductors                357, 367                         1.0080       0.0559       0.08        9.0            0.0
22   Telecommunications            366, 381, 481, 482, 489          1.0085       0.0412      -0.05        5.4            8.8
23   Textiles/Apparel              22, 23                           1.0100       0.0613       0.21       11.0            0.0
24   Utilities                     49                               1.0078       0.0392       0.02        6.8            4.3
25   Wholesaling                   50, 51                           1.0109       0.0614       0.13       10.7            0.0
                                                               47


Table 2

Tests of the mean variance efficiency of the Standard and Poors 500 stock index excess return in a sample of
industry portfolio returns. The monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of common stocks are
measured, for the sample period February 1963 through December 1994 (T=383 observations), and ten-year
subperiods. A holdout sample from January, 1995 through December, 2002 (96 observations) is also shown.
The conditioning information consists of a lagged Treasury bill yield, dividend yield, excess bill return, and
yield spreads of long over short-term Government bonds and low-grade over high-grade corporate bonds.
NA denotes not applicable, when the number of assets is larger than the number of time series observations
and the covariance matrix of the returns is singular. Asymptotic p-values are from the chi-squared
distribution.

Subperiod                                         63-72                73-82     83-92      63-94      95-02
Panel A: Test assets Rt, no conditioning information:
Wald Statistic                                     32.80               26.26     29.76      24.77      51.26
  asymptotic p-value                                0.14                0.39      0.23       0.48       0.001

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                                 52.82    52.34     50.82      51.93    211.40
 empirical p-value                                             0.43     0.71      0.58       0.59      0.70

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                  60.05    63.86     62.32      40.00    231.41
  empirical p-value                                            0.52     0.81      0.65       0.58      0.72
Panel B: Test assets are R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 :

Wald Statistic                                                NA      NA        NA         348.63    NA
 asymptotic p-value                                                                          0.00

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                                                              327.99
 empirical p-value                                                                           0.02

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                                               475.96
  empirical p-value                                                                          0.44
Panel C: Test assets are all Portfolios x′ ( Z t −1 ) R t :

Test Statistic                                             203.29     188.56    164.98     161.84    148.2

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                              125.69     121.58    121.61     133.27 139.93
 empirical p-value                                           0.000      0.000     0.001      0.002  0.029

Resampling 5% Critical Value                               117.25     130.55    121.62     118.76 144.89
  empirical p-value                                          0.003      0.005     0.003      0.001  0.044
                                                              48


Table 3

Tests of the mean variance efficiency of the Standard and Poors 500 stock index excess return. The industry
data are monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of common stocks, for the sample period February
1963 through December 1994 (T=383 observations). The size/BM returns are 25 portfolios of stocks sorted
on market capitalization and book-to-market ratio, for the sample period July 1963 through December 1994
(T=378 observations). A holdout sample covers January 1995 through December, 2002 (96 observations).
The conditioning information consists of a lagged Treasury bill yield, dividend yield, excess bill return, and
yield spreads of long over short-term Government bonds and low-grade over high-grade corporate bonds.
Asymptotic p-values are from the chi-squared distribution. NA indicates that the sample size does not allow
the statistic to be calculated.
Sample                                                 size/BM                                  industry
                                                63-94          95-02                    63-94          95-02
Panel A: Test assets Rt, no conditioning information:
Sample Statistic                                 83.02         74.12                    24.77        51.26
  asymptotic p-value                              0.000         0.000                    0.475        0.001

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                              40.97     114.58             51.93        211.40
 empirical p-value                                          0.000      0.192             0. 59         0.70

Resampling 5% Critical Value                               45.13     131.52             39.99        231.41
  empirical p-value                                         0.000      0.277             0.579         0.72
Panel B: Test assets are R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 :
Sample Statistic                                           517.12    NA                348.63        NA
  asymptotic p-value                                         0.000                       0.000

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                              342.03                      327.99
 empirical p-value                                           0.000                       0.019

Resampling 5% Critical Value                             508.78                        475.96
  empirical p-value                                         0.040                        0.440
Panel C: Test assets are all Portfolios x′ ( Z t −1 ) R t :
Sample Statistic                                           272.66    210.4             161.84        148.2

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                              120.79    131.92            133.27        139.93
 empirical p-value                                           0.000     0.000             0.002         0.029

Resampling 5% Critical Value                               107.59    135.10            118.76        144.89
  empirical p-value                                          0.000     0.003             0.001         0.044
                                                              49

Table 4

Tests of the null hypothesis that conditioning information does not expand the mean variance boundary. The
industry data are monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of common stocks and a market index
return. The size/BM returns are for 25 portfolios of stocks sorted on market capitalization and book-to-
market ratios and a market index return. The conditioning information consists of a lagged Treasury bill
yield, dividend yield, excess bill return, and yield spreads of long over short-term Government bonds and
low-grade over high-grade corporate bonds. Asymptotic p-values are from the chi-squared distribution. NA
indicates that the sample size does not allow the test statistic to be calculated.

                                                                          size/BM               industry
                                                                     63-94      95-02      63-94     95-02
Panel A: Test assets are R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 :
Sample Statistic                                                     356.29     NA         304.31 NA
 asymptotic p-value                                                    0.000                 0.000

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                                        338.18                326.70
 empirical p-value                                                     0.033                 0.141

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                         520.38                485.96
  empirical p-value                                                    0.464                 0.686
Panel B: Test assets are all Portfolios x′ ( Z t −1 ) R t :
Sample Statistic                                                     155.75      77.70     128.83      63.78

Monte Carlo 5% Critical Value                                        122.29     127.69     133.42     133.96
 empirical p-value                                                    0.000       0.458      0.067      0.806

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                         108.69     138.26     118.83 148.08
  empirical p-value                                                   0.001       0.539      0.025  0.779
                                                              50

Table 5

Tests of the null hypothesis that a fixed-weight combination of the three Fama-French factors is efficient.
The industry data are monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of common stocks and a value-
weighted index. The size/BM returns are for 25 portfolios of stocks sorted on market capitalization and
book-to-market ratio and a value-weighted return. In each design the first and 25th portfolio returns are
replaced with the returns of the HML and SMB factors, respectively. The conditioning information consists
of a lagged Treasury bill yield, dividend yield, excess bill return, and yield spreads of long over short-term
Government bonds and low-grade over high-grade corporate bonds. Asymptotic p-values are from the chi-
squared distribution. NA indicates that the sample size does not allow the test statistic to be calculated.

                                                                               size/BM              industry
                                                                          63-94      95-02     63-94     95-02
Panel A: Test assets are Rt:
Sample Statistic                                                          34.96     49.51      43.03     55.53
  asymptotic p-value                                                      0.089     0.002       0.014    0.004

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                              41.58     63.97      39.24     61.22
  empirical p-value                                                       0.117     0.157       0.021     0.077
Panel B: Test assets are all Portfolios R ft + ( Rt − R ft ) ⊗ Z t −1 :
Sample Statistic                                                          521.87    NA         415.08    NA
 asymptotic p-value                                                       0.000                 0.000

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                              319.34    NA         313.73    NA
  empirical p-value                                                       0.000                 0.000
Panel C: Test assets are x′ ( Z t −1 ) R t :
Sample Statistic                                                          340.61    181.55     180.09    174.64

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                              70.52     128.03     75.55     118.38
  empirical p-value                                                       0.000     0.003       0.000     0.001
                                                       51

Table 6

Tests of dynamic intersection. The null hypothesis is that an efficient-with-respect-to-Z combination of the
three Fama French factors touches the efficient-with-respect-to-Z frontier of the test assets at a tangency
from the risk-free rate. Industry refers to monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of common stocks
and a market index return. The size/BM returns are 25 portfolios of stocks sorted on market capitalization
and book-to-market ratios and a market index. The first and 25th portfolio returns are replaced with the
returns of the HML and SMB factors. The conditioning information consists of a lagged Treasury bill yield,
dividend yield, excess bill return, and yield spreads of long over short-term Government bonds and low-
grade over high-grade corporate bonds.

                                                                            size/BM                industry
                                                                       63-94      95-02       63-94     95-02

Sample Statistic                                                       268.09      124.3      125.47     118.9

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                           73.30       127.14     79.59      114.05
  empirical p-value                                                    0.000       0.055       0.001      0.039
                                                      52

Table 7

Tests of Conditional Efficiency. The industry data are monthly returns on 25 industry-sorted portfolios of
common stocks and a market index return. The size/BM returns are for 25 portfolios of stocks sorted on
market capitalization and book-to-market ratios and a market index. In each design the first and 25th
portfolio returns are replaced with the returns of the HML and SMB factors. The conditioning information
consists of a lagged Treasury bill yield, dividend yield, excess bill return, and yield spreads of long over
short-term Government bonds and low-grade over high-grade corporate bonds.

                                                                           size/BM                industry
                                                                      63-94      95-02       63-94     95-02
Panel A: Conditional Efficiency of the Market Index
Sample Statistic                                                      339.16      131.70     189.70     143.0

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                          101.12      88.19      91.42      83.22
  empirical p-value                                                   0.000       0.008       0.002      0.006
Panel B: Conditional Efficiency of the Fama-French Factors
Sample Statistic                                                      362.95      132.50     144.37     137.8

Resampling 5% Critical Value                                          98.13       97.65      117.75     94.19
  empirical p-value                                                   0.000        0.016      0.012     0.015
