                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INNOVATION, COMPETITION, AND
                              WELFARE-ENHANCING MONOPOLY

                                           Michael R. Darby
                                           Lynne G. Zucker

                                         Working Paper 12094
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12094


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




This research has been supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (SES-0304727 and SES-
0531146) and the University of California's Industry-University Cooperative Research Program. The authors
are grateful for helpful comments from Harold Demsetz, John de Figueiredo, Marvin Lieberman, Richard
Rumelt, Mariko Sakakibara, and other participants in the UCLA Innovation Workshop and the UCLA
Anderson School’s Policy Seminar. They are not implicated in any remaining error. This paper is a part of
the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of their employers or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Innovation, Competition and Welfare-Enhancing Monopoly
Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 12094
March 2006
JEL No. D40, D24, O31, L1

                                            ABSTRACT

The basic competitive model with freely available technology is suited for static industries but
misleading as applied to major innovative economies for which development of new technologies
equals in magnitude around 10% of gross domestic investment. We distinguish free generic
technology from proprietary technologies resulting from risky investment with uncertain outcome.
The totality of possible outcomes drives the national innovation system and the returns to a particular
successful technology cannot be compared to its own direct investment costs. Eureka moments are
hardly ever self-enabling and incentives are required to motivate investment attempting to turn them
into an innovation. The alternative to a valuable proprietary innovation is not the same innovation
freely available but the unchanged generic technology. Growth is concentrated in any country at any
time in a few firms in a few industries that are achieving metamorphic technological progress as a
result of breakthrough innovations.

So long as the entry and exit of firms using the generic technology sets the price in an industry, one
or more price-taking firms can coexist with proprietary technologies yielding more or less substantial
quasi-rents to the sunk development costs. Consumer welfare is increased if an innovator creates a
proprietary technology such that the market equilibrium price is reduced and output increased. If the
technological breakthrough is sufficiently large for the innovator to drive all generic producers out
of the industry and increase output as a wealth-maximizing monopolist, consumer welfare is surely
increased. After some time, the innovative technology will diffuse into an imitative generic
technology. The best innovators develop a stream of innovations so that technological leaders can
maintain their status as dominant firm or monopolist for extended periods of time despite lagged
diffusion, and consumers benefit from this stream as well. The economics of an innovative nation
are different from those of the no-growth stationary state which we teach and fall back on. We
propose an ambitious agenda to integrate major research streams treating innovation as an object of
economic analysis into our standard models.

Michael R. Darby                                       Lynne G. Zucker
Anderson Graduate School of Management                 Department of Sociology
University of California, Los Angeles                  University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                             Los Angeles, CA 90995-1551
and NBER                                               and NBER
darby@ucla.edu                                         zucker@ucla.edu
              Innovation, Competition and Welfare-Enhancing Monopoly
                             Michael R. Darby and Lynne G. Zucker


       The world’s leading economies are characterized by national innovation systems which

encourage development of embryonic inventions into successful commercial innovations that

reduce costs or improve the qualities of existing products or create entirely new products.

Innovation is driven by appropriable opportunity.1          Appropriability in part depends on

government enforcement of intellectual property rights, but may also depend on the nature of the

innovation.     Opportunity involves creative insight, and frequently arises from scientific

discovery that makes possible the previously impossible. Innovation has its critics: it raises

standards of living generally, but among producers the gains are concentrated and frequently

achieved by the emergence of new firms and industries that may become quite large and displace

existing firms and workers. Schumpeter’s “creative destruction” evokes the economic churning

– rise and fall, entry and exit – caused by rapid “disruptive” technological progress.

       The core of our argument is to differentiate between a generic technology (and its

associated production and cost functions) which is available freely to any potential industry

entrant and a proprietary technology which is the result of risky investments by a particular firm

and not freely available to any entrant. The generic technology corresponds to the traditional

concept of technology and may be embodied in physical and/or human capital which is available

to entrants at a given market price which may or may not depend on the amount of these

resources used by the industry.2 A proprietary technology may be more or less protected by

patents, copyrights, trade secrets, actual secrecy, and/or natural excludability, any or all of which

reduce the speed and completeness of imitation by other new or existing firms in the industry.3

A fundamental condition for firms to invest in creating a proprietary technology is that the


                                                 1
expected return from using the technology resulting from the investment instead of the generic

technology equals or exceeds the cost of the investment. This cannot happen if the technology is

freely available to all entrants since no returns would accrue to the technology. It is a fallacy to

conduct a positive or normative analysis on the assumption that the technology is free to all when

it would not exist in that case. It is worse to blame the innovator for being inconsistent with our

traditional model.

       Some legal and institutional arrangements are more conducive to scientific breakthroughs

which create technical opportunity, and to converting inventive inspiration (the eureka moment)

into actual new commercial technology.4 For example, intellectual property protections vary

greatly as does the possibility of venture financing and public offerings for innovative start-ups;

anti-trust law and policy can undo the market outcomes of great innovators, reducing the

incentive for any other inventor to try to emulate. Reducing a great idea – an embryonic

invention – to practice is an expensive, failure-prone process and the expected returns have to

cover the costs, or it will not be pursued. As shown in Table 1, in the major innovative nations,

R&D expenditures average upwards from 2 percent of GDP, an amount equal in magnitude to

about 10 percent of gross expenditures for creation of new physical capital.5

       The reality, excitement, hope, and costs of innovation are entirely absent from the

received standard model of perfect competition as incorporated in hundreds of textbooks

(hereafter RSM). If our long run is simultaneously optimal and hopeless, our science is dismal.

The RSM assumes a technology described in the production function – an engineering

relationship describing the maximum amount of output that can be produced from any given

combination of inputs – that is freely available to all industry participants. The cost function of

(efficient) firms is then derived using this production function and input prices. The same




                                                 2
conception of production and cost functions is routinely applied in models of monopolistic

competition, monopoly, and oligopoly. That is, technology is neither a produced means of

production nor an object of (as opposed to given for) economic analysis. This concept is

consistent with the long-run of a stationary state and – if exogenous change is permitted – even

the Solow-Swan neoclassical growth model, but not with the reality of investment in research

and development to produce new technologies.

       We propose some amendments to the RSM and monopoly models which make them

consistent with the production function as an economic object while preserving important results

and pedagogical tractability. The objective is to synthesize key insights of the growing but still

separate   economics-of-science-and-technology      and    new-growth-theory     literatures   and

incorporate that synthesis into revised RSM and monopoly models. The specific concepts

developed here are mostly familiar to participants in those literatures, but their implications in

the RSM and monopoly models may still surprise.

       Whether the amendment proposed here is adopted depends on its usefulness in improving

the conclusions derived from the RSM and monopoly models.6 We develop four important new

results in the following sections: (a) There can be a competitive equilibrium with proprietary

technologies which dominates the RSM equilibrium in the Pareto-welfare sense. (b) A firm

profitably innovating a proprietary technology need not face a downward-sloping demand curve

for its output. (c) Consumer welfare is increased only if the innovative technology increases the

quantity sold and reduces the market price. (d) This surely occurs if the innovating firm drives

out all competitors and becomes a monopoly firm operating in the downward-sloping region of

its demand curve. In section I we develop the concept of proprietary technology and point to a

substantial literature that firms adopting proprietary technologies are the primary means of




                                                3
economic growth. The first two propositions characterizing a competitive equilibrium with an

innovating firm are developed in Section II. The model for an innovating firm which emerges as

a dominant firm is presented in Section III. Next, we consider the case of an innovating firm

which creates a proprietary technology for which the wealth-maximizing strategy drives out all

firms using the generic technology, creating a welfare-enhancing monopoly. In Section V, we

introduce imitation which limits the incentives for innovation as it diffuses the cost reduction to

other firms in the industry. A concluding section summarizes the paper and proposes an agenda

of future work to apply the same concepts of technology to other market models.



                           I. Generic and Proprietary Technologies

       Figure 1 from Lamkey (2005) illustrates corn output per acre of farmland used in the

United States before and after the arrival of hybrid seed corn around 1935. The RSM applies

naturally to conditions to the left of 1935: There is a single, unchanging best way to produce

corn and anyone operating a farm has learned it either from parents or farm school. If anyone

invented any part of the technology, that has long since entered free common knowledge and

use. Zvi Griliches (1957) pioneered the study of economically rational technological change by

examining the order of introduction (as well as speed of adoption by farmers) of hybrid seed

corn. Darby and Zucker (2006) emphasize that the hybrid seed corn revolution was the result not

of a scientific breakthrough which enabled agronomists to develop better hybrid corn species

than they knew how to do, but instead was based on appreciation of the commercial importance

of a scientific discovery which prevented farmers from saving seed from their crops so that they

had to purchase hybrid seed corn each year from its inventor: It was not that cross-breeding to




                                                4
achieve superior crops was previously unknown, it was that double-cross-breeding produced

appropriability which motivated seed companies to invest resources in inventing better seed.7

       No one today can deny the importance of commercial innovation in seed corn in

producing ever rising standards of living and social welfare. The enabling invention which

started this process – only later augmented by establishment of intellectual property rights as a

result of proven benefits – was a method of inventing which could not be readily copied by new

entrants. Students of science and technology have long wrestled with differences between

dynamic and static welfare illustrated by this example: Once a seed corn is invented, social

welfare is maximized (in the static sense) by making the new technology freely available. But if

that is done, then there is no expected return to motivate the innovation in the first place and the

seed corn is never invented, resulting in dynamic inefficiency. Put differently, welfare analysis

is fundamentally flawed if it ignores the cost of and incentives for innovating a technology, and

examines technologies only after they have been invented and reduced to practice.8

I.A. Self-Enabling versus Embryonic Inventions

               Genius is one per cent inspiration and ninety-nine per cent perspiration.

                                      –   Thomas A. Edison (spoken circa 1903,

                                          published Harper's Monthly, 1932)

       The arguments over static and dynamic welfare in part reflect two polar opposite views of

the knowledge constituting technology. One view is that an invention is created in an “epiphany

of insight” or “eureka moment” and once this occurs can be easily understood and used by

anyone of reasonable intelligence. Early proponents of this view are Nelson (1959) and Arrow

(1962). More recently Romer (1990) argues that technological change is well characterized as

“improvement in the instructions for mixing together raw materials,” not inherently tied to a




                                                 5
human being as human capital, and thus inherently nonrivalrous.9 If pride of authorship, points

toward tenure, or book royalties from publication provide sufficient incentives for all such

eureka moments to be codified and published, such self-enabling inventions are reasonably

described as free gifts of nature which do not require economic motivation for creation or for

introduction to the market since any producer has to make the same investment and faces the

same cost conditions to enter the market. Our best candidate for an example of a self-enabling

invention is how to create hybrid corn seed which does not self-propagate (discussed above); this

was an invention of a method of an inventing – a conceptual research tool – which could be

understood and applied readily although it took nearly two decades after publication before it

resulted in the creation and marketing of any actual seed.

       At the other extreme, the same eureka moment is seen as producing only an embryonic

invention which requires much cooperative investment to reduce it to practice and bring it to

market as an innovation.10 For example, the embryonic invention might be to use a specific

receptor on a cell to control or cure a disease. Going from there to a successful innovation might

involve developing a prototype molecule that would fit on that receptor, using combinatorial

chemistry to create thousands of variants of the prototype, cloning the receptor so that the variant

molecules can be screened for which best bind to the receptor, and then identifying the drug-

candidate molecules. These candidates then must be tested for activity versus diseased human

cells in the Petri dish and activity and safety in animal models. If there are any surviving drug-

candidates, one is picked as the best candidate for the very expensive human tests required to

prove safety and effectiveness. On the order of 20 percent of the drug candidates that enter

clinical trials actually make it through to FDA approval for marketing.      DiMasi, Hansen, and

Grabowski (2003) estimate that the total R&D cost per new drug approved at 802 million in year




                                                 6
2000 dollars, of which nearly half is accounted for by the cost of capital between outlays and

eventual approval. After a drug candidate resulting from an embryonic invention is approved, a

major investment in marketing is still required to educate harried physicians on the benefits of

the product relative to other treatment strategies.

       Our reading of the literatures on the economics and sociology of science and technology

is that self-enabling inventions are extremely rare in the history of technological innovation. The

great bulk of innovations are embryonic and follow Edison’s famous inspiration-perspiration rule

requiring much time and resources to turn the embryonic invention into an innovation in product

or production. Clearly, most embryonic inventions do not succeed as innovations even after the

investment of time and resources. About half of granted patents are allowed to expire by the end

of ten years rather than pay relatively small renewal fees (Griliches 1990). We speculate that the

vast majority of embryonic inventions are never pursued in the sense of actual investment or

resources in an attempt to reduce them to practice, principally due to a lack of incentives,

resources, or vision on the part of the inventors.

       Governments can do little with respect to vision, but can affect incentives and resources

for good or ill. For example, by 1990, 33 and 40 percent of U.S. and Japanese star bioscientists

had actively worked with firm scientists to the point of publishing a joint paper, as compared to

only 7 percent in Europe (Zucker and Darby 1999). The rank correlation between prevalence of

star scientists working in research institutes and star-firm articles was -0.71. (Co-publishing with

firm scientists has proven to be a robust indicator of transfer of tacit, naturally excludable

technology at the bench level.) We argue that the key factor is the difference in incentives from

American and Japanese professors for European star in research institutes whose employees

typically get no share of royalties on an invention and cannot participate in founding a new firm




                                                     7
while retaining their job at the institute. Besides the apparent differences in the star bioscientists

transferring their embryonic technology to industry, we doubt that the lack of industry

connection on the part of the remaining 67 and 60 percent of American and Japanese stars

represents a lack of embryonic inventions on their part.

       The most important policy of most countries with respect to incentives for innovation is

the patent law. A good analogy for the role of a patent for an embryonic invention such as a

drug candidate is that of the deed for the land on which a skyscraper will be built. Once clear

title to the land is secured, the investment in erecting the building makes sense. If instead the

building were erected on public land, the building will benefit the public but likely bankrupt the

builder. Without the patent on a drug candidate, no rational pharmaceutical company would

invest in testing whether it was a safe and effective medicine, since – if they were to succeed –

numerous rivals could produce the drug by investing the small cost of proving it chemically

equivalent. The market price for the drug would be sufficient to cover only productions costs

and the cost of proving chemical equivalence; the original investment in proving it safe and

effective and trying many other failed drug candidates would be a loss to the investing firm.

I.B. Introduction of Proprietary Technologies as the Main Engine of Growth

       Harberger (1998) has documented that growth is generally concentrated in a few companies

in a few industries which are achieving dramatic real cost reductions. Darby and Zucker (2003)

have generalized his results to include introduction of new products or qualities of products and

distinguish between normal perfective growth and metamorphic growth which transforms existing

industries or forms new ones. Theorists following Jovanovic (1982) have developed models in

which entry, exit, and reallocation of production among firms with varying productivity drive

productivity change at the industry level. Bartelsman and Doms (2000) have recently reviewed the




                                                  8
associated empirical literature using business-level microdata that demonstrates that within-industry

firm turnover and reallocation shape changes in industry level productivity. Indeed, “these results

begin to cast doubt on the appropriateness of an aggregate production function that is based on a

representative firm.” (p.584) Fogel, Morck, and Yeung (2005) present evidence that countries

with more displacement and actual decline of their ten largest firms between 1975 and 1996

experienced faster economic growth in the 1990s. These results are all consistent with the young

Schumpeter’s belief (1912, recanted by 1942) in the importance of creative destruction by entry

of new firms as a driving force for growth.

       The industries undergoing metamorphic growth change over time. Famous examples from

the past include spinning, weaving, steam engines, steel, glass, electricity, and aircraft. More

current examples would be semiconductors, information technology, biotechnology, and

nanotechnology. The source of the driving innovations for metamorphic change may be internal or

external to the industry, with external innovations using different technological bases the most

threatening to existing firms in a transforming industry (Tushman and Anderson 1986).

       The good news for the RSM is that most industries at any given time are characterized by

little if any technological progress. Unfortunately, ignoring the exceptions – industries with firms

achieving metamorphic progress – is fundamentally misleading not only with respect to

understanding technological progress but also in understanding industrial organization and the

welfare implications of market structures resulting from particular firms generating technological

progress via purposive, wealth-maximizing investment in R&D.




                                                 9
                  II. Competitive Equilibrium with a Proprietary Innovator

       If pressed, most economists would agree that it is possible for some entrepreneurs to have

technologies superior to that of the typical firm using what we call the generic technology. A

rare example of a textbook discussing such infra-marginal firms is Friedman (1976) who

attributes these differences as related to superior entrepreneurial capacity. While the existence of

firms with superior entrepreneurial capacity means that all firms will not be identical as in the

RSM, entry and exit of the generic-technology firms will continue to determine long-run

equilibrium. The firm or firms with superior entrepreneurial capacity may earn above-normal

returns and differ in size from the standard firms, but they will have no effect on the long-run

price and quantity in the industry.11 Thus, our characterizing some firms in an industry as

having proprietary technologies resulting from risky investment might be dismissed as merely

relabeling entrepreneurial capacity, but not adding anything of substance to the RSM. We

believe our amendment is important, however, because it lays the groundwork in this paper for

understanding proprietary technology as a produced means of production not only for a

competitive industry as discussed in this section, but also as the firm grows large and faces a

downward-sloping demand curve with or without any surviving competitors using the generic or

imitative technologies (Sections III-V).

       Consider a scientist, engineer, or other potential or current entrepreneur with an

embryonic invention which could reduce costs of producing an existing product or introduce an

entirely new product or a new quality in an existing product at a cost which will be valued by

consumers by more than the cost increase required to produce it using the new technology. The

inventor knows that there is some probability that the idea will fail and needs to formulate some

assessment of the probability and returns to be earned with different degrees or types of success.




                                                10
If those expected returns are sufficient and the inventor has sufficient capital to self-finance, he

or she will proceed to try to convert the invention to an innovation in the marketplace. Absent

self-finance, the inventor will face a cost of capital which depends on the organization,

efficiency, expectations, and risk tolerance of the venture capital market. We will restrict our

discussion in this section to inventors who can self-finance reduction to practice of a cost-saving

innovation for an existing product. The other complications are discussed in the remaining

sections or added to the agenda for future research.

       The long-run industry equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 2. The long-run equilibrium

price P is determined by entry and exit as in the RSM and equal to the minimum average cost of

the generic firms. Firm 1 using a proprietary technology produces q1 where marginal cost MC1

equals P at an output greater than its own minimum average cost. The cost curves for firm 1 are

drawn conventionally excluding the cost of the proprietary technology. The shaded area equal to

q1(P-AC1) is the quasi-rent returns to the proprietary technology. In any particular case, the net

present value of these returns over the life of the technology can be greater or less than the cost

of creating the proprietary technology. If expectations are rational, however, on average the

NPV of returns to implemented proprietary technologies over all market structures (including

those described in future sections) must exceed the expected cost of those technologies by

enough to compensate for the failed R&D projects which either produce no new technology or

one with higher minimum average cost than the generic technology. Noting that generic firm

outputs q2 = q3 = … = qn = qgeneric are measured relative to correspondingly shifted origins 02, 03,

… , 0n, the proprietary-technology firm which could be quite large crowds out of the market q1/

qgeneric firms, but does not affect equilibrium output and price in the market in industries

characterized by a horizontal long-run supply curve. A firm with a proprietary technology can




                                                11
shift an upward- or downward-sloping long-run supply curve if it uses more or less of a scarce

input than the firms it displaces or otherwise has disproportionate externalities on the other firms

in the industry.

       Note that the long-run equilibrium price and quantity are undisturbed (with caveats for

externalities) if there is more than one proprietary-technology firm so long as some generic firms

remain in the market so that their long-run minimum average cost determines the price in the

long run. Thus independent inventors or imitators do not affect the quasi-rents to a proprietary

technology so long as the combined output of the proprietary-technology firms is less than

sufficient to supply the quantity demanded at a price equal to the generic long-run minimum

average cost.

       As in the RSM, the demand curve Di faced by each firm i is the industry excess demand

curve with its own output subtracted:

(1)             Di = DM – (SM –Si),

where DM is the market demand curve, SM is the market supply curve inclusive of firm i, and Si is

the supply curve of firm i. That is, SM i = (SM –Si) is the supply curve of all firms in the market

except i, including potential entrants in the long run. The price elasticity Ei of the firm’s demand

curve Di at the equilibrium price and output is given by the formula:

(2)             Ei = (EM/ i) – {[(1- i)/ i]εM i} = [EM – (1- i)εM i]/   i


where EM is the price elasticity of demand for the market,      i   is the firm’s fractional share of the

market, and εM i is the elasticity of supply of all other firms (including potential entrants for the

long-run demand curve). So long as the share of firm i is small, say 0.001, we say that the firm

will behave as a price taker because the first term will be so large for any value of EM which we

are likely to encounter. However, suppose that the innovation is metamorphic and the firm has a



                                                  12
large share of market output, say 0.5. A wealth-maximizing firm will still behave as a price taker

if the elasticity of supply of other firms is sufficiently large, and that quantity εM i is infinite in

the RSM long run with the usual caveat on the absence of pecuniary or other externalities

affecting the market equilibrium.

       A myopic short-run-profit maximizer might attempt to reduce output and raise price, to

equate short-run marginal revenue and marginal cost, but the resulting entry of new generic firms

will reduce future prices and profits for an extended period. This apparent contradiction between

profit maximization and wealth maximization reflects the failure to account in myopic marginal

revenue for the higher future profits associated with higher levels of current output.

       In summary, we have demonstrated in this section that there can be a competitive

equilibrium with proprietary technologies. Even if its equilibrium size is large relative to the

market, an innovative firm employing proprietary technology will face a horizontal demand

curve and act as a price-taker so long as the supply elasticity of other firms is large, as under the

conditions corresponding to long-run equilibrium with entry and exit of generic firms. While the

proprietary-technology firm is clearly better off given its innovation to be in the market, generic

firms earn the same returns in this and other markets and so the displaced firms are no worse off

in long run equilibrium. However, a full welfare analysis requires consideration of all the

possible outcomes of an investment attempting to convert an embryonic invention into an

innovation. Note also that if the innovation can be embodied in a “black-box” machine (or seed)

which cannot be copied or reverse engineered, the innovator must compare the costs and returns

of entering the product market or the market which produces machinery for the product market.

Similarly, if the innovation could be licensed to all market participants with effective protection

for intellectual property rights, that route may be the preferred by a wealth-maximizing inventor.




                                                  13
                    III. The Metamorphic Innovator as a Dominant Firm

       Metamorphic innovations – here, a major cost reduction which reduces the average

minimum cost of production by a large percentage – can result in a firm which produces a large

fraction of the market output. This occurs where the proprietary technology has a much larger

output at the minimum average cost and/or a very flat marginal cost curve. We will analyze this

case by reinterpreting the traditional dominant firm model.

       We first observe that the traditional dominant firm model with a fringe of (generic)

competitors does not apply to a constant-cost (horizontal generic-firm-supply-curve) industry

because the dominant firm’s long-run demand curve given in equation (1) has infinite elasticity

and, the firm behaves as a price taker as we saw in the previous section. Thus the discussion in

this section is confined to the case of an upward-sloping long-run supply curve for an industry

originally made up solely of generic firms.

       Figure 3 is the standard dominant firm model, traditionally used to analyze the pricing

behavior of a dominant producer firm 1 (say, OPEC) given the supply of a competitive fringe of

price-takers. This figure can similarly illustrate the wealth-maximizing output for an innovating

firm 1 which replaces much but not all of the production of the generic firms, leaving a

competitive fringe. Before firm 1 enters, we would have the RSM long run competitive solution

in which a large number of generic firms produce an industry output of Q' which is sold at the

market clearing price P'. Now the demand curve faced on entry by firm 1 is simply the

negatively sloped excess demand curve D1 of the generic industry. The demand for the output of

firm 1 is thus 0 at the competitive price P' and increases until it corresponds to the entire market

demand curve at prices so low that all generic firms have left the market.            The wealth-




                                                14
maximizing innovator firm 1 produces Q1 where its long-run marginal cost MC1 equals its long-

run marginal revenue MR1, which can occur to the left or right of firm 1’s minimum long-run

average cost. Given firm 1’s output Q1, the generic firms will supply QM      1   for a total market

output of Q* corresponding to the market clearing price P* on the market demand curve. Note

that consumers unambiguously benefit from the entry of the dominant firm since the new market

price P* is lower than the competitive (generic-firms only) equilibrium price P'.

       Figure 4 presents the conventional static welfare analysis. Entry of the innovating firm 1

increases consumer surplus by the entire trapezoid bounded by the horizontal lines at P' and P*,

the vertical axis and the industry demand curve, but the unshaded portion of this gain to

consumers is producer surplus lost by the generic firms. The lighter shaded triangle on the right

is the pure gain in consumer surplus. The darker shaded triangle to its left represents resources

released from this industry but not counted in the third component of social welfare gain which is

the producer surplus of firm 1 measured by the lightly shaded quasi-rents rectangle representing

firm 1’s output Q1 times its margin between P* and its average costs (again exclusive of the cost

of the innovation). Thus, in this case consumers are unambiguously better off and their gains

more than offset the loss of producer surplus by the generic firms. In addition, social welfare is

enhanced by resources released from the industry and by the producer surplus of firm 1.

       This static welfare analysis is fundamentally incomplete even if the gains are compared

to the actual costs of creating the particular proprietary technology utilized by firm 1. It leaves

out the uncertainty of the outcome – of which creating a dominant firm is only one possibility

and failure is another. Therefore, welfare analysis must properly be applied only to the totality

of the national innovation system and not to particular outcomes.




                                                15
       There is a difficulty in the standard dominant firm model generally including its

application here to a major innovator. The difficulty arises from taking the supply curve of the

generic industry as independent of the output of firm 1 and taking the cost conditions of firm 1 as

independent of the output of the generic firms. When the model is applied to an extractive

industry in which there are different qualities of deposits and the dominant firm has a vastly

larger, high quality deposit, the cost-independence assumptions make perfect sense. But then the

fringe of price takers can hardly be characterized as identical generic producers. Upward sloping

supply curves for more standard industries are usually justified either by increases in industry

output driving up the supply price to all firms of a scarce specialized input or by technical

connections among the generic firms as when they use a common resource such as fishing

grounds, clean water, or clean air.

       If the innovative technology does not require the scarce or common resource then Figures

3 and 4 are properly drawn. Suppose instead that the innovative technology only reduces, for

example, the amount of the scarce input used per unit of output. Then a second generic-firm

supply curve SM   1   should be drawn given the equilibrium firm 1 output (and implied use of the

scarce input) Q1 and the cost curves for firm 1 should be drawn given the equilibrium generic

firm output QM 1. Taking account of these interdependencies both reduces the illustrated gains

from the innovation and greatly complicates the diagram. We leave the detailed analysis to our

agenda for future research.



             IV. The Metamorphic Innovator as Welfare-Enhancing Monopolist

       Next, we consider the case of an innovating firm which creates a proprietary technology

for which the wealth-maximizing strategy drives out all firms using the generic technology,




                                                 16
creating a monopoly despite freedom to enter using the generic technology. Figure 5 essentially

replicates Figure 3, except in this case the innovation results in long run marginal costs that

intersect the marginal revenue of firm 1 to the right of the output Q'' at which all generic firms

leave the market.12 This analysis applies equally to the case in which the generic industry is

characterized by a horizontal supply curve and firm 1 becomes a price searcher only at prices

below the minimum long-run average cost of the generic firms.13 The innovating firm’s optimal

price and output are given by P* and Q*. While consumers do not benefit from the innovation in

the case of a constant-cost generic industry when the innovating firm does not drive out all firms,

they do if this occurs and output is increased beyond Q''. Consumers benefit in increasing-cost

generic industries in any case, but benefit more when all generic firms are driven out of the

industry by low prices which maximize the innovating firm’s wealth.

       Note that this is not predatory pricing. The firm is not driving competition out of

business to raise prices. The innovating firm’s long-run optimal price is so low that no firm

using the generic technology can earn a normal return and so all exit. The generic technology is

no longer viable.

       In the case of new products, there was no prior generic industry because there was no

known way to produce the product at a cost consumers would be willing to pay. Since the

consumers now have a choice that they value, they are clearly benefited by the new product.

       Figure 5 is drawn with a sharp intersection of the generic supply curve SM       1   with the

vertical axis. This implies that the demand curve of the innovating firm D1 will have a kink at

the price P'' and output Q'' at which the last generic firms exit the industry. As a result of this

assumption, the marginal revenue drops at this point. As illustrated in Figure 6, the innovating

firm will not choose to increase output beyond Q'' or lower price below P'' if its marginal cost




                                                17
curve happens to intersect the marginal revenue curve in the vertical portion representing this

discontinuity in the price elasticity of demand. This behavior is sometimes referred to as limit

pricing. Consumers are no worse off than before the innovation and are in fact better off in the

case of an increasing-cost generic industry. The innovating firm 1 would of course be better off

if its innovation reduced costs further so that marginal cost intersected marginal revenue to the

right of Q'', but there are bound to be some examples in which the special case occurs.

       Often, but not necessarily, innovations which result in the market structures discussed in

this section are preferable outcomes compared to those analyzed in Sections II and III from the

point of view of the innovator. An informal poll of economists, including a number specializing

in industrial organization, suggests it is more surprising that consumers are generally better off

and always no worse off if a major innovation resulting in a monopoly for the innovating firm

occurs. Once again, the difference from the traditional view of monopoly is recognizing that

innovative technologies are produced in expectation of returns, and would not exist if the

innovation were instead made freely available to any entrant.



                        V. The Metamorphic Innovator with Imitation

       Thus far we have made reference to particular innovation as occurring in the context of a

national innovation system which results in numerous attempted innovations, some of which are

complete failures, others are an improvement but do not cover even their own sunk costs for

R&D much less the risk of failure, and yet others which are very to fabulously successful.

Another aspect of success, however, is that it breeds imitation which both limits the duration of

the returns and shifts benefits of the innovation to consumers generally over and above any

initial benefits from increased consumer surplus.




                                               18
       Patented innovations enter the public domain after a fixed limit of time, or earlier if

renewal fees are not paid. Imitation takes many forms: Patents often can be invented around

because they are rarely broad enough to cover the insight underlying the eureka idea. For

example, the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory scientists J. Georg Bednorz and K. Alexander

Müller won the 1987 Nobel Prize in Physics for their 1986 breakthrough discovery that a rare-

earth ceramic was superconducting at much higher temperatures than metals. However, others

quickly discovered different rare-earth ceramics which were superconducting at even higher

temperatures, including the commercially important 77 K (-196°C or -321°F) boiling point of

nitrogen, rendering the IBM patent on the original ceramic of no economic value. In other cases,

such as recombinant DNA, the techniques used to make the discovery involve so much tacit

knowledge that natural excludability limits the ability of other scientists to apply and invent

around the discovery.

       Here we consider simple imitation (such as at patent expiration) in which previous

proprietary technologies are incorporated into the generic technology with a lag of T years. Thus

after T years any innovation earns its user only the normal return to the costs to any new entrant.

If there is no intervening innovation, the RSM will apply and all the benefits of the innovation

are shifted to the consumers (and possibly the owners of scarce specialized inputs whose value is

enhanced by the innovation).

       Many high-technology industries are characterized by ongoing innovation. Consider here

the case of a technology leader (firm 1) and a fringe of imitators using the technology leader’s

technology of T years prior vintage. We continue to concentrate on cost-saving innovations

rather than quality improvements, but expect future research to obtain similar results for the




                                                19
latter types of ongoing innovation. The equilibrium in any given year can be illustrated by

Figures 2, 3, 5, or 6, depending on the nature and pace of innovation.

       Assume for clarity that the technology leader’s R&D program is achieving ongoing cost

reductions of R percent per year. Then the minimum long-run average cost of firm 1 (MLRAC1)

will equal a fraction of the imitative generic technology firms’ MLRACM 1:

(3)                            MLRAC1 = MLRACM 1/(1 + r)T,

where r = R/100. In practice ongoing innovations tend to also shift out the output q(MLRACi)

q*i corresponding to the MLRAC of firm i, so we assume an increasing scale growth rate S:

(4)                            q*1 = (1 + s)T q*M   1


where s = S/100. Further, the demand curve for the industry will shift out horizontally at a

growth rate G equal to the income elasticity of demand for the product times the growth rate of

aggregate income.

V.A. Innovative Leader with Generic Imitators in Competitive Equilibrium

       Suppose that the generic and proprietary technologies involve no pecuniary or technical

externalities so that the industry has a flat long-run generic supply curve at any instant of time

which is shifting downward at R percent per annum once the technology leader has been

innovating for more than the T-year life of a proprietary technology. So long as there are some

imitating generic firms, the equilibrium illustrated in Figure 7 will look essentially the same as in

Figure 2 – competition with a proprietary technology. Table 2 summarizes some results for this

simple model of innovation with competitive imitation.

       The first thing to note is that with only a temporary cost advantage over its imitators, the

innovative leader still enjoys a cost advantage k which is increasing in both the imitation lag T

and the rate of innovative cost reduction per year R (or r in decimal terms). Unless the marginal




                                                 20
cost curve is vertical at the quantity corresponding to MLRAC1, the innovative leader will

produce more than that quantity and have a margin of quasi-rents toward its (excluded) R&D

costs that is less than its percentage cost advantage. The leader’s output will accordingly exceed

that of a representative generic imitator by more than its absolute scale advantage. Once a

steady-state growth equilibrium such as described by “Moore’s Law” has been achieved, total

industry output will grow according to both income and price effects on demand. Price falls at R

percent per year governed by the fall in the imitators’ MLRACM 1. We cannot generally say

whether industry sales will rise or fall relative to GDP or even in absolute terms, since this

depends on the price elasticity of demand as well as the rates of fall in costs and income induced

increases in demand. It is similarly ambiguous whether the market share of the technology

leader will increase, decrease, or stay steady. This uncertainty arises because the growth in the

size of the leader depends on the growth rate of the output corresponding to its MLRAC1, while

the size of the industry will grow according to both income and price effects on demand.

       There can be multiple innovating leaders in this industry with no strategic interaction so

long as the imitative generic fringe can still be characterized as determining the industry price

with an imitation lag behind the industry leaders. However, even if the industry price is set by

lagged imitation by generic imitators, multiple innovating leaders will likely involve strategic

interaction on R&D since they are likely to be able to imitate each others innovations much more

quickly than non-innovating imitators. Therefore, we will leave further investigation of this

market structure to future research.

V.B. Continuing Metamorphic Innovation by a Welfare-Enhancing Monopolist

       Analysis of the case of a monopolist engaged in ongoing innovations which are

potentially usable by generic technology entrants after a lag T is similar to that for imitated price-




                                                 21
taking innovators, but inherently messier. We examine only the shifting proprietary and generic

technologies in Figure 8, leaving out the demand shifts which are of second order of magnitude

for metamorphic progress and would further clutter the analysis. Moving from one year to the

next (indicated by a ' sign), we see that the decline in the cost curves due to technology

improvement will reduce the wealth-maximizing price and increase the corresponding quantity

of output. This provides further benefits to consumers. An interesting feature of this case is that

the lagged availability of technological improvements to potential imitative generic entrants

progressively lowers what would be the comparable competitive equilibrium price and the price

at which some entry will occur. Whether that feature has any impact would depend on the

precise shape of the demand curve and position of the cost curves for the proprietary and generic

technologies.

       Addition of income-induced demand shifts over time as in Section V.A above would

work to reinforce the increase in output of the innovating monopolist, but offset the price

decrease in whole or part or even – if large enough relative to the pace of innovation – could lead

to increasing prices over time. Of course the same would be true for the competitive equilibrium

price in a market with an upward-sloping supply curve which shifts down due to technology

improvements while output is simultaneously shifting out due to higher income.



                        VI. Conclusions and Agenda for Future Work

       Invention, innovation, and technology have been long compartmentalized in economics,

viewed as add-ons for specialists rather than playing any central role in the basic theory. Indeed,

the standard model’s dismissive theoretical treatment of technology as an engineering statement

relating maximum possible output to each combination of inputs makes economists’ model of




                                                22
human behavior as motivated by self-interest appear sophisticated by comparison.               This

treatment is at variance with the fact that advanced economies generally spend 2-3 percent of

GDP on research and development – an amount equal in magnitude to around 10% of gross

domestic investment.     As a leading innovator, American corporate wealth is increasingly

concentrated in intellectual property.

       Omission of technological change does not simply gloss over descriptive detail; it leads

us astray when we make policy recommendations on subjects ranging from intellectual property

to anti-trust policy. Almost any economist would argue that R&D which leads to improved

technology at a firm in a competitive industry is better for consumers than one that creates

conditions such that firm can and does drive all competitors out of business and sets prices as a

monopolist. But we have shown in this paper that exactly the opposite conclusion is correct. If

the competitive price-taking industrial organization is maintained, the generic firms set the price

and all or most of the benefits of the innovation are likely to be captured by the innovator. When

the change is sufficiently large and increases scale advantage, the wealth-maximizing innovator

sets a price lower than that at which any competitive firm using the generic technology can

survive, the gains to consumers are assured and can be quite large.          In this case the cost

difference between the innovator and the generic firms is so great that the latter are irrelevant to

the pricing decision of the innovator.

       The totality of possible outcomes drives the national innovation system, and the returns to

a particular successful technology cannot be compared to its own direct investment costs. Eureka

moments are hardly ever self-enabling and incentives are required for high-risk investment in an

attempt to turn inspiration into innovation. The alternative to a valuable proprietary innovation is

not the same innovation freely available but the unchanged generic technology.




                                                23
       Growth is concentrated in any country at any time in a few firms in a few industries that

are achieving metamorphic technological progress. The best innovators develop a stream of

innovations so that technological leaders can maintain their status as dominant firm or

monopolist for extended periods of time despite lagged diffusion into the free generic

technology, and consumers’ benefits grow larger over time as the cost saving grows.

       This paper has synthesized ideas developed by many scholars over many decades. An

impressive amount of the work was done by affiliates of the productivity program at the National

Bureau of Economic Research, led until recently by the sorely missed Zvi Griliches. The first

item on the agenda for future work which we are proposing is to make these lessons a central

part of the economist’s standard model. We believe we have made the case that can and should

be done but have no illusions that our efforts here cannot be substantially improved.

       We have only essayed incorporating technological change in the form of cost reduction

into the competitive, dominant firm, and monopoly models. Much innovation takes the form of

creating entirely new products or improving the characteristics of existing products. We see the

most obvious next steps to integrate such innovations (as well as cost reductions) into

monopolistic competition and oligopoly models.

       The ultimate goal is to develop models of innovation for the economy as a whole in

which new industries emerge and old ones decline and exit. This model would include an

explicit role for advances in basic science and engineering and conditions shaping the

transmission of the new, often tacit knowledge to firms. A way station on this path would be

explicit treatment of the ongoing replacement by new innovators of firms grown large through

prior innovation.




                                                24
                                        References

Arrow, Kenneth J., "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention," in

       Richard R. Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and

       Social Factors, N.B.E.R. Special Conference Series vol. 13, Princeton, NJ: Princeton

       University Press, 1962.

Bartelsman, Erik, and Mark Doms, “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal

       Microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature, September 2000, 38: 569-594.

Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, “Growing by Leaps and Inches: Creative Destruction,

       Real Cost Reduction, and Inching Up,” Economic Inquiry, 2003, 41: 1-19.

Darby, Michael R., and Lynne G. Zucker, “Grilichesian Breakthroughs: Inventions of Methods

       of Inventing and Firm Entry in Nanotechnology,” Annales d’Economie et Statistique,

       2006 in press.

DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski, “The Price of Innovation: New

       Estimates of Drug Development Costs,” Journal of Health Economics, 2003, 22: 151-

       185.

Fogel, Kathy, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, “Corporate Stability and Economic Growth:

       Is What’s Good for General Motors Good for America?” paper presented at the Policy

       Seminar, UCLA Anderson School, November 4, 2005.

Friedman, Milton, Price Theory, Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing Company, 1976.

Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,”

       Econometrica, October 1957, 25(4): 501-522.

Griliches, Zvi, “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic

       Literature, December 1990, 28(4):1661-1707.




                                             25
Harberger, Arnold C., “A Vision of the Growth Process,” American Economic Review, March

       1998, 88(1): 1-32.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center for

       International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), October 2002

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, 1982, 50: 649-70.

Klevorick, Alvin K., Richard C. Levin, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter, "On the

       Sources and Significance of Interindustry Differences in Technological Opportunities,"

       Research Policy, March 1995, 24(2): 185-205.

Lamkey, Kendall R., “Corn Facts,” web page of Kendall’s Maize Breeding Project, downloaded

       November 5, 2005, from http://corn2.agron.iastate.edu/Lamkey/Cornfacts/Default.html

Lerner, Josh, and Julie Wulf, “Innovation and Incentives: Evidence from Corporate R&D,”

       National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. 11944, January 2006.

Moser, Petra, “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century

       World’s Fairs,” American Economic Review, September 2005, 95: 1214-1236.

National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators 2004, two volumes, Arlington, VA:

       National Science Foundation, 2004.

Nelson, Richard R., "The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research," Journal of Political

       Economy, June 1959, 67(3): 297-306.

Nelson, Richard R., and Sidney G. Winter, An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change,

       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98

       (5, Part 2--Supplement): S71-S102.




                                             26
Schumpeter, Joseph A., Theorie der Wirtshaftlichen Entwichling, Leipzig: Dunker und Humbolt,

       1912 [The Theory of Economic Development, Redvers Opie, trans., Harvard Economic

       Studies vol. 46, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934].

Schumpeter, Joseph A., Capitalism Socialism and Democracy, New York, NY: Harper & Bros.,

       1942.

Tushman, Michael L., and Philip Anderson, "Technological Discontinuities and Organizational

       Environments," Administrative Science Quarterly, March 1986, 31(1): 439-465.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby, “Star Scientist Linkages to Firms in APEC and

       European Countries: Indicators of Regional Institutional Differences Affecting Competitive

       Advantage,” International Journal of Biotechnology, 1999, 1(1): 119-131.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong, "Geographically Localized Knowledge:

       Spillovers or Markets?", Economic Inquiry, January 1998, 36(1): 65-86.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer, "Intellectual Human Capital and

       the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises," American Economic Review, March 1998,

       88(1): 290-306.

Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Máximo Torero, "Labor Mobility from Academe to

       Commerce," Journal of Labor Economics, July 2002, 20(3): 629-660.




                                              27
                                              Footnotes

1
    See, for example, Klevorick, Levin, Nelson, Winter (1995).
2
     The generic technology differs from the traditional concept of technology in that it will

generally change over time (as discussed below) in response to the evolution of proprietary

technologies.
3
     Natural excludability refers to the property of many discoveries at the scientific frontier which

can not be practiced without learning the techniques by working at the bench level with those

already adept; this property slows both diffusion to other scientists and imitation by other firms

(Zucker, Darby, and Brewer 1998 and Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong 1998). Zucker, Darby, and

Torero (2002) present empirical evidence of natural excludability in genetic engineering.
4
    For example, Zucker and Darby (1999) showed that countries which rely on national research

institutes have a much lower percentage of their top “star” bioscientists involved in bench-level

knowledge flows to firms than countries which rely more heavily on research universities as the

locus of basic research. Moser (2005) shows for the second half of the nineteenth century, that

invention in countries without patent laws was limited to a small set of industries where there

were other means of appropriability, while inventors in countries with patent laws were

introducing innovations across a much more diversified set of industries. Lerner and Wulf

(2006) report that larger incentives such as stock options and restricted stock for a firm’s R&D

chief are associated with more patents with higher citation rates and generality.
5
    Neither Canada nor Italy invests as much in R&D as do the G-5 countries.
6
     We believe that similar improvements result in monopolistic competition and oligopoly

models, but developing amended versions of those models is beyond the scope of this paper.
7
     Specifically, double-cross breeding produces a first generation crop which is valuable as seed


                                                  28
but does not breed true so that a seed-saving farmer gets a mixture of the inferior constituent

strains combined to create the seed corn. Appropriability can be achieved through maintaining

secrecy about the constituent strains that work for particular soil and climate conditions or –

where available – by intellectual property rights over the use of those true-breeding strains. The

advent of effective property rights for seed corn permitted the switch from double-cross to true

breeding single-cross seed corn beginning around 1960.
8
    This error is related to the “time inconsistency” problem in macroeconomics in which the

central bank wants the public to believe that it is committed to fighting inflation in the future, but

in the present increases money supply to lower unemployment since it cannot now affect the

public’s current expectations.
9
     The Arrow-Nelson-Romer view incorporates two distinct ideas: technological change is

simple (cheap) and nonrivalrous. The main argument in the text is concerned with the former.

However, the latter is frequently not true either. Cell lines may be cheaply reproducible but the

production process involved in producing a drug based on a cell line may be quite complex

involving considerable tacit knowledge embodied in particular individuals.            Most valuable

proprietary technologies are quite complex and embodied in multiple individuals interacting in

an organization’s task routines each of whom individually could not recreate the technology in a

new organization (Nelson and Winter 1982). While the organization is protected from the loss of

any particular individual by redundant knowledge, a potential imitator would have to hire a

constellation of employees to be able to practice the proprietary technology.
10
     U.S. patent law recognizes the importance of both embryonic inventions and co-operative

investment by recognizing priority of invention based on the eureka moment but extending the

time in which an inventor has to file for a patent so long as he or she is diligently pursuing its



                                                 29
reduction to practice.
11
      The existence of a firm or firms with superior entrepreneurial capacity could, in fact, affect

the long-run price and quantity in the industry if it (they) used sufficiently more or less of a

scarce industry factor than the standard firms they displaced that the supply price of that input is

changed at the output which would exist if there were only standard firms. Textbook writers can

be forgiven for deciding to leave that complication for advanced treatments.
12
     Since all the generic firms have exited in long-run equilibrium, our concerns about the source

of the upward slope to the generic supply curve are irrelevant.
13
     In this case the supply curve of the generic industry SM   1   is horizontal at P' and marginal

revenue of firm 1 equals P' until the market demand curve DM falls below P'.




                                                 30
                                        Table 1
 Research & Development Expenditures and Gross Domestic Investment as Percentage of GDP
   and Research & Development Expenditures as Percentage of Gross Domestic Investment,
                                       1981-2000



                             R&D/GDP             GDI/GDP             R&D/GDI
Canada                         1.6                25.0                  6.3
France                         2.2                24.7                  9.0
Germany                        2.5                24.0                 10.4
Italy                          1.1                22.6                  4.8
Japan                          2.6                32.5                  8.1
United Kingdom                 2.1                18.6                 11.1
United States                  2.6                21.3                 12.3
Sources:     R&D/GDP calculated by authors from data in National Science Board (2004),
             Appendix Table 4-43, p. A4-89.
             GDI/GDP calculated by authors from Investment Share of CGDP [GDP in current
             prices] data from the Penn World Table (Heston, Summers, and Aten 2002).
             R&D/GDI calculated by authors as (R&D/GDP)/(GDI/GDP).




                                          31
                                         Table 2
 Summary of Results for Innovative Leader and Generic Imitators in Competitive Equilibrium

Leader’s Cost Advantage (measured at minimum long-run average costs):
               MLRAC M ≠1 − MLRAC1         1
                                   =1−           =k
                   MLRAC M ≠1          (1 + r )T

Leader’s Margin (exclusive of costs of creating technologies):
               P * − LRAC1           η
                           = k ⋅ (1 − AC )
                    P*               η MC

       where AC is the arc elasticity of the leader’s average cost with respect to output and MC
       is the arc elasticity of the leader’s marginal cost with respect to output. Note that AC
         MC/2 so long as the marginal cost curve is concave from above; thus the leader’s margin
       is expected exceed half of its cost advantage.
Leader’s Scale Advantage (measured at minimum long-run average costs):
                 q ( MLRAC1 )
                                = (1 + s )T = β
               q ( MLRAC M ≠1 )

Leader’s Output:
                     q1           q              1    k
                               = 1 = β ⋅ [1 + (     ⋅     )
               q ( MLRAC M ≠1 ) q M ≠1         η MC 1 − k

       The leader’s output exceeds each generic-imitator firm’s output not only in proportion to
       the leader’s scale advantage but also by a factor which is increasing in the cost advantage
       and decreasing in the elasticity of the leader’s marginal cost with respect to output.
Growth Rates of the Total Industry (in percent per annum):
               100 dQ *                                        100 d ( P * Q*)
                  ⋅     = G − EM ⋅ R              or                 ⋅         = G − ( EM − 1) ⋅ R
               Q * dt                                         P *Q *    dt

       where EM is the (negatively signed) price elasticity of market demand. Entry or exit
       ensure that total output of all firms grows according to the income-induced shift in
       demand G plus the movement along the market demand curve due to the market price fall
       at the rate R. The growth rate of industry revenue accounts for the rate of price decrease.
Growth Rate of Leader’s Market Share (in percent per annum):
               100 dσ 1
                  ⋅     = S − (G − E M ⋅ R)
               σ 1 dt

       The leader’s output (and each generic-imitator firm’s output) grows at the growth rate S
       of the leader’s scale advantage; its share grows depending on whether this is greater or
       less than the growth of industry output.



                                                       32
Figure 1. Stationary and Innovative Growth Equilibria




Source: Lamkey (2005).




                             33
Figure 2. Long-run competitive equilibrium for industry with firm
with proprietary technology




                                 34
Figure 3. Long-run wealth-maximizing strategy for a dominant firm
with proprietary technology




                                35
Figure 4. Static welfare analysis for entry into a competitive
industry by a dominant firm with proprietary technology




                                  36
Figure 5. Metamorphic innovation creates monopoly firm with
proprietary technology despite free entry of generic firms




                            37
Figure 6. Metamorphic innovation creates monopoly firm with
proprietary technology and limit pricing




                            38
Figure 7. An Innovative Leader with Generic Imitators in
Competitive Equilibrium




                                 39
Figure 8. Monopolist with Ongoing Metamorphic Innovation




                               40
