                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      RENT PRESERVATION AND THE PERSISTENCE OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT

                                        Raghuram G. Rajan

                                        Working Paper 12093
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12093


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




I thank Peter Gourevich, Steven Haber, Robert Inman, Simon Johnson, Subir Lall, Rodney
Ramcharan, Antonio Spilimbergo, Arvind Subramanian, and seminar participants at Berkeley,
Brown University, Harvard University, the IMF, and the University of Pennsylvania for valuable
comments, as well as the NSF and the Center for the Study of the State and the Economy at the
GSB Chicago for financial support. I am especially grateful to Karla Hoff, Bilge Yilmaz, and
Luigi Zingales, whose contributions to this version have been invaluable. I thank Yannis
Tokatlidis for research assistance. An earlier version of this paper was entitled “The Persistence
of Underdevelopment: Institutions, Human Capital, or Constituencies?”. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2006 by Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Rent Preservation and the Persistence of Underdevelopment
Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 12093
March 2006, Revised June 2020
JEL No. O1,O15,P5,I2,K0

                                          ABSTRACT

When citizens in a poor constrained society are very unequally endowed, they are likely to find it
hard to agree on reforms, even though the status quo hurts them collectively. Each citizen group
or constituency prefers reforms that expand its opportunities, but in an unequal society, this will
typically hurt another constituency’s rents. Competitive rent preservation ensures no
comprehensive reform path may command broad support. The roots of underdevelopment may
therefore lie in the natural tendency towards rent preservation in a divided society.


Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu
                                             -1-




       Why are reforms in underdeveloped countries so difficult? One view is this is because
in many underdeveloped countries the elite maintain their rents by forcing suboptimal
policies on the rest of the population through oppressive political institutions. Yet political
institutions do change. Unfortunately, emancipation, independence, and even
democratization have not resulted in growth-enhancing reforms. Unless these changes in
political institutions are a complete sham – and no one witnessing elections in poor countries
like India could conclude that – the answer must lie elsewhere.

       One possibility (see William R. Easterly 2002 and 2006) is that economists simply do
not know what it takes to lift countries out of poverty, and that development is a consequence
of countries hitting upon the right policies through trial and error or even by chance alone. If
one is unwilling to accept this very real possibility that we know little, the puzzle becomes
deeper. Why do citizens of poor countries, who have obtained the political power to vote out
old elites, find it so hard to enact the right policy reforms that will lift them out of poverty?

       Let me explain my answer. Let a constituency be a group where each member has the
same factor endowments (such as education), and therefore similar preferences over policies
even without being organized. 1 I start with the observation that in elite dominated societies,
the oppressed are typically not a uniform homogenous group. Instead, they themselves are
divided into separate constituencies through substantial differences in endowments. These
divisions are sometimes created by the elite, though what matters in this paper is not where
the divisions come from but that they exist. 2




1
  I prefer the term constituency rather than interest group or class. Interest groups (e.g.,
textile workers) typically are much narrower than my notion of constituency (e.g., the
educated), and imply organization (and thus, possibly, institutions), while the term “class”
has prior associations (e.g., linked to the ownership of the means of production) that may
confuse rather than enlighten.
2
  In hierarchical societies such as India, for example, the British simply inserted themselves
at the top of the existing system, and encouraged the continuance of pre-existing caste and
feudal loyalties. Over time, they did favor some communities at the expense of others, but
                                                                                      (continued)
                                            -2-




       Now consider an economy where elite oligopolists own the only firms in town and
there are two other, “oppressed”, constituencies; The educated who can work as managers for
the oligopolists or as self-employed doctors providing essential medical services for all, and
the uneducated, who can work as laborers for the oligopolists.

       Assume that the economy democratizes, but it takes a majority of the constituencies
(two out of three) to vote a reform through. I examine the support for two kinds of reform
policies that are generally thought to be necessary for development: ones that increase
competition by allowing the educated also to open up firms (broadly termed pro market
reforms, which include a strengthening of property rights and expansion of access to finance)
and ones that increase access to endowments such as education (including setting up schools,
expanding seats in colleges, etc.). The interesting result is that under plausible conditions,
there is no equilibrium where comprehensive reforms (that is, enacting both reforms) take
place. In particular, reforms expanding access to education never take place, even though the
direct effect of education is to make a majority better off. Moreover, under a variety of
circumstances, the inefficient status quo prevails.

       The intuition for reform paralysis, post democratization, is simple. The educated are
for pro-market reforms because it expands their opportunities, and they are against education
reforms because it will reduce their rents from opportunities open only to the educated. The
uneducated are always for more education because it will give them access to better
opportunities. The oligopolists would also prefer a more educated work force, because it can
help them reduce the rents currently obtained by the educated, but they are against pro-
market reforms because it creates competition that will eat into their rents. However, the
oligopolists know that if they vote for education, they will eventually have a workforce
(formerly uneducated and the formerly educated) that is united in pushing for pro-market
reforms. To forestall the greater eventual loss from pro-market reforms, the oligopolist will
vote with the educated against more education.

whether this was a Machiavellian attempt to divide and rule as some historians have
suggested is not central to the point in this paper.
                                            -3-




       If education reforms are unlikely to be enacted, the uneducated may turn against pro-
market reforms, preferring the status quo instead. While pro-market reforms create new
employment opportunities for the uneducated, there is also a dark side. The greater
opportunities of the educated may worsen the conditions of the uneducated: The uneducated
benefit from the status quo where the educated have low productivity, and hence low wages,
in manufacturing, because it also implies that other essential services provided by the
educated – such as healthcare -- are cheap. But greater income generating opportunities for
the educated in the formal sector as a result of pro-market reforms will lead to higher prices
for the informal-sector services provided by the educated. Indeed, under a variety of
circumstances, most typically when the capacity of the economy to provide services is
limited because of the small initial numbers of educated and their low productivity in service
provision, the real wage of the uneducated can fall after reforms, even though their own
employment opportunities improve.

         More generally, the status quo in an underdeveloped country constrains the
opportunities of all constituencies except the elite. If we assume the constrained are one
uniform constituency, they would be unified in their desire for reform. It is then puzzling
why reforms do not take place, and the immediate diagnosis is the overwhelming power, de
facto or de jure, of the elite. The solution to the problem of underdevelopment then seems to
be to destroy the power of the elite, often through reform of the oppressive political
institutions. Yet political reform, or changing constitutions, rarely seems to be key to
economic growth.

       In reality, the “oppressed” in an underdeveloped country typically consist of multiple,
unequal, constituencies, each of whom is constrained by the status quo in some way. Matters
are no longer as simple as in the economy with a homogenous group of the oppressed. Each
reform typically expands the opportunities of a hitherto constrained constituency but its
effects on the other constituencies can be uncertain. Indeed, the disproportionate expansion
of opportunities for one formerly constrained constituency can make other constrained
constituencies worse off, either because other constituencies have to share their hitherto
privileged opportunities, or because it increases their costs. As a result, the constrained may
                                             -4-




not act as a unified collective. Instead, they may act like crabs in a bucket, willing to pull
down any crab that appears to be climbing out, with the active help of the elite oligopolist,
who prefers them all to stay in the bucket. The oligopolist may even forego some reforms
that could enhance his rents, for fear that they would unify the crabs in the bucket and allow
them to overwhelm him. Competitive rent preservation ensures the collective choice is
indeed poverty.

         I also examine the effect of other political institutions such as a plutocracy, where
the wealthy oligopolist initially has all the power. In a plutocracy, voting power can change
over time, based on how wealth changes. Two results stand out. First, the plutocracy may
result in more reforms than our democracy, even though political power is more concentrated
– indeed because of it. So democratization need not lead to more reform. Second, to the
extent that political institutions can be changed by those in power, the oligopolist may opt for
democratization when he knows his power in the plutocracy is ebbing, because he welcomes
the paralysis that democratization induces. This may partially explain why it is so hard to
find an effect of democratization on growth – democratization is often endogenous.

       The paper points to two related factors that might hinder development in an economy.
The first is the inequality of endowments that will result in multiple constituencies, each of
which sees reforms differently. The second is limited capacity. Reforms that expand
opportunities will raise the price of capacity, and increase costs for all, including those who
do not have the endowments to take advantage of the reforms. Lower the initial capacity,
greater the price effects and greater the resistance to reforms. Poor unequal countries are thus
more likely to be paralyzed, while countries with homogenous and relatively equal
populations, with significant endowments and productivity, may be more open to reforms.
Perhaps this is partly why it is so hard to find convergence between countries in growth.

       My paper does not address the question of where initial inequality in endowments and
opportunities came from. One important source of initial conditions could be colonization. In
some countries, European colonizers came upon existing, heavily populated, hierarchical
societies following feudal modes of production, and simply displaced the rulers. In others
                                             -5-




that were amenable to plantation modes of agriculture, or mining, they enslaved the local
population, or imported slaves (see Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff 2005). In
yet others where land was fertile and plentiful, the disease environment not inhospitable, and
the local population scarce, the colonists worked the land themselves in small holdings (see
Daron Acemogulu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson 2001).
        In my view, the primary legacy of the early European colonialists were the
differential degrees of initial inequality in endowments and opportunities in their colonies,
and not coercive political institutions (for a view that political institutions are key, see
Douglass C. North and Barry R. Weingast 1989 or Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and
James A. Robinson 2004, and for evidence suggesting political institutions are not key, see
Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer 2004).
My perspective is thus closer to Stanley L. Engerman, Elisa V. Mariscal, and Kenneth L.
Sokoloff 2002, who provide suggestive evidence that initial inequality led to policies or
economic institutions like schooling that reproduced the inequality, and eventually
constrained reform and growth. I offer a theoretical explanation for their evidence.
        The rest of the paper is as follows. In section I, I present some empirical motivation
for some of the main features of the model, in section II, I present a framework, in section III,
I analyze outcomes under different scenarios, in section IV I determine the resulting political
equilibria, in section V I discuss extensions and the literature, in section VI I discuss
implications, then conclude.


                                          I. Motivation.
The key effect in the model, as I have argued, and we will see, is that differences in
endowments lead to differences in the way reforms are perceived, because differentially
endowed people have different ability to take advantage of reforms. To examine whether this
effect is empirically plausible, I use data collected by the World Value Survey (WVS), a
cross-country project examining the basic values and beliefs of individuals coordinated by
the University of Michigan.
A. World Value Survey and Attitude Towards Competition.
                                              -6-




       I focus on the 2000 survey in one country, India. The advantage of examining one
country is that I keep the overall political environment constant across respondents, thus
enabling a focus on attitudes rather than institutions. To identify people’s attitudes toward
competition the survey asks:
         “How would you place your views on this scale? 1 means you agree completely with
the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with the statement on the right; and
if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose any number in between.”

       The statement on the left is “Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst in
people”, the one on the right is “Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and
develop new ideas”. As the summary statistics in Table 1 indicate, the mean over 2002
respondents is 7.8 with a standard deviation of 2.9.
       -------------------------Table 1 approx here ---------------------------
       The survey asks each respondent a number of questions about their characteristics
(age, gender, education, profession, etc.), location (district, size of town/village), and status
(caste). These then are the source of my explanatory variables. I include only those responses
in my analysis where the respondent is described as being either “very interested” or
“somewhat interested”, leaving out those where the respondent is uninterested on grounds
that the responses may be unreliable. Including them does not materially change the findings.
       Start first with characteristics. I code the respondent as young if they are below age
34, middle aged if they are between 35 and 54, and old if above. There are nine categories for
education, ranging from “no formal education” to “university with degree”. I ascribe a
number from 1 to 9 for these increasing levels of education. A number of responders never
had a job (typically if they are students or housewives). In these cases, I code the profession
of the respondent as the profession of the head of the household. I classify the professions
broadly as managerial (including supervisory and professional staff), industrial laborers
(semi-skilled or unskilled industrial and office workers), agricultural laborers, and farmers.
B. Education and attitude towards competition
       In the first specification in Table 2 (column (1)), I include only managers and
industrial laborers, along with indicators for age and gender. In each of the regressions
                                              -7-




described below, I include indicators for the district in which the respondent lives, so as to
absorb local differences. Robust standard errors are clustered at the district level.
       ------------------------------Table 2 approx here ------------------------
       Column 1 suggests industrial laborers are statistically significantly less favorable
towards competition than are managers, with the difference in attitude amounting to about 25
percent of the standard deviation of the dependent variable. In column (2) I include other
categories of respondents (primarily farmers and agricultural laborers), as well as a separate
indicator for managers, and find that managers are more favorable than the average (though
not statistically so) and laborers are less favorable than the average, with the difference in
attitude between the two still being statistically significant at the 5 percent level. In column
(3), I include my measure of educational attainment. The coefficient on education is strongly
statistically significant -- an increase in education from the bottom category to the highest
category increases the respondent’s receptiveness towards competition by about as much as
the move from laborer to manager. Moreover, the inclusion of education substantially wipes
out the coefficient of the manager indicator, and renders the difference between the
coefficients of the manager indicator and the laborer indicator statistically insignificant at
conventional levels. In short, education seems to be a powerful driver of the differences in
attitudes, and seems to be responsible for some of the difference between managers and
laborers.
       Finally, another measure of one’s ability to take advantage of opportunities is one’s
income (as a proxy for wealth). An immediate question is whether education simply proxies
for wealth – after all, the wealthy have a greater ability to get educated. In column (4) I
include indicators for the quartile in which the respondent’s household income lies, along
with my measure of education (the omitted category is the lowest household income).
Education still has a statistically significant and economically important coefficient.
C. How opportunities modulate attitude.
       It may well be that attitudes towards competition become more favorable with
education, not because the respondent sees greater economic opportunities in competition as
education improves, but because education makes an individual more aware of the benefits of
competition. Of course, economists with a more socialist bent could claim that education
                                              -8-




makes an individual more aware of the evils of competition – and this is more plausibly the
learning imparted in India, which still defines itself as socialist in the constitution. At any
rate, it is useful to examine whether proxies for the extent of opportunity associated with
education enhance the effects of education.
        Alfred Marshall 1890 argued that because distance limits communication, cities are
particularly conducive to spread of ideas. This idea, further refined by J. Jacobs 1968 and
Edward L. Glaeser 1999, among others, suggests that education is likely to be more
important in taking advantage of the opportunities opened up by competition in large towns
than in small villages. If this is so, education should be significantly more important in
affecting attitudes towards competition for respondents in large towns, and significantly less
important for respondents in small towns and villages.
       We know the size of the town the respondent lives in. In column (1) of Table 3, we
include in the standard specification (that is, Table 2 column (3)) an indicator if the
respondent is an inhabitant of a large town (more than 50,000 inhabitants), and also an
interaction between that indicator and education. The estimated coefficient of the interaction
is positive and statistically significant. The coefficient estimates in column (1) suggest
education engenders a more favorable attitude towards competition at a rate approximately 4
times faster in a large town than the average. The coefficient of the indicator suggests where
the attitude of the uneducated in a large town lies relative to the district average. The
significant negative coefficient indicates the uneducated are relatively unfavorable to
competition in large towns, where education is particularly valuable.
       -------------------------Table 3 approx here -------------------------------
       In column (2) we include in the standard specification an indicator if the respondent is
an inhabitant of a small town (below 5000 inhabitants), and also an interaction between that
indicator and education. The coefficient on the interaction is strongly negative and
approximately equal in magnitude to the coefficient on education, while the coefficient on
the small town indicator is not statistically different from zero. Thus education does not seem
to alter views towards competition in a small town, consistent with it offering fewer
economic opportunities for the educated.
D. Privileges and attitude.
                                                 -9-




          In India, lower castes (including backward castes, scheduled castes, and scheduled
tribes) have typically been excluded from jobs requiring higher education. As a result, a
variety of affirmative action programs are in place for these jobs to attempt to reverse historic
discrimination. To the extent that the educated lower castes have fewer opportunities, we
should find less of an effect of education on the attitudes of lower castes towards
competition. A similar effect will arise if educated lower castes benefit from affirmative
action in their jobs, and fear competition will erode these benefits. 3
          In column (3) I include an indicator if the respondent is low caste, and an interaction
between that indicator and education. As predicted, the coefficient on the interaction is
negative and statistically significant – and of a magnitude large enough to fully offset the
otherwise positive effects of education on attitudes towards competition. Interestingly, the
coefficient on the low caste indicator is strongly positive. A respondent belonging to a lower
caste is thus typically more favorable towards competition, but more education does not
make them more favorable.
          One way to tell whether this stems from lower relative opportunity for the educated
lower castes or greater relative privilege (from affirmative action) is to examine the attitudes
of the unemployed and the employed among the lower castes. While in general employment
status does not alter the effect of education on attitude towards competition (results available
from the author), it does for lower castes. The estimates in column (4) suggest that while
employed lower castes are, in general, favorable towards competition, they become less
favorable towards competition when they have more education. By contrast, unemployed
lower castes, if anything, become more favorable towards competition when they have more
education. It may well be that lower castes discover the extent of discrimination in jobs
requiring education, and the lack of further opportunity, only when they get jobs (but,
implausibly, not when they are searching for jobs). More likely, affirmative action in jobs
requiring more education makes the educated lower castes relatively privileged. Being
conscious of the rents they benefit from, they turn against competition.


3
    I thank Steve Davis for pointing this out.
                                            - 10 -




       In column (5), I include all the basic indicators and interactions at the same time. The
coefficient estimates are broadly similar, suggesting some stability to the regression
specifications.
       E. Motivation for model
       The empirical results aim to provide some motivation for the model I will present
next. The following effects are worth noting; (i) Differences in endowments – education --
create differences in perception of the value of competition. Of course, this may simply be a
direct effect of education in broadening minds and attitudes, or in changing aversion to risk;
(ii) However, the effect of endowment on perception varies with the value the endowment
has in that environment – in large towns where there are more opportunities for the educated,
the uneducated have a more negative view of competition, while the rate of increase in
favorable attitude with education is significantly higher than elsewhere. By contrast,
attitudes vary little with education in small towns. This suggests an important indirect effect
of education, working through perceptions of personal opportunities and costs, an effect I
will stress in the model.
       The exception to the positive association of education with a more favorable attitude
towards competition is in the case of lower castes. The educated lower castes have a more
unfavorable attitude towards competition than the uneducated amongst them. While
conclusions have to be tentative, this may stem from the educated lower castes benefiting
from more affirmative action in their jobs. This suggests yet again that it is not just the direct
effect of education in broadening minds or allowing greater risk tolerance, but also its
indirect effect in changing the opportunities individuals will face, or the privileges they will
lose, when competition expands, which frames attitudes towards competition (and thus
reform). Somewhat obviously, (iii) the better-endowed may benefit from privileges that will
make them resist certain reforms. This again will be an important effect in the model, which I
now present.




                                      II. The Framework
A. Goods production technology and endowments
                                            - 11 -




Consider an economy with three types of agents: incumbent oligopolists, educated workers,
and uneducated workers. The economy starts out with each oligopolist having a production
technology that enables him to produce θ mα l β of a good where m indicates the number of
workers in managerial positions and l is the number of workers employed as laborers, and θ
is an efficiency parameter. I assume
Assumption 1: (i) 0 < α < 1 , 0 < β < 1 (ii) α + β < 1 (iii) α > β
In words, (i) ensures diminishing marginal productivity of both managers and laborers, and
(ii) implies decreasing returns to scale. When the number of managers is equal (or less than)
the number of laborers, assumption (iii) ensures managers will be more productive. In what
follows, I normalize the number of oligopolists to one (knowing that there are competing
oligopolists with the same technology in the background). The oligopolist is educated and is
different from other educated workers only in that he happens to own the goods production
technology.
       The number of educated other than the oligopolist (henceforth, all quantities are per
oligopolist) is initially e , so the total number of educated is 1+ e . The number of uneducated
is u . In a developing country with substantial inequality, the number of uneducated workers
will be large compared to the number of educated, who will in turn outnumber the
oligopolist. Therefore
Assumption 2: u >> 1 + e >> 1
An educated worker can occupy either a managerial position or a laborer’s position or divide
his time between the two (though he is not more productive in the laborer’s position than an
uneducated worker), while an uneducated person can only occupy a laborer’s position.
B. Services consumption and production.
       In addition to the formal production sector, where entry can be easily regulated, I
assume there is an informal (services) sector, and demand for services is inelastic: Each
individual requires one unit of services per period to survive. It is best to think of these as
essential medical services provided by doctors, but other important professional services
would also fit the bill. Nothing hinges on the assumption of inelastic demand, but it greatly
simplifies the exposition.
                                           - 12 -




       Only the educated can provide these services, and each educated person has to choose
between working in goods production or producing professional services. If she chooses the
                                                                  1+ e + u
latter, she can produce γ units of services. It must be that γ > (         ) so that the number
                                                                   1+ e
of educated is sufficient to provide services for everyone (left alive) in the economy. Note
that I could allow the uneducated to provide informal services also, but it would add little to
the model (where the effects come from liberalizing the formal sector), while complicating
the exposition.
C. Reforms
       Without reforms, everyone who chooses to produce goods has perforce to work for
the oligopolist. I consider two reforms. The first expands access to factor endowments.
Specifically, education reforms allow all uneducated workers to receive an education. For
simplicity, I assume there are no costs to this reform, and the uneducated can then obtain
education for free.
       The second reform expands opportunities by increasing the ease with which new
goods-producing businesses can be set up. The precise nature of this reform can range from a
strengthening of property rights to a removal of licensing laws and other bureaucratic barriers
to entry. Such pro-market reforms allow the educated to set up businesses, and produce
mα l β . Uneducated workers do not have the capacity to open their own businesses, but they
can quit their jobs with the oligopolist and work as laborers in these new businesses.
       Under the status quo, the oligopolist suppresses competition through a variety of
means. These will typically impose substantial inefficiencies in goods production – because
the lack of competition will directly increase X- inefficiencies and because the means by
which the oligopolist suppresses competition, such as keeping the financial system
underdeveloped, will indirectly increase inefficiency. Therefore, I assume θ < 1 . That is, the
oligopolist’s goods production technology under the status quo is less efficient than the
technologies available after pro-market reform.
       Note that each reform increases total output, education reforms because the marginal
product of a manager is higher than that of a laborer (when the number of laborers in a firm
exceeds managers), and pro-market reforms because, with greater efficiency of entrants and
                                             - 13 -




decreasing returns to scale, more entry implies higher output. Hence, the model is structured
so that it is always efficient to have a comprehensive reform. The question, then, is whether
the constituencies will allow it.
       To abstract from problems relating to the transition phase, I assume that reforms can
be implemented immediately. In practice, it takes time to educate large segments of society,
which may further hamper the consensus for reforms.
D. Preferences
       Individuals of a type (that is, the initially uneducated, the educated, or the oligopolist)
do not have different preferences from anyone else of their type, hence it is reasonable to
assume that they express their preferences as a single collective, even though they may not be
organized. I shall term each set of such individuals a constituency. Each constituency is
forward looking, and evaluates the consequences of its current choices on future choices and
outcomes. It chooses the option that maximizes the present value of its future income (net of
what it pays for the services it consumes inelastically), where δ is its discount rate. In other
words, they maximize the consumption of goods, which is the appropriate metric since their
consumption of services is inelastic. I will consider three possible reform strategies –
education only, pro-market reforms only, or both, that is, comprehensive reforms.



                             III. Outcomes under various strategies
Let us first examine outcomes under various reforms (and the status quo), after which we will
discuss voting. Superscript S denotes the status quo, E, education reforms, P, pro-market
reforms, and C comprehensive i.e., education and pro-market reforms.
A. Status Quo.
       Since each individual demands a unit of (the essential) services, total demand for
                                                                           1+ e + u
services is 1 + e + u , and the number of educated producing services is              . Since the
                                                                               γ
oligopolist is also educated, the number of educated not involved in producing services is
              1+ e + u   
m S =1 + e −              . Under the status quo then, per period production of goods is
                 γ       
                                                      - 14 -




then θ (m S )α (u ) β , where the educated who are not engaged in producing services work as
managers producing goods and the uneducated work as laborers. 4
           Because the labor market is competitive (between oligopolists), each worker gets his
marginal product as wage. Each manager gets θα ( m S )α −1 (u ) β while each laborer

gets θβ ( m S )α (u ) β −1 . Furthermore, because the educated have to be induced to provide
services, the price of a unit of services in terms of goods, p , has to equalize the earnings of

                                                                          θα ( m S )α −1 (u ) β
the educated in goods and services production, so p =                                           . Thus the price of
                                                                                  γ
services increases in the earnings of the educated from goods production, a feature which
will be important in what follows. Net of the unit of services he has to purchase, each
              1
manager gets  1 −  θα ( m S )α −1 (u ) β , while each laborer gets
              γ

                                                                 θα ( m S )α −1 (u ) β
(1)                                    θβ ( m S )α (u ) β −1 −                                                           .
                                                                         γ
                                                                                   α + β                    u      
           It is easily seen that service productivity, γ , has to be greater than                         1+ e     +1
                                                                                    β                              
for (1) to be positive. Intuitively, if service productivity is too low, the price of services will
be so high that laborers will not be able to afford it. Because the price of services is
determined by the ratio of marginal productivity of the educated in goods production to their
productivity in service production, this cannot fall until something else gives. In this neo
Malthusian world, laborers will have to “die” due to lack of medical services until their
marginal productivity is raised (and the marginal productivity of the managers falls) to the
point that laborers can just afford medical services. Allowing for this possibility simply
reduces the initial number of uneducated to the point they can afford to pay for services. So
in what follows, we assume the initial conditions are such that

4
    The educated would work as laborers only if their marginal product would otherwise be below that of laborers,
                (1 + e ) α
i.e., only if           ≥ . But because there are fewer educated than uneducated by assumption 2, and α > β
                   u     β
by assumption 1, this will never be the case.
                                                     - 15 -




                  α + β         u     
Assumption 3: γ ≥              1+ e    +1
                   β                  
Now let us examine what happens under each reform.
B. Partial Reforms: Education but no Competition
        When only educational reforms are implemented, all the uneducated become
educated. The oligopolist is still the only producer. Let m E be the number of workers in
managerial positions and l E be the number in laborer positions. Since workers are all
educated, they must get a common wage. The oligopolist will thus set marginal products in
the manager and laborer position to be equal. This implies
                                                                        mE α
θα (m E )α −1 (l E ) β = θβ ( m E ) (l E ) β −1 , which simplifies to
                                 α
                                                                           = . Also, the total workers
                                                                        lE  β
                                                                                     1
employed in production should equal the total available so m E + l E = (1 + e + u ) 1 −  .
                                                                                     γ
From these two equations, we can solve for l E and m E . We have
Lemma 1: The uneducated are better off after education reform than under the status quo,
while the educated are worse off. The oligopolist may be better or worse off depending on
parameters.
Proof: See appendix.


        The educated do not like education reforms because it subjects them to greater
competition from the currently uneducated, diminishing the positional rents they enjoy from
goods production. Their earnings from services production also decrease commensurately.
The uneducated like education reforms because it improves their productivity and their
wages, while reducing what they have to pay for services. The oligopolist’s position is
ambiguous because, in theory, he wears two hats. His net income is
                                                               1
(2)                           (1 − α − β )θ mα l β
                                                + αθ mα −1l β 1 − 
                                                               γ
        The first term is his rent from the oligopoly, which is dependent on his margin of
profits from production, (1 − α − β ) , and total production, θ mα l β . Clearly, total production
                                              - 16 -




increases as a result of education reforms, because more workers can be placed in high
productivity activities. So rents from oligopoly would push the oligopolist towards
welcoming education reforms. However, the second term reflects the net income the
oligopolist gets because he is also one of the educated (and thus works as a manager in his
own firm). If oligopoly rents are small – either because profit margins are small ( α + β ≈ 1 ) –
or because the number of workers is small and production is small relative to managerial
wages, then the oligopolist’s incentives become aligned with the initially educated. It turns
out that the oligopolist’s preferences over education versus the status quo will be immaterial
to the final outcome. Nevertheless, because the number of workers is large by assumption 2,
so long as profit margins are not too small the oligopolist’s focus will be on maximizing his
oligopolistic rents. So he will prefer education over the status quo.
         Even if it improves the lot of a majority of voting constituencies, an endowment-
enhancing reform like education will not be undertaken. We will see why shortly.
C. Partial Reform: Pro-market competition but no education.
         When only pro-market reforms are enacted, the educated can open their own
businesses. Because the oligopolist loses his oligopoly, he will now be no different from any
of the other educated. Diminishing returns ensure that an educated worker will never work
for another educated worker. This is because he can always get more by opening his own
firm (which has the same technology as the firm opened by any other educated worker) and
get both the wage of a manager as well as the rents of a proprietor. So post-reform, there will
be m S firms, where m S defined earlier is the number of educated not engaged in producing
services. Each firm will be owned and managed by one of the educated, and will employ
       u
lP =     S
           uneducated laborers. The laborers will earn β (l P ) β −1 , the owner manager will get
       m

          P β                                               (1 − β )(l P ) β
(1 − β )(l ) , and the price of a unit of service will be                      .
                                                                   γ
Lemma 2: The educated are better off with only pro-market reforms than under the status
quo. The oligopolist and the uneducated may be better off or worse off depending on
parameters.
Proof: See appendix.
                                               - 17 -




        The earnings of the educated in production will now be higher, both because they are
more productive, and because they get the rents from ownership. As a result, the price of
services will also go up proportionally. The educated will be better off.
        The position of the oligopolist is ambiguous for the reasons discussed above, and
because he produces with a more inefficient technology under the status quo than after pro-
market reforms. If his rents from oligopoly under the status quo are low (because the profit
margin (1 − α − β ) is low, or because total production is low because productive efficiency θ
under the status quo is low, or because there are only a small number of educated whose
human capital he can exploit), then the oligopolist identifies with the educated and welcomes
the opportunities pro-market reforms bring. We have, ceteris paribus;
Corollary 1: (i) The oligopolist’s net income under the status quo relative to his net income
under pro-market reforms increases as his productive efficiency, θ , increases. (ii) If there is
an e = e ' such that the oligopolist prefers the status quo to pro-market reforms, he prefers the
status quo to pro market reforms for all e > e ' . If there is an e = e '' such that the oligopolist
prefers pro-market reforms to the status quo, he prefers pro-market reforms to the status quo
for all e < e '' . (iii) If there is an u = u ' such that the oligopolist prefers the status quo to pro-
market reforms, he prefers the status quo to pro market reforms for all u < u ' . If there is an
u = u '' such that the oligopolist prefers pro-market reforms to the status quo, he prefers pro-
market reforms to the status quo for all u > u '' .
Proof: See appendix.
        While there may be no value of e or u for which the oligopolist’s preferences switch,
corollary 1 (ii) and (iii) suggest that any such switching point will be unique.
        Typically, in a poor country with a very small number of oligopolists and where the
oligopoly is not too inefficient relative to the conceivable alternatives, oligopolist rents are
high and the oligopolist has an incentive to preserve these rents by voting against pro-market
reforms.
        More interesting is why the uneducated may be worse off with pro-market reforms;
Substituting u = l P m S in (1) and rearranging, we get the net earnings of the uneducated
under the status quo to be
                                                              - 18 -




                                          θ                                 θ             α P β
(3)                                     S 1− (α + β )
                                                        β (l P ) β −1 −   S 1− (α + β )
                                                                                            (l )
                               (m )                  (m )                                 γ
          The first term is their earnings, the second is their cost of services. Compared to the
status quo, pro market reforms increase the uneducated’s earnings by a factor of
(m S )1−(α + β )
                   . This is composed of two effects. The first is the productivity of the goods
      θ
                                                                                    1
production technology increases with reform by a factor                                   . Second, given the ratio of labor
                                                                                   θ
to managers, managers collectively make a lower contribution to each laborer’s productivity
under the status quo because all managers are forced to work for the same firm. Intuitively,
because of diminishing returns, managers crowd each other, an effect which is not present
under pro-market reforms, where each manager can break away to form his own firm.
          Turn next to the price of services. These are higher under reforms by a factor of
 (m S )1−(α + β )   1 − β   
                             . The first term is the increase in goods productivity we have just
       θ           α        
encountered, which should also increase the goods price of services. The second term,
 1− β    
          , which is greater than 1 because of decreasing returns, represents the increased
 α       
earnings of the educated because they can now be owners, while earlier they could just be
managers. What is clear is that pro-market reforms increase the uneducated’s service costs by
a greater factor than it increases their earnings, precisely because earning opportunities
increase disproportionately for the educated – they can become entrepreneurs while the
uneducated cannot. If the uneducated’s service costs are high enough to begin with, relative
to their income, they could be made worse off by reform. We have, ceteris paribus:
Corollary 2: (i) The net income of the uneducated under the status quo relative to their net
income after pro-market reforms increases as the relative efficiency of the oligopolist, θ ,
increases. (ii) There is a γ ' such that an uneducated worker prefers the status quo to pro-
market reforms for all γ < γ ' and pro-market reforms to the status quo for all γ > γ ' . (iii)
There is an e ' such that the uneducated worker prefers the status quo to pro-market reforms
for all e < e ' and pro-market reforms to the status quo for all e > e ' .
                                                 - 19 -




Proof: See appendix.
          A higher relative efficiency θ of the oligopolist’s technology under the status quo
improves the uneducated’s net earnings, and hence increases their preference for the status
quo. More interesting, lower service productivity, γ , increases the size of service costs
relative to earnings from goods. Given that the uneducated’s service costs increase by a
greater factor than do their earnings on pro-market reforms, it must be that for a low enough
γ , service costs will be at a high enough level (relative to earnings) pre-reform, that they will
increase by a greater amount than will earnings post reform, rendering the uneducated laborer
worse off. The change in the number of the educated has a similar effect. Lower the
number, higher will be the marginal productivity of the educated in manufacturing, and
higher will be the size of service costs relative to laborer wages pre-reform.
          In sum, the lack of outside opportunities for the educated under the status quo creates
an implicit rent for the uneducated by reducing the price of services. With pro-market
reforms, this price will explode. The uneducated will measure the loss of this implicit rent
against the benefit of the higher productivity laborer positions that are created by the new
firms opened up by the educated. The lemma above describes some conditions under which
the loss of the implicit rent will outweigh the benefit of addition opportunities created by
reform.
        Let α 0.5,
Example:=      =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 . In Figure 1, I plot for different values of θ
and e the line that separates the region where the uneducated prefer competition to the status
quo from the region where they prefer the status quo. Note that the line slopes upward,
consistent with corollary 1.
--------------------------------Figure 1 here -----------------------------------------------
D. Comprehensive Reforms.
          Now consider both education and pro-market reforms, that is, comprehensive
reforms. Since everyone is educated, and no one wants to work for anyone else, everyone
opens a firm and divides their time between managerial and labor activities. Let mC be the

time the self-employed worker spends on managerial tasks and l C be the time he spends on
labor. Then it must be that if his marginal productivity at both tasks are equalized,
                                              - 20 -




       α C
mC =     l . Also, his time must be divided only between the two tasks, so mC + l C =
                                                                                    1.
       β
                               α          β
                      α   β 
Solving, he produces               through self-employment. The price of services
                     α + β  α + β 
                         α          β
             1 α   β 
must then be 
            γ  α + β   α + β 
                                     .

Lemma 3 (i) The uneducated worker always prefers comprehensive reforms to the status
quo or to partial reform (that is, either education only or pro-market reforms only); (ii) The
educated worker prefers comprehensive reforms to only education reforms, but prefers pro-
market reforms to comprehensive reforms. His preference between the status quo and
comprehensive reforms is parameter specific. (iii) The oligopolist prefers pro-market reforms
to comprehensive reforms. Thus, if he prefers the status quo to pro-market reforms (see
lemma 2), he prefers the status quo to comprehensive reforms.
Proof: Omitted.
        The uneducated worker is always better off when partial reforms become
comprehensive, regardless of what the additional reform is. By contrast, the educated care
very much whether the completion of reforms entails further opportunity (pro-market
reforms added to prior education reforms) or further loss of rents (education reforms tacked
on to prior pro-market reforms). The oligopolist’s preferences are aligned with those of the
educated after pro-market reforms are enacted. Further education reforms only enhance
competition by giving the uneducated the ability to compete, so he opposes them.
Corollary 3: (i) An increase in the number of the educated, e , or a decrease in the
efficiency of the incumbent’s production technology, θ , increases the educated’s net income
from comprehensive reforms relative to maintaining status quo. (ii) There is a level of service
productivity γ ** such that, ceteris paribus, the educated prefer the status quo to comprehensive

reforms when γ < γ ** , and prefer comprehensive reforms to the status quo when γ > γ ** .
Proof: See appendix.
        Intuitively, the educated especially benefit from the outside opportunities created by
pro-market reforms if the number of educated is high (so that employment with the
                                                 - 21 -




incumbent oligopolist is not attractive because the many educated themselves compete down
wages). Furthermore, these outside opportunities are relatively more valuable if the
oligopolist’s efficiency is low. Finally, lower service productivity decreases the number of
educated available for production, increases their earnings, and thus gives them greater rents
to protect in the status quo.
Example:
Let α 0.5,
=      =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 . In Figure 2, I plot for different values of θ and e
the line that separates the region where the educated prefer comprehensive reforms (to the
status quo) from the region where they prefer the status quo (to comprehensive reforms). In
this example, total production when θ =0.9 and e =12 is 11.25 under the status quo, 19.75
under pro-market reforms, 22.75 under education reforms only, and 64.75 under
comprehensive reforms.
-------------------------------------------Figure 2 here -------------------------------------
        Interestingly, the best two reform outcomes will not be achievable under reasonable
voting rules. In order to show this, I have to discuss how voting power and voting is
determined. This is what I turn to next.


                           IV. Electoral Choice and Reform Outcomes
A. Voting and Voting Power
        I assume that each strategy (amongst the reform strategies and status quo) is placed in
pair-wise comparison with every other strategy, and the constituencies vote on which one
they prefer. Each constituency has one vote for each comparison, with the weight of that vote
– its voting power -- determined by the political system. A strategy is implemented only if it
is preferred by a simple majority of the voting power in every pair-wise comparison it
features in. If only partial reforms are implemented (e.g., education only) or the status quo is
maintained, further reforms can be voted on in future periods. All votes take place at the
beginning of each period.
                                                  t, is ν it f ( wit , nit ) ≥ 0 where wit is its
        Each constituency i’s voting power at time=

aggregate wealth and nit is the number of agents who belong to that constituency at time t. I
                                               - 22 -




                          dvit        dvit
assume   ∑v i
                it   =
                     1,
                          dwit
                               ≥0 ,
                                      dnit
                                           ≥ 0 . Also, focusing on the case of a populous, unequal,

developing country, we have nu 0 =u > ne 0 =e > no 0 =1 and wu 0 =<
                                                                  0 we 0 =w < wo 0 =
                                                                                   W . Let
us now consider different ways voting power can be allocated.
B. Pure Democracy
                                                                                nit
First consider what would happen under a perfect democracy where vit =                . In this case,
                                                                               ∑ n jt
                                                                                j


the uneducated would have the majority vote, and they would vote for comprehensive
reforms. This is the ideal case.
C. Imperfect Democracy
         All democracies are imperfect. Money matters, if nothing else in securing advertising
time to inform voters. Oligopolists are few in number but have tremendous money power,
while the uneducated have little money power but are large in numbers. The educated are in
between. Let us therefore assume now that at least two constituencies are needed to secure
the majority (for instance, the combination of aggregate wealth and numbers results in each

constituency having equal voting power, i.e., v=  v=  v=  1 ). If this is not a democracy,
                                               ut  et  ot  3
the vote each constituency possesses could be thought of more broadly as its influence over
policies.
         What is interesting here is not just that the first best is not implemented but that even
policies that benefit two of three constituencies will not be implemented. In what follows, let
us examine the most plausible and interesting case where the oligopolist prefers the status
quo to pro-market competition. Indeed, in many populous poor countries, the rents from
oligopoly would indeed be large relative to any income an oligopolist might generate as an
individual. It is also the more interesting case because the alternative case would have his
interests aligned with the educated. The outcomes in the latter, two-constituency, world, with
the educated having power, are well known – pro-market reforms but no education reforms.
         If the rents from oligopoly are high, it is also likely the oligopolist prefers education
reforms relative to the status quo – because that improves overall goods production and his
rents. Again, this is the more interesting case to one where he is against education reforms.
                                               - 23 -




As we will see, in an imperfect democracy his preferences in this case will be unimportant
for the final outcome. To understand why, we need to consider the dynamics.
Dynamic effects
       Thus far, I have analyzed only the immediate consequences that a reform has on the
payoff of each constituency – the one period payoffs, so to speak. But reforms also impact
the endowment of each group in the next period and, therefore, their preferences. In
particular, consider education reforms. If it is implemented, the uneducated will receive
education and the following period will make common cause with the initial educated
constituency to vote for pro-market reforms. Because the constituencies together will have
the majority, education reforms today will inexorably lead to comprehensive reforms next
period. The consequences of considering the dynamics in this case are simple: the higher the
discount factor, the more the future will matter, and the closer will a constituency’s
preference ranking for education reforms today drift towards its preference ranking for
comprehensive reforms.
       Let us assume a high discount factor in what follows (see footnote 5 for the case of a
low discount factor) so that the ranking of discounted payoffs approaches the ranking of per
period payoffs of the reform equilibrium the economy settles into. Since education reforms
last only a period before they morph into comprehensive reforms, a constituency will rank
them slightly above comprehensive reforms if the constituency prefers education only to
comprehensive reforms in the one-period game, and slightly below if the constituency prefers
comprehensive reforms to education reforms in the one-period game. Preferences are
straightforward and are given in Table 4.
       -----------------------------Table 4 here ---------------------------------------
       The oligopolist prefers the status quo to pro-market reforms, which he in turn prefers
to comprehensive reforms. Given that education reforms increase his rents briefly but
inevitably lead to comprehensive reforms, he ranks education reforms above comprehensive
reforms but below pro-market reforms (while in the one shot game, he would rank education
reforms above everything else).
       In the one shot game, the educated prefer pro-market reforms to everything else, and
dislike education reforms relative to the status quo, and education reforms relative to
                                                - 24 -




    comprehensive reforms. Again, in the repeated game, education reforms, which would
    otherwise be at the bottom, is just below comprehensive reforms (since education reforms
    means one period of education only followed by an eternity of comprehensive reforms). The
    uneducated prefer comprehensive reforms to everything else, and therefore in the repeated
    game, education reforms are just below.
           What is left ambiguous is (i) whether the educated prefer comprehensive reforms to
    the status quo or not, and (ii) whether the uneducated prefer pro-market reforms to the status
    quo or not. Corollary 2 and 3 describe how these preferences vary with the oligopolist’s
    efficiency θ and the number of educated e . We then have four possible regions, regardless
    of the specific parameters of the example. For the example discussed so far, with
=α 0.5,
    =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 , and with the discount factor tending to 1, the regions are
    as in Figure 3 (obtained by superimposing Figure 1 on Figure 2). Table 4 indicates the
    ranking of choices in each region for each constituency.
    Trapped in the status-quo.
           Let the number of educated (for a given number of uneducated) be low and the
    oligopolist be relatively efficient (area A on figure 3.). Because they are relatively few, and
    the oligopolist is efficient, the educated earn substantial rents from the status quo, and are
    against comprehensive reforms. As always, though, they would prefer partial, pro-market
    reforms, to anything else. The uneducated dislike pro-market reforms because employment
    under the relatively efficient oligopolist is quite attractive, and the prospect of paying even
    higher prices for services (than the already high current prices) after pro-market reform is
    daunting.
           In this situation, there is a majority against comprehensive reforms (the educated and
    the oligopolist), against education (the educated and the oligopolist), and against pro-market
    reforms (the uneducated and the oligopolist) relative to the status quo. Hence, the status quo
    will obtain a majority in all pair-wise contests and be retained, allowing inequality and
    underdevelopment to persist.
    Partial reforms
           If the oligopolist is relatively inefficient and the educated are numerous (area B in
    Figure 3), the uneducated prefer pro-market reforms to the status quo, and the educated
                                                  - 25 -




prefer comprehensive reforms to the status quo. There is clearly a majority for pro-market
reforms over the status quo (the educated and the uneducated) and for comprehensive
reforms over the status quo (the educated and the uneducated). But when these reforms are
compared, the oligopolist prefers to side with the educated in favoring pro-market reforms
only, over comprehensive reforms. Thus the economy settles for partial pro-market reforms
even though a majority supports comprehensive reforms over the status quo.

          If the oligopolist is quite efficient but there are also a fair number of educated, the
educated prefer the status quo to comprehensive reforms and the uneducated prefer pro-
market reforms to the status quo (area C in Figure 3). Again, the status quo is not an option
because the educated and uneducated prefer pro-market reforms over it, but further education
reform is blocked by the educated and the oligopolist. Pro-market reforms are again the
choice.

          Finally, if the oligopolist is relatively inefficient but the number of educated is small
(area D in Figure 3 ), the uneducated prefer the status quo to pro-market reforms while the
educated prefer comprehensive reforms to the status quo. No option obtains a majority in all
pair-wise contests, generating the so called Condorcet cycle (where, depending on the order
in which contests are presented, different outcomes prevail). To determine a unique solution,
I need to impose more structure on the voting game without skewing it. Let’s assume,
therefore, that all the reform strategies are ranked by each constituency. The strategy that has
the lowest sum of ranks is chosen. If two strategies tie, a final vote between the two is held.
          -------------------------------Table 2 here --------------------------------------
          As Table 2 suggests, the earlier choices continue to be preferred in regions A, B, and
C, but we now get pro-market reforms in region D also (note that in this region, because the
uneducated are made worse off by the reform, reforms increase inequality). More generally,
pro-market reforms take place in the south east areas of Figure 3. Therefore, using corollary
2 and 3, and the analysis above, if the discount factor is high;
                                             - 26 -




Lemma 4: (i) Education reforms never take place; (ii) For any e , if there is a θ = θ e such

that pro-market reforms take place, they will take place for all θ < θ e ; (iii) For any θ , if

there is an e = eθ such that pro-market reforms take, they will take place for all e > eθ .
         Endowment enhancing education reforms never take place. Partial, pro-market
reforms are more likely to take place if the number of the educated (that is, the middle class)
expands, or if goods productivity under the oligopolist worsen.
         Finally, note that a decrease in γ shifts the uneducated’s indifference curve between
the status quo and pro-market reforms to the right in Figure 3, and thus shrinks the region in
which reform takes place. Intuitively, ceteris paribus, the increase in service costs as a result
of reforms will be higher when service productivity is low. This means the uneducated will
tolerate greater productive inefficiency from the oligopolist, or require a greater number of
the educated to offset the increase in service costs, before voting for pro-market reform. Put
differently, low productivity in one sector can create resistance to pro-market reforms in
another sector, leading to a low productivity status quo equilibrium.
The Difficulty of Comprehensive Reforms
         Lemma 4 presents a very bleak picture about the possibility of moving away from the
status quo. Indeed, under no circumstances are education reforms undertaken, suggesting the
persistence of a grossly undereducated population in this economy. The underlying reason
for too little reform is not because of the coercive power of the oligarchy as in other models.
Indeed, the oligopolists have no more power than the other constituencies, and as we will see,
might even reform more if they had more power. Too few reforms take place because of the
active connivance of those whose opportunities and capacities are limited by the status quo
today.
         The reason is interesting. Typically, reforms expand choice and competition, as well
as endowments and capacities. Therefore we think they should be welcomed by all except the
very privileged rentiers. In an unequal and unreformed society, however, all manner of rents
abound. It is not only the elite who enjoy rents, so in a manner do many other constituencies.
The competitive attempt to preserve one’s rents while limiting the rent of others is what leads
here to reform paralysis.
                                           - 27 -




       Specifically, opportunity-enhancing reforms are welcomed by those who have the
endowments to take advantage of them. But such reforms can also put tremendous pressure
on the limited capacity of the economy (e.g., to provide services), which then serves as a tax
on everyone, thus creating opposition to the reforms. But endowment- or capacity-enhancing
reforms might be even more strongly opposed when opportunities are limited, because this
dilutes the rents of those who have access to these opportunities by dint of their privileged
access to endowments. The solution might be to expand opportunities and endowments at the
same time, but clearly this does not command the support of those who can get everything
they want, and preserve some rents, with much more selective reforms. The key insight here
is that the rents of the underprivileged (both the educated and the uneducated) are not
monotonically increasing in every reform. A related insight in this model is that the pro-
market reforms that are actually enacted can make the poor uneducated worse off, even
though competition increases, production expands, and jobs pay more. Reform and growth
can be immiserizing for some.
       A second, less-commented-upon, effect of reforms is to change constituencies and
thus power. The oligopolist fears education reforms – not because the educated participate
more, are more aware of the issues, or have a pre-disposition towards freedom – but because
education reforms will create a united constituency for further reforms. Not only will the now
larger constituency of the educated have similar preferences on economic issues, and thus be
harder to divide or block, it is also likely to be more internally competitive and thus have
fewer rents to protect.
       A final effect is that of productivity in essential sectors (medical services in the
model) that are not directly affected by the reform. To the extent that productivity, and thus
capacity here, is low, these sectors compete for key factors (the educated) with the sectors
that have been freed by reforms, excessively increasing the rents accruing to the key factors,
and turning a number of constituencies who are deficient in the key factors and who have not
benefited from the reforms against it. Low productivity in essential sectors (which may be
                                            - 28 -




hard to reform) thus is an additional factor to the inequality and paucity of endowments in
limiting reforms. 5
D. Plutocracy and Dynamic Power Shifts.
       Thus far, I have examined perfect democracy and an imperfect (but realistic)
democracy. What if we had a plutocracy – where only the weight of money mattered for
                                                wit
political power? In this case, we have vit =          . Given our assumptions about initial
                                               ∑ w jt
                                                j


wealth, the oligopolist’s preferences will prevail initially. After that, however, political
power will depend on the evolution of wealth. Let us examine what would happen,
continuing to assume that the future is discounted very little, and assuming that all the
income that accrues to a constituency (net of service consumption) adds to its wealth (or
equivalently, assuming an equal propensity for other un-modeled forms of consumption out
of income for all constituencies).
       Over time, cumulated net income will dominate the effect of any initial distribution of
wealth on the eventual distribution of wealth. Therefore, voting power will depend on the
relative sizes of the net incomes of each constituency. Let us now examine outcomes.
Plutocracy and education.
       Clearly, the oligopolist will opt for education reforms (in preference to the status quo)
only if he can be assured that he will continue to have the voting majority post-reform, so
that he can block any further pro-market reforms. This will depend on whether his net
income post reform exceeds the sum of the share of the educated and the formerly
uneducated. Simple algebra suggests that:




5
 What if the discount factor is low so that everyone cares only about their income in the
period after reform, and not in the distant future. Assuming that the uneducated prefer
education only to pro-market reform only (the results are not dramatically different if we
assume the opposite), we get Condorcet cycling in all four areas. If we impose further
structure by choosing the reform strategy with the lowest sum of ranks, we get
comprehensive reforms only in area D.
                                                - 29 -




Lemma 5: In a plutocracy, the oligopolist will opt for education reforms in the initial period
                            1
if and only if (α + β ) ≤     .
                            2
Proof: See appendix.
        Intuitively, for the oligopolist to retain power, it is important that his profits be high
post reforms relative to wages, which will be true only if returns decrease considerably with
scale so that marginal productivity and, thus, wages, for working constituencies are low. In
other words, a plutocracy may produce education reforms, but only if the power of the elite is
likely to remain undisturbed by the reforms.
        What if this condition is not satisfied? Now the oligopolist will not choose education
reforms, for he knows that it will inevitably lead to his least preferred alternative,
comprehensive reforms. The extent of reform now will depend on the preferences (and
wealth) of the different constituencies.
The Rise of the Bourgeoisie
        It is easily shown that the aggregate income of the educated will always exceed the
aggregate income of the uneducated under either the status quo or under pro-market reforms.
Then
                                  1                              (u + 1 − e )α
Lemma 6: (i) If (α + β ) >          and (e − 1)α > (1 − α )m S −               , where m S defined
                                  2                                    γ
earlier is the number of educated engaged in production, the status quo will prevail until the
wealth of the educated exceeds half the total wealth, after which pro-market reforms will be
enacted. (ii) There is an α * such that the conditions in (i) are satisfied iff α > α * . (iii) An
increase in γ leads to an increase in α * .
Proof: Appendix.
        The first condition in Lemma 6 (i) is simply that the condition for lemma 5 does not
hold. The second condition in 6 (i) is that the net income of the educated exceeds the sum of
the net incomes of the uneducated and the oligopolist (when γ is high, this reduces to
α > 0.5 ). Lemma 6 (ii) indicates that the higher the productivity of managers under the status
quo, α , the more likely this condition is to be satisfied. The income share of the educated
under the status quo is then high enough that they will eventually obtain a majority share of
                                             - 30 -




the wealth and voting power, and force through pro-market reforms. The intuition behind
Lemma 6 (iii) is that the lower the productivity of the educated, γ , in providing services, the
greater their share of the income for any level of productivity in goods production. Thus
goods productivity and services productivity have opposing effects on the aggregate income
share of the educated – low productivity γ in essential services leads to fewer educated
going into manufacturing, where higher productivity α and small numbers will keep their
wage high, allowing the educated to charge a higher price for services and extract a higher
share of overall net income.
                        1                              (u + 1 − e )α
Lemma 7: If α + β >       and (e − 1)α ≤ (1 − α )m S −               and if
                        2                                    γ
   γ (e − 1) − (e + u − 1) 
α                           + β > 1 − α − β , then the eventual outcome will be as derived in
   γ (e + 1) − (e + u + 1) 
section IVC, else the status quo will prevail.
Proof : See appendix.
The first two conditions in Lemma 7 (i) are simply that the conditions of Lemma 5 and 6 do
not hold. The third condition is that the income shares of the educated and the uneducated is
higher than that of the oligopolist , so their combined voting power will eventually swamp
that of the oligopolist. Because no constituency has the majority voting power at that point,
however, we will be back to the situation described in the model of imperfect democracy,
where the votes of two out of the three constituencies are needed for any reform option to
win the pairwise contest against another reform option. The outcome at that point will follow
the solution derived in section IVC. If the third condition does not hold, the oligopolist will
retain majority power under the status quo and no reform will take place. When γ is high,
Lemma 7 simplifies to only two conditions : If α + β > 0.5 and α ≤ 0.5 , the outcome
follows that derived in section IV C.
Discussion: Plutocracy vs Imperfect Democracy
       Reforms that reduce the power of the powerful are particularly difficult, because the
powerful are unlikely to be a party to their own loss of power. However, if the currently
powerful see a continuation of their power after reforms (Lemma 5), they may go along with
                                            - 31 -




some reforms. Indeed, to the extent that the rents of the educated are particularly high under
the status quo because of their productivity in goods manufacturing and their inefficiency in
essential services, the oligopolist may have an added incentive for education reforms – it
reduces the rents of the currently educated stemming from their privileged ability to provide
services, preventing their eventually acquiring power and opting for pro-market reforms.
Note also that the all-powerful oligopolist in a plutocracy has the incentive to undertake
education reform even though he would team with the educated in successfully opposing it if
he were in a (imperfect) democracy. Democratizing, in the sense of spreading political
power, does not always help reform.
       Similarly, we see that in region A in an imperfect democracy, the equilibrium
outcome is the status quo. However, if the educated capture a great enough share of the
income (Lemma 6), they will gain power over time in a plutocracy and force through pro-
market reforms. The point again is that concentration of political power in a particular
constituency is not necessarily bad for reforms – it can break the gridlock that could ensue if
power were spread across constituencies with different interests.
       Taking this further, if indeed political institutions could be created by those in power,
it might make sense for the oligopolist to voluntarily choose to democratize to induce
gridlock; If the oligopolist is likely to lose political power because the educated capture a
large enough share, and the other parameters of the problem put us in region A, then he can
convert the political system to an imperfect democracy while he still has majority wealth and
thus political power. By doing so, he gives up some of the political power that anyway was
ebbing towards the educated, but he empowers the uneducated who will join him in opposing
pro-market reforms. By strategically democratizing (or as we saw earlier, educating), the
oligopolist can prevent further reforms.
                    V. Robustness, Extensions, and Related Literature

       The specifics of the model , the endowment (education) and the constituencies
(oligopolist, manager, laborer), are primarily to convey the intuition with a simple but
plausible situation, consistent with the motivating empirical evidence. More generally,
though, the key ingredients of the model are (i) differences in endowments create a variety of
“oppressed” constituencies (ii) a constituency’s endowment determines the extent to which it
                                            - 32 -




can take advantage of a reform (iii) reforms that expand opportunities or expand endowments
for one oppressed constituency can undermine the rents enjoyed by another oppressed
constituency. It is in this sense that the constituencies are in a “Prisoner’s dilemma” situation
vis a vis each other, and the collective choice may be to stay oppressed under the status quo.
This is a fairly general point and it should be obvious it is not dependent on the specific
constituencies in the example, their number (three), or the specific channel through which
expanded opportunities for one group affect the real incomes of another group. Perhaps the
best way to show this is to offer another situation that is analogous to the model.
A. A different set of constituencies and a different set of reforms
       Consider, for instance, a variant of the model, couched in terms of reforms expanding
access to finance and to land instead of education and market reforms. Suppose the economy
consists of a landlord (oligopolist), the liquidity unconstrained (educated), and the liquidity
constrained (uneducated). Suppose it takes access to finance to buy and run a small farm –
for example, to buy fertilizer inputs and seeds and survive bad harvests– as also to obtain the
health and education to be an overseer in a large farm. Suppose also that land reforms
consists of imposing ceilings on private land holdings (or selling government land) so that
more land is available for sale.
        Prior to land reform, both the liquidity constrained and the liquidity unconstrained
work for the landlord, the former as laborer, the latter as overseer. The landless laborer also
rents some marginal land from the landlord to grow food for personal consumption. After
land reforms, overseers will leave to run their own farms, where not only are they more
productive, they also obtain the income from ownership. The greater income possibilities
associated with better farmed land will, of course, boost land rents significantly. The landlord
loses his monopoly rights and opposes land reform. So, also, might the liquidity constrained,
whose wages may not go up in proportion to the higher rents they have to pay on the land on
which they grow food for personal consumption. So the landlord and the liquidity
constrained may both be against land reform.
       Financial sector reforms alone will allow the liquidity constrained to upgrade their
human capital and compete with the liquidity unconstrained for overseer jobs. But it will also
make them more favorable to land reforms, which the landlord opposes. Hence, the very
                                            - 33 -




same structure of preferences arises in this case, with a similar impasse in reforms. Note also
that here it is the laborer who has the additional opportunity, that of renting land, and his
opportunity becomes less valuable when the overseer’s opportunities expand.
       The model, therefore, can be applied across a variety of countries and a variety of
political structures. But reform may be particularly difficult in poor countries because of the
vast inequality in endowments and because the spillover effects between the oppressed may
be much larger as a result of paucity of a common input (land, human capital), or low
productivity in its manufacture.
B. Compensating Transfers.
       Thus far, we have ignored the possibility of compensating transfers that could be used
to buy support for value-enhancing reforms. For instance, the educated might attempt to get
support for pro-competition reforms in area A by indemnifying the uneducated for the loss
they suffer as a result of the increased competition. The difficulty in achieving such transfers
in our model starts with the fact that the uneducated are likely to be disorganized, and will
“vote” their pocketbooks. Of course, the educated could state in public their intent to
compensate the uneducated if their preferred reform is voted through (though even this
requires the educated to organize). 6 In practice, though, such indemnifying transfers are hard
to commit to.
       Without formal modeling for reasons of space, consider ways in which any agreement
could break down. The transfers, amounting to the present value of all the losses the
uneducated suffer over time, will need to be large. If they are made immediately and in a


6
 The lack of organization and commitment may also explain why my model is more
plausible than one where the oligopolists bribe the uneducated with higher-than-competitive
wages to support the status quo. Each oligopolist would like to free-ride by paying his
uneducated workers the competitive wage and thus increasing profits (as compared to paying
them more than their marginal product), while enjoying the political benefits of contented
workers generated by the overpayment by others. Unless the oligopolists are well organized
to detect and punish such free-riding, the “bribe” equilibrium will tend to break down. It may
be that such organization, commitment, and monitoring is possible in developed countries –
witness country wide wage bargains – but it seems less plausible in underdeveloped
countries, where informal labor arrangements would soon swamp formal arrangements.
                                            - 34 -




fungible form, then the uneducated can use these resources to obtain more political power,
and use the power to push for comprehensive reforms. In other words, a transfer of fungible
resources, in practice, also amounts to a transfer of political power. Since the educated prefer
the status quo to comprehensive reforms in region A, the compensating transfer to buy
support for pro-market reforms is unlikely to take place if it further tilts the balance of power
(or if it overly escalates the level of dissipative political activity). More generally, Raghuram
G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales 2000 point out that agreements are hardest to seal through
compensating transfers when the recipient is very poorly endowed, as is the case with the
uneducated.
       An alternative would be for the educated to not offer a lump sum transfer, but instead
offer a steady compensatory payment over time, contingent on the uneducated not borrowing
against this compensatory payment to gain political power (or perhaps offer compensation in
a non-fungible, hard-to-borrow-against form). Here, however, the reverse problem might
emerge. What is to stop the educated from reneging on their commitment to pay (see
Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate 1997), once the agreed upon reform catches on (also see
Avinash Dixit and John Londregan 1998 for other variants of how the inability to commit
can lead to difficulty in concluding Coasian bargains)?
       The alternative of the uneducated bribing the educated to support education reforms
has similar problems. This will inevitably lead to comprehensive reforms, and the uneducated
will have to commit to pay the educated the difference between what they would get in the
absence of the agreement and with reform. There are two problems here in addition to those I
have pointed to earlier. First, the uneducated will be more numerous than the educated, and
with the added earning power, may be too powerful to be able to commit. Second, the newly
educated will be hard to tell apart from the old educated, so the usual tax and transfer
compensations (barring those that discriminate based on when one gets a degree) may be
more difficult.
       Even the process of negotiating over reforms may be fraught with difficulty in a
democracy. The oligopolist and the educated do not have formal legal rights to the rents they
obtain by limiting competition or access to education. The moment they admit to these rents
in a negotiation, they lose the moral high ground in the court of public opinion, which again
                                            - 35 -




could affect their political power and their ability to obtain compensation for the rents. In
short, it might be hard for them to negotiate indemnification for the loss of rights they were
not “supposed” to enjoy to begin with. A detailed investigation of the consequences of
introducing transfers is, however, left to further research.
C. Extensions
        There are many ways this simple model can be extended. I have space only to sketch
some.
Alternative Identities.
        I have associated an agent’s identity entirely with his endowments. In reality,
however, there are many other sources of identity such as ethnic group, religion, gender, etc.
Clearly, introducing solidarity as well as discrimination based on these identities will
introduce a whole new dimension to the model.
        Indeed, it is not a priori clear how alternative identities would affect incentives for
reform. In particular, if the opportunities created by reforms could be limited through
discrimination based on identity, those enjoying rents (presumably, those whose identities
secure them privilege) would not feel so threatened by the reforms (expanding competition or
endowments). At the same time, though, the underprivileged will see considerably fewer
benefits of the reform, and have less of an incentive to press for it, especially if the reform
involves personal costs.
More elastic demand and reforms to the input in short supply.
        I have assumed, for simplicity, that demand for medical services is inelastic. More
elastic demand would have less clear-cut effects but would not qualitatively change the basic
intuition. As reforms raise wages, the demand for medical services will expand, putting
upward pressure on their prices over and above that placed by limited supply. At the same
time, higher prices will reduce demand. On net, the real wages of all those who consume,
but do not produce, services will be affected as in the model, unless they can substitute away
very easily from the services.
        One way to reduce the price of medical services is to produce more doctors, but this
is implied by education reform, which we have already analyzed. Another way is to raise the
productivity of medical services. Even if productivity could be raised (and given that services
                                             - 36 -




are not regulated in the first place, it is not clear that there are “no-brainer” reforms that
would raise productivity), the educated would not like it. Given inelastic demand, higher
productivity in medical services means more educated can be released for production,
reducing the marginal product of the educated in goods production. Of course, if the
consequence of low productivity is that the uneducated vote against pro-market reforms, the
educated may have an incentive to enhance productivity in services and then propose goods
market reforms. This requires both that there be easy gains in services productivity, and that
the loss of rents to the educated from added productivity be outweighed by the benefits of
pro-market reforms. This reaffirms the general point that countries that have (or can enhance)
capacity will find reforms easier. Nevertheless, a worthwhile extension would be to
endogenize differential improvements in opportunities as well as changes in productivity.
D. Related literature
Reform Paralysis
        Raquel Fernandez and Dani Rodrik 1991 and Shang-Jin Wei 2000 offer a different
rationale for why reform may be opposed even when a majority benefits (ex post) from it.
Essentially, if the costs and benefits of reform are uncertain, and spread unevenly across the
population, one can create examples where the electorate will vote against them because of
the expected incidence of net benefits, even though more people benefit (ex post the
realization of uncertainty) from the reform than lose. Of course, by symmetry, it is also
possible to create examples of excessive reform. The interesting twist in Fernandez and
Rodrik (1991) is that if reforms are allowed to be reversed, reforms that were popular ex ante
but hurt the majority ex post will be reversed, while reforms that were unpopular ex ante but
would have benefited the majority ex post are never enacted, so uncertainty is not revealed.
Thus there is a status quo bias against reforms.
        Unlike in Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), there is no uncertainty in my model, and the
mechanism for paralysis is entirely different – indeed my model explains paralysis even
when the benefits of comprehensive reforms to each constituency are large, clear, and
certain. However, in attempting to explain persistent underdevelopment, my model draws on
factors such as inequality, fractionalization, poor education, and limited capacity, which have
been suggested in the literature before. In that sense, my paper does not offer a new
                                            - 37 -




explanation of underdevelopment, but suggests why the factors matter, and in what
combinations they matter most. My analysis explains why reforms have been so difficult in
Africa and Latin America, where a relatively small, educated urban middle class has often
sided with a small ruling clique in opposing wider, deeper, reform (thus echoing an earlier
literature on rent seeking, for example, Anne O. Krueger 1974 or Robert H. Bates 1983, and
more recently Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny 1999).

       Unlike François Bourguignon and Thierry Verdier 2000, where education tends to
increase the political participation of the poor, and thus threatens to subject the rich to
redistribution, education in my model has no direct effect on political power. In fact, the
oligopolist values the more skilled workforce he will have as a result of education. However,
education does give the poor the ability to take advantage of pro-market reforms, and thus
makes them predisposed to further reform, which is what the oligopolist fears. 7
       Oded Galor and Omer Moav 2006 also model spillover effects. In their model, the
differential marginal productivity of human capital between the agricultural and the non
agricultural sector creates the friction. Since education will increase the cost of labor more
than its productivity in agriculture, the landed aristocracy will oppose universal education. 8
More generally, the powerful have the incentive to choose inefficient technologies in order to
maintain a larger share of a smaller pie (see, for example, Karla Hoff 1996). The landlord in
all these models resembles the oligopolist in mine, though the Oded Galor, Omer Moav, and
Dietrich Vollrath, forthcoming, model is one that focuses on political competition between
industrial and rural elites. My model, by contrast, shows how the adverse spillover effects of
reforms can induce the poor uneducated to support the oligopolist.

7
 Perhaps the elite oppose reforms because they have to pay the costs (say, for education).
This certainly could be part of the story but does not explain why expenditures on public
education have stayed limited even as societies become more democratic, especially given
high returns to education.
8
 Similarly, Hans P. Binswanger and Klaus Deininger 1997, an excellent survey of the
difficulty of agricultural reform, discuss the role of the elite large farmers in limiting
opportunities for small family farms in order to reduce the reservation utilities of their
operators.
                                             - 38 -




        My paper is also not the first to argue that the difficulty of commitment to future
actions may lead to paralysis in policy. Besley and Coate (1997) identify three reasons why
optimal policies may not be undertaken by the currently powerful. First, compensation may
not be paid by the future powerful. Second, the action today may change the identity of those
who get elected in the future. Third, actions today may change the preferences of future
policymakers. All three factors are clearly at work in this paper, though the key is that taken
in combination, they can work against any reform obtaining support, even when we allow a
vote to those who are not the elite today.
        Finally, others have examined how to structure reforms such that the loss of rents to
incumbents is minimized, and the oligopolist supports rather than opposes reform. Francesco
Caselli and Nicola Gennaioli, forthcoming, present an elegant model where the right
sequencing helps create constituencies for further reform – in their case, legal reform enables
oligopolists to become more efficient (while allowing inefficient oligopolists to sell out), thus
reducing their opposition to competition-enhancing reforms. Similarly, in my model,
education reforms would create constituencies for pro-market reforms. But this is precisely
why it attracts opposition.
Persistence of Underdevelopment.
        My paper offers an alternative to the institutional view of development (see Karla
Hoff 2003 for an excellent survey), which suggests that persistent coercive political
institutions, set up to assert the power of a ruling elite in the distant past, serve to entrench
the elite and their sub-optimal self-interested policies even today, when they have lost their
initial sources of power (see Glaeser et al. 2004 for an important empirical critique).

        Indeed, underdevelopment has persisted despite a dramatic increase in inclusiveness
and decrease in coerciveness of the political institutions in poor countries – including
independence, emancipation of slaves, democratization, and new constitutions. One
explanation is that there are deep, hard-to-observe, “micro” political institutions that
completely offset any effect of democratization or rewriting constitutions, and continue to
entrench the coercive political power of the elite. An alternative, but observationally
identical, explanation is that the elite also have non-institutional sources of power that are
                                            - 39 -




strengthened to allow sub-optimal economic policies to continue even when the institutional
sources of power weaken. It is implausible though that if the institutional persistence
explanation had merit, a weakening of major coercive political institutions would have such
little effect on economic outcomes. Indeed, once we accept the possibility that the elite have
non-institutional sources of power, then the whole institutional explanation for persistence is
undermined. Could it not simply be that the elite have power from other sources and use that
power to implement preferred policies (see, for example, Abhijit Banerjee and Lakshmi Iyer
2005, Stanley L. Engerman and Kenneth L. Sokoloff 2003, Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi
Zingales 2003a, and Adam Przeworski 2004)?

       My argument in this paper, in contrast to the above literature, is that it is not just the
power of the elite, informal or formal, that matters. Instead, cleavages and inequality among
the rest are as important in understanding reform paralysis and underdevelopment. Put
differently, in any analysis of the effects of inequality on underdevelopment, we have to
focus on the distance, not just between the elite and the rest, but within the rest. 9

       Raghuram G. Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan 2007 offer some evidence consistent
with this view. They examine the effect of concentration of agricultural land holdings in
different counties in the United States on the strength of the banking sector in that county
(with the idea that those who have more access would like to keep finance repressed for the
rest as, for example, in Roger L. Ransom and Richard Sutch 1972 or Raghuram G. Rajan and
Luigi Zingales 2003b). By looking within country, within state, between counties, they keep
9
  There is an extensive literature suggesting that inequality can lead to distributional conflicts
that hamper growth (see, for example, Alberto Alesina and Dani Rodrik 1994). Typically, the
literature focuses on the incidence of costs of public goods and of taxation. My paper
abstracts from those effects, focusing instead on the uneven incidence of the benefits of
reforms as well as the loss of rents. One broad implication – that inequality in endowments
hampers growth – is similar, though I add the qualification that the level of endowments also
matters, with economies with particularly low levels of endowment having low capacity and
thus little ability to absorb the unequal effects of reforms. Also, the literature would suggest a
narrowing of inequality over time as the rich are taxed, while my paper would suggest the
persistence of inequality.
                                            - 40 -




political institutions relatively constant, leaving informal economic power as the
differentiating factor. They find that there are fewer banks in areas with more concentrated
land holdings. Moreover, the relative economic power of the landowners does matter, and the
effect of land concentration wanes as manufacturing accounts for more of the value added in
an area, while it becomes more pronounced when more of the smaller farmers are tenants.
Furthermore, land concentration, when aggregated up to the state level, appears to influence
the nature of state laws, with stronger usury laws, which tend to limit access to finance to the
very poor (see Efraim Benmelech and Tobias J. Moskowitz 2008), more likely in states with
more concentrated land holdings. Finally, it appears that it is not just the most powerful
landowners that are responsible for repressed finance – concentration measured leaving out
the largest land holdings, or other proxies for the homogeneity of the “rest”, seem to be
correlated with financial repression also. This last piece of evidence should only be taken as
suggestive for there might be common factors explaining concentration across the spectrum,
but it indicates ways to tell my model apart from others.
                                VI. Discussion and Conclusion
       When faced with a paralyzed economic and social reform process, people are quick to
blame political institutions. Those with presidential systems seek parliamentary systems and
vice versa, those with proportional representation seek to change to a majoritarian system,
and vice versa, some seek to decentralize, while others to centralize decision making. While
economists have found some effect of these changes (see Torsten Persson and Guido
Tabellini 2002 and 2005 for an excellent overview), they are subtle and far more limited than
one might expect. Indeed, it is hard to rule out the possibility that any observed economic
effects reflect the underlying change in circumstances that prompt the change in political
structures, rather than the effect of changes in political structures themselves.
       The point my paper makes is that economic paralysis may well reflect the broad
aggregation of preferences of the electorate. Even though everyone can see a better place for
the economy to be in, each constituency’s “better place” is not the same as every other
constituency’s “better place” because they start with different endowments and opportunities,
and therefore want to protect different rents. The status quo may be the only common ground
since it happens to be the one everyone is standing on.
                                          - 41 -




       If indeed poor countries are a selected sample that has landed in paralytic status quo
equilibria, it may well take an unorthodox jolt or crisis to shake them out of the paralysis.
Standard nostrums may well not work, especially because there are likely to be a rich variety
of sources of dysfunctionalities, far surpassing what can be captured in a simple model. 10
Nevertheless, my model suggests a significant broadening of access to endowments, as well
as an increase in capacity, may well be a necessary ingredient for sustained growth, and for
popular acceptance of opportunity-enhancing reforms.
A. Where has all the education gone?
       My specific application suggests that spreading education should improve outcomes.
A valid question is then the one Lant Pritchett 2001 asks: Where has all the education gone?
He argues, using cross-sectional data, that there is no association between increases in human
capital attributable to the rising educational attainment of the labor force and the rate of
growth of output per worker. One explanation he offers is rent seeking – an increase in the
number of educated simply increases the number of government jobs that need to be created
to accommodate the politically dangerous educated. A related explanation is demand.
Perhaps education is beneficial only when there is demand for the educated – to the extent
that opportunities are limited and technology stagnant, these may well not exist, and the
educated may turn to rent seeking. Neither of these possibilities are present in my model but
could easily be accommodated.
       A third explanation is that educational quality may in fact be too low to create
additional human capital – indeed, the educated in our model may keep the uneducated quiet
through a separate but grossly unequal system. It may also be that some minimum threshold
of education is needed (both in number of educated, and education per person) so as to attract
investment or create necessary service capacity. Increasing enrollments in primary or even
secondary education may not increase the number of doctors, especially if another factor that


10
  Of course, this does not immediately imply we know which heterodox policies will work.
Indeed, sustained growth may require careful and logical experimentation, taking into
account the local political economy, without being shackled by orthodox nostrums (see, for
instance, Easterly (2006) or Ricardo Hausmann and Dani Rodrik 2003).
                                                   - 42 -




he does not mention is also at work: outward migration takes the best and the brightest
away. 11 All this suggests a simple minded focus on expanding low quality education may
have intrinsic benefits, but may not immediately help growth.
         At the same time, while it might be hard to find evidence of the benefits of changes
in education on growth in cross-country regressions (see Banerjee (2007) for a critique of
such methods), Glaeser et al. (2004) find a strong relationship between a country’s initial
level of human capital and its subsequent level of economic development as well as growth.
Perhaps the problems in finding a robust correlation between growth in human capital and
economic growth have to do with the persistence of human capital (so that short term
changes in the former largely reflect noise) and threshold effects (so that increases below the
threshold have little effect). Perhaps they also have to do with whether the education is
appropriate (i.e., whether there is demand for the kind of education provided so that more
education of the wrong kind does not simply turn into rent seeking). Philippe Aghion, Leah
Boustan, Caroline Hoxby, and Jerome Vandenbussche 2005 show that in US states that are
close to the technological frontier, tertiary education is more growth enhancing, while in
states that are further away, secondary education is more growth enhancing. Moreover,
tertiary education in states that are far from the technology frontier may lead to costs with
few benefits as the highly educated workers migrate to frontier states. In sum, more careful
and nuanced scrutiny of the data seems to suggest that education does help growth.
B. Conclusion
Any uni-dimensional view of economic development and the impediments to it is likely to be
incomplete. The details in each country obviously differ, and any attempt at generalization is
likely to be considered overly sweeping. Nevertheless, there is value in putting forward
theories, and in building the case for them, not so much to exclude other theories or to offer
“the” grand theory of development, but to give economists more options in describing the

11
   In their interesting comparison of developing countries that had sustained growth accelerations with currently
poor countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Simon Johnson, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian 2007 find
that enrollment rates in the former (in both primary and secondary education) at the point of take-off were about
the same as enrollment rates in the latter today. However, an enormous source of difference is the number of
physicians per million people.
                                           - 43 -




impediments to growth in a specific instance. Broadly speaking, I have argued that a key
impediment to development is that underdeveloped economies are divided into constituencies
that prefer idiosyncratic pathways to reform rather than a collectively beneficial one.
Competitive rent preservation ensures the collective reform choice is paralysis and poverty.
 While, to the best of my knowledge, this is a new description of reform paralysis, many of
the features that drive my model –in particular, inequality of endowments and low capacity –
have been described elsewhere as factors correlated with underdevelopment. I would
hesitate, therefore, to say mine is a new theory of underdevelopment. Instead, it offers an
explanation knitting together the various factors and explaining under what conditions they
might matter the most. Remedying these conditions is not an easy task for policy makers,
even if they could be certain of the necessary subsequent policies, which may explain why
underdevelopment caused by these factors is so persistent.
                                         - 44 -




                                       References

Acemoglu Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review,
91(5): 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. “Institutions as
Fundamental Determinants of Long-Run Growth.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, ed.
Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, Volume 1A: 385-472. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing.

Aghion, Philippe, Leah Boustan, Caroline Hoxby, Jerome Vandenbussche. 2005.
“Exploiting States’ Mistakes to Identify the Causal Impact of Higher Education on Growth.”
http://www.econ.ucla.edu/lboustan/research_pdfs/research05_education_growth.pdf.

Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2): 465-490.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2005. “History, Institutions, and Economic
Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India.” American Economic
Review, 95(4): 1190-1213.

Bates, Robert. H. 1983. Essays on the Political Economy of Rural Africa. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Tobias J. Moskowitz. 2008. “The Political Economy of Financial
Regulation: Evidence from U.S. State Usury Laws in the 19th Century.”
http://faculty.chicagogsb.edu/tobias.moskowitz/research/Usury_082607.pdf.

Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1997. "An Economic Model of Representative
Democracy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 85-114.

Binswanger, Hans P., and Klaus Deininger. 1997. “Explaining Agricultural and Agrarian
Policies in Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(4): 1958-2005.

Bourguignon François, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality
and Growth.” Journal of Development Economics, 62(2): 285-313.

Caselli, Francesco, and Nicola Gennaioli. Forthcoming. “Economics and Politics of
Alternative Institutional Reforms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Dixit, Avinash, and John Londregan. 1998. “Ideology, Tactics, and Efficiency in
Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 497-529.
                                         - 45 -




Easterly, William Russell. 2002. The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures
and Misadventures in the Tropics. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Easterly, William Russell. 2006. The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Effort to Aid the
Rest Have Done so Much Ill and so Little Good. New York: Penguin.

Engerman, Stanley L., Elisa V. Mariscal, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. “The Evolution
of Schooling Institutions in the Americas: 1800-1945.” Unpublished.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2003. “Institutional and Non-Institutional
Explanations of Economic Differences.” NBER Working Paper 9989.

Engerman Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2005. “Colonialism, Inequality, and Long
Run Paths of Development.” NBER Working Paper 11057.

Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik. 1991. “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the
Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty.” American Economic Review, 81(5): 1146-
1155.

Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2006. “Das Human-Kapital: A Theory of the Demise of the
Class Structure.” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1): 85-117.

Galor, Oded, Omer Moav, and Dietrich Vollrath. Forthcoming. “Inequality in Land
Ownership, the Emergence of Human Capital Promoting Institutions, and the Great
Divergence.” Review of Economic Studies.

Glaeser, Edward L. 1999. “Learning in Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics, 46(2): 254-
277.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
2004. “Do Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3): 271-303.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Development as Self-
Discovery.” Journal of Development Economics, 72(2): 603-633.

Hoff, Karla. 1996. “Market Failures and the Distribution of Wealth: A Perspective from the
Economics of Information.” Politics and Society, 24(4): 411-432.

Hoff, Karla. 2003. “Paths of Institutional Development: A View from Economic History.”
World Bank Research Observer, 18(2): 205-226.

Jacobs, J. 1968. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage Books.

Johnson, Simon, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Arvind Subramanian. 2007. "The Prospects for
Sustained Growth in Africa: Benchmarking the Constraints.” IMF Working Paper 07/52.
                                         - 46 -




Krueger, Anne O. 1974. “The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society.” American
Economic Review, 64(3): 291-303.

Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.

North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.”
Journal of Economic History, 49(4): 803-832.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2002. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
Policy (Zeuthen Lectures). Cambridge: MIT Press.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2005. The Economic Effects of Constitutions.
Cambridge: MIT Press (Munich Lecture Series in Economics).\

Pritchett, Lant. 2001. “Where Has All the Education Gone?” World Bank Economic
Review, 15(3): 367-391.

Przeworski, Adam. 2004. “The Last Instance: Are Institutions the Primary Cause of
Economic Development?” European Journal of Sociology, 45(2): 165-188.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Rodney Ramcharan. 2007. “Landed Interests in the United
States and the Political Economy of Financial Underdevelopment.” Unpublished.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2000. “The Tyranny of Inequality: An Enquiry
into the Adverse Consequences of Power Struggles.” Journal of Public Economics 76(3):
521-558.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2003a. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists.
New York: Crown Business.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2003b. "The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century.” Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1): 5-50.

Ransom, Roger L., and Richard Sutch. 1972. “Debt Peonage in the Cotton South After the
Civil War.” The Journal of Economic History, 32(3): 641-669.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1999. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies
and Their Cures. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Wei, Shang-Jin. 2000. Economic Globalization: Finance, Trade, and Policy Reforms.
Beijing: Beijing University Press.
                                                    - 47 -




                                                    Appendix

                                                                                          mE α
    Proof of Lemma 1: The oligopolist will place workers in managerial and                   = . But by
                                                                                          lE  β
                               α 1 + e mS
    assumptions 1 (iii) and 2,   >    >   , where m S , the number of educated who work as
                               β   u    u
                                                                                                mE mS
    managers under the status quo, is by definition less than 1 + e . Therefore,                     >    , and
                                                                                                lE      u
    since all workers are used in both situations, it must be that m S < m E and u > l E . Given
    diminishing marginal productivity of both managerial and labor input, it must be that
    managers get a lower wage than in the status quo while laborers get a higher wage than in the
    status quo. As a result, the educated are worse off while uneducated are better off, in part
    because of their higher income, and in part because the price of services, which depends on
    the income of managers, is lower. It is easy to check that total goods production increases
    because more workers can now be deployed in the higher marginal productivity activity of
    management. The oligopolist’s net oligopoly rents are
    θ (m)α (l ) β − α mθ (m)α −1 (l ) β − β lθ (m)α (l ) β −1 = (1 − α − β )θ (m)α (l ) β . Substituting
    l= k − m where k is the (constant) total number of workers, differentiating w.r.t. m, and
    collecting terms, we get the oligopolist’s profits increasing in the number of managers (and
    hence education) if (1 − α − β ) [α l − β m ]θ (m)α −1 (l ) β −1 > 0 . But the first term in parentheses
    is positive because of diminishing returns to scale and the term in the square brackets is
    positive so long as the marginal manager is more productive than the marginal laborer (and
    zero when the profit maximizing point of equal productivity is reached). Hence, the
    oligopolist’s rents are higher with education than in the status quo. However, his net income
    as a manager will be lower.

    To show that his preference depends on parameters, start with the example in the text, where
=α 0.5,
    =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 . Let e = 6 and θ =0.9. The oligopolist’s rent is one tenth of
    total production and is 1.14 under the status quo and 3.14 under education reforms. Even
    though his net income as a manager falls from 0.87 to 0.17, it is more than made up by the
    increase in his oligopolist rents. However, =if α 0.58,
                                                          =     β 0.4 , the oligopolist’s rent is one
    fiftieth of total production. It goes up from 0.25 to 0.88 on education reforms, but his rent as
    a manager falls more – from 1.78 to 0.40. Thus the oligopolist is worse off in this case after
    education reform.


    Proof of Lemma 2:
                                                      - 48 -




                                                      1                              u
After pro-market reforms, an educated worker gets (1 − )(1 − β )(l P ) β where l P = S . Under
                                                                  γ                      m
                         1
the status quo, he gets 1 −  θα ( m S )α −1 (u ) β . Comparing the two terms, he gets more on
                         γ
reform iff
                                                   θα
(A1)                                          < (1 − β )
                                                  S 1− (α + β )
                                    (m )
We know θ < 1 . Also, 1 − β > α by assumption 1 (ii). Finally, m S > 1 as we will show. So
                                                                                1+ e + u 
the LHS of (A1) is indeed less than the RHS. To show m S > 1 : m S =1 + e −               .
                                                                                     γ    
                                                                                α         
                                                                                    u     
                 α                                                                β
                   u +1+ e + u                                                            
                 β                                                              +     +
Substituting γ >                from assumption 3, we get m > (1 + e )
                                                                S            1   e     u  .
                     1+ e                                                   αu            
                                                                            β             
                                                                                        +1
                                                                            1+ e + u      
                                                                                      α 
Using from assumption 2 the fact that u >> 1 + e , this simplifies to m S > (1 + e )        .
                                                                                     α + β 
          α  1
                  > and (1 + e ) > 2 , m > 1 .
                                         S
Because 
          α + β   2
That the uneducated and the oligopolist’s preferences are parameter specific can easily be
shown by example.

Proof of Corollary 1:
Comparing the oligopolist’s net income under the status quo to his net income under pro-
market reforms, the former is greater iff
                                                                           β
                                                   1               u   1
(1 − α − β )θ ( m S )              + αθ ( m S )
                    α                         α −1
                        (u )                      1 −  > (1 − β )  S  1 −  . Clearly the
                                                     (u )
                               β                            β

                                                   γ              m   γ 
left hand side increases in the oligopolist’s efficiency θ , hence (i). Taking out the common
                         β
                 u 
positive term  S  , whether the inequality holds depends on the sign of
                m 
                                      α + β −1    1             1
(1 − α − β )θ ( m S )     + αθ ( m S )
                     α +β
                                               1 −  − (1 − β ) 1 −  . Differentiating w.r.t. m
                                                                                                   S

                                                  γ               γ 
                                                                            α  1
and simplifying, we see that the term increases in m S iff (α + β ) − S 1 −  > 0 . Because
                                                                           m  γ
m S >1 (see proof of lemma 2), this last inequality holds. Since m S increases in e and
decreases in u , the remaining parts of the corollary follow.
                                                    - 49 -




Proof of Corollary 2:

Comparing net incomes, the uneducated are better off under the status quo than under pro-
market reforms iff

                              θ             α P  P β −1       (1 − β )l P  P β −1
                                        β −             >  β −              (l )
                                             γ 
(A2)                                          l   (l )
                      (m S )1−(α + β )                             γ       
The left hand side of (A2) clearly increases in θ , hence corollary 2 (i).
Cancelling positive common terms in (A2), moving terms to one side, and differentiating
w.r.t. γ , we get an expression that decreases with an increase in γ iff
                                                                       P                                 P
       α P   1 − (α + β )  dm S                        αθ            l + (1 − β ) −      αθ            dl < 0
−  β − l θ                            −   (1 − β ) −
       γ   ( m S ) 2 − (α + β )  d γ 
                                                    ( m  )
                                                           S 1− (α + β )  γ 2
                                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                                          ( m  )
                                                                                               S 1− (α + β )  d γ
                                                                                                             
       dm  S
                  dl P
                                                               α
Since        > 0,      < 0 , assumption 3 ensures β ≥ l P , and the term in square brackets is
        dγ        dγ                                           γ
positive (see inequality (A1) above and associated proof), the inequality holds. Moreover, we
know that preferences switch within the range of feasible γ : If γ is such that assumption 3
holds with equality, the left hand side of (A2) is zero, while the right hand side is negative,
so the uneducated prefer the status quo. If γ is very high, the right hand side of (A2) is
                                                      θ
greater than the left hand side because             S 1− (α + β )
                                                                    < 1 . Hence preferences switch and
                                                 (m )
corollary 2 (ii) holds.

Cancelling positive common terms in (A2), moving terms to one side, and differentiating
w.r.t. e , we get an expression that decreases with an increase in e iff
                                                                         P
       α  1 − (α + β )   1                              αθ            dl < 0 . The first term is
 −  β − l P θ       2 − (α + β ) 
                                       1 −  (
                                            +   1 − β ) −
        γ  (m )                   
                                                          (m )
                                                               1− (α + β )
                    S
                                       γ                  S               de
                                                                        
                             P
                        dl
clearly negative as is           , so the expression will be negative if the term in square brackets is
                         de
positive. But the term is indeed positive because of inequality (A1) above. Moreover, using
the same argument as in corollary 2 (ii), we can show that preferences switch for feasible
values of e . Hence corollary 2 (iii).

Proof of Corollary 3:

The educated prefer comprehensive reforms if
                                                    - 50 -



                                                                   α            β
                                         1  α   β   1
                      αθ ( m ) ( u ) 1 −  < 
                                S α −1     β
(A3)                                                                 1 − 
                                         γ  α + β  α + β   γ 
Clearly, the left hand side increases in θ and decreases in m S , and m S increases in e . Thus
the first two parts of the corollary. Finally cancelling common terms, and recognizing that
 m S increases in γ , we get the last part of the corollary. Since it is not clear that the
educated’s preferences will flip between the status quo and comprehensive reforms for
feasible γ , we have corollary 3 (ii).

Proof of Lemma 5:

For the oligopolist to make more conditional on choosing education, it must be that
                                                               1                                       1
      (1 − α − β )θ (m E )α (l E ) β + αθ (m E )α −1 (l E ) β 1 −  ≥ ( e + u ) αθ (m E )α −1 (l E ) β 1 −  (1.4)
                                                               γ                                       γ
                                                                     α                     1
Cancelling common positive terms, substituting           =     mE            (1 + e + u ) 1 −  , and
                                                                    α + β                  γ
                               e +u  1                            1
simplifying, we get, (α + β )            ≤ , which implies α + β ≤ on applying
                               e + u +1  2                        2
assumption 2.

Proof of Lemma 6:

The educated’s income share under the status quo is higher iff

                   eα   1                         α   1   αu 
(A5)               S  1 −  > (1 − α − β ) + β +  S  1 −  −  S 
                   m  γ                           m γ  γ   m γ 
Collecting terms and simplifying we get
                                                      (u + 1 − e )α
(A6)                         (e − 1)α > (1 − α )m S −
                                                                       γ
Now as γ → ∞ , m → e +1, and the second term in the right hand side of the inequality
                       S


tends to zero. Because e is much larger than 1 by assumption 2, the required condition tends
to α > 0.5 . Of course, because the right hand side of (A6) falls with γ , we get lemma 6 (iii).

Proof of Lemma 7:

Adding the educated and the uneducated’s income share, comparing with the oligopolist’s
income share, and simplifying, we require
(A7)
                           ( e − 1) α + β − ( e + u − 1) α > 1 − α − β
                               mS                mSγ
                                           - 51 -




                            e + u +1 
Substituting m S = e + 1 −            and simplifying, we get the required condition.
                               γ     
                               - 52 -




Table 1: Summary Statistics




Variable                           Mean
                                   (standard deviation)

Attitude towards competition       7.7898
                                   (2.9391)

Male                               .5674
                                   (.4956)

Young                              .4131
                                   (.4925)

Middle age                         .4021
                                   (.4904)

Manager                            0.3591
                                   (0.4798)

Laborer                            0.2027
                                   (0.4021)

Resident of small town             .2652
                                   (.4416)

Resident of large town             .1603
                                   (.367)

Belongs to low caste               .1728
                                   (.3782)

Education                          4.4505
                                   (3.0897)

Observations                       2002
                                           - 53 -




The data are from the 2000 World Value Survey for India. Young is an indicator if the
respondent is below age 34, Middle age is an indicator if the respondent is between 34 and
55. Manager is an indicator set to 1 if the respondent owns or manages an office or
enterprise, or is a professional or supervisory worker. Laborer is an indicator set to 1 if the
respondent is a non-manual office worker, a skilled manual worker, a semi-skilled manual
worker, or an unskilled manual worker. Resident of large town is set to 1 if the respondent is
from a town with more than 50000 inhabitants, while resident of small town is set to 1 if the
respondent is from a town with less than 5000 inhabitants. Belongs to low caste is set to one
if the respondent is classified as belonging to a backward caste, a scheduled caste, or a
scheduled tribe. Education describes the extent of the respondent’s education, ranging from 1
(no formal education) to 9 (completed degree at university).
                                           - 54 -




Table 2: Attitudes towards competition

                            (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)
Male                        0.219         0.028            -0.045              -0.013
                            (0.259)       (0.183)          (0.186)             (0.202)

Young                       0.166         0.129            -0.045              -0.055
                            (0.350)       (0.252)          (0.263)             (0.262)

Middle age                  0.077         0.186            0.097               0.101
                            (0.308)       (0.235)          (0.243)             (0.244)

Laborer                     -0.756        -0.474           -0.475
                            (0.296)**     (0.295)          (0.301)

Manager                                   0.234            0.045
                                          (0.163)          (0.190)

Education                                                  0.075               0.058
                                                           (0.030)**           (0.028)**

highest quartile income                                                        0.603
                                                                               (0.384)

third quartile income                                                          0.191
                                                                               (0.334)

second quartile income                                                         0.198
                                                                               (0.224)

Constant                    8.590      9.668               9.474               9.069
                            (0.514)*** (0.260)***          (0.261)***          (0.349)***

Observations                 810          1288              1283                1283
R-squared                    0.17         0.18              0.18                0.18
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
The dependent variable is the respondent’s attitude towards competition from the 2000
World Value Survey for India. The Global Value Survey reports 9 income categories. I
reclassify these roughly into quartiles. The highest income quartile corresponds to income
categories g to k, third quartile corresponds to category f, second quartile to category e, and
                                          - 55 -




the lowest quartile to categories c and d. The omitted category is those with missing
household income.
                                               - 56 -




Table 3: Attitudes towards competition: The role of the opportunity set and privileges.

                                     (1)                (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)

Male                                 -0.056             -0.044      -0.039       -0.017       -0.050
                                     (0.179)            (0.186)     (0.185)      (0.19)       (0.178)

Young                                -0.034             -0.030      -0.061       -0.062       -0.046
                                     (0.260)            (0.260)     (0.261)      (0.257)      (0.257)

Middleage                            0.093              0.097       0.058        0.056        0.053
                                     (0.247)            (0.243)     (0.246)      (0.238)      (0.249)

Laborer                              -0.393             -0.441      -0.433       -0.454       -0.336
                                     (0.299)            (0.304)     (0.290)      (0.284)      (0.293)

Manager                              0.089              0.042       0.059        0.051        0.100
                                     (0.189)            (0.191)     (0.185)      (0.175)      (0.186)

Education                            0.045              0.093       0.107        0.106        0.094
                                     (0.035)            (0.035)**   (0.032)***   (0.031)***   (0.041)**

Resident of large town               -1.155                                                   -1.026
                                     (0.425)***                                               (0.405)**

Resident of large town * education   0.156                                                    0.129
                                     (0.077)*                                                 (0.078)

Resident of small town                                  0.735                                 0.497
                                                        (0.810)                               (0.757)

Resident of small town*education                        -0.109                                -0.075
                                                        (0.054)*                              (0.056)

Belongs to low caste                                                0.953        -1.679       0.902
                                                                    (0.430)**    (1.427)      (0.425)**

Belongs to low caste*education                                      -0.206                    -0.192
                                                                    (0.087)**                 (0.087)**
Belongs to low caste and employed
                                                                                 2.929
                                                                                 (1.428)**
                                              - 57 -




Belongs to lower caste and
unemployed* education                                                            0.128
                                                                                 (0.215)

Belongs to low caste and
employed*education                                                               -0.244
                                                                                 (0.096)**

Constant                              9.650            9.601        9.271        9.433        9.540
                                      (0.304)***       (0.751)***   (0.258)***   (0.302)***   (0.739)***

Observations                            1283         1283           1283         1283         1283
R-squared                               0.18         0.18           0.18         0.19         0.19
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
The dependent variable is the respondent’s attitude towards competition from the 2000
World Value Survey for India.
                                                           - 58 -




                                  Table 4: Preferences of agents in different regions
                                  (High Discount Factor)


                                  Oligopolists                        Educated                       Unskilled
         Best                     SQ                                  PMR                                    CR
Area A                            PMR                                 SQ                                      E
                                  E                                   CR                                     SQ
         Worst                    CR                                  E                                     PMR

                                  Oligopolists                        Educated                       Unskilled
         Best                     SQ                                  PMR                                    CR
Area C                            PMR                                 SQ                                      E
                                  E                                   CR                                    PMR
         Worst                    CR                                  E                                      SQ

                                  Oligopolists                        Educated                       Unskilled
         Best                     SQ                                  PMR                                    CR
Area B                            PMR                                 CR                                      E
                                  E                                   E                                     PMR
         Worst                    CR                                  SQ                                     SQ

                                  Oligopolists                        Educated                       Unskilled
         Best                     SQ                                  PMR                                    CR
Area D                            PMR                                 CR                                      E
                                  E                                   E                                      SQ
         Worst                    CR                                  SQ                                    PMR

         -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  SQ                                   Status quo
                                  PMR                                  Pro market reforms
                                  E                                    Education reforms
                                  CR                                   Comprehensive reforms
                                     - 59 -




         Table 5: Scores Based on Voting Game
         Strategy   Score       Winning strategy



         SQ                 6
Area A   PMR                7        SQ
         E                  9
         CR                 8



         PMR                6
Area C   SQ                 7        PMR
         E                  9
         CR                 8



         PMR                6
Area B   SQ                 9        PMR
         E                  8
         CR                 7



         SQ                 8
Area D   PMR                7         PMR
         E                  8
         CR                 7
- 60 -
                                                                   - 61 -




                                             Figure 1: Preferences of Uneducated -- Status Quo vs Pro-Market Reforms




                                  1
                               0.99
                               0.98                Uneducated prefer status quo
                               0.97
   Efficiency of Oligopolist




                               0.96
                               0.95
                               0.94
                               0.93
                               0.92
                               0.91
                                                                                                      Uneducated prefer
                                0.9
                               0.89                                                                   pro market reforms
                               0.88
                               0.87
                               0.86
                               0.85
                                      10.5          11               11.5                12           12.5             13
                                                                            Numbe r of Educate d




          has α 0.5,
This graph=      =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 .
                                                                                - 62 -




                                            Figure 2: Preferences of Educated: Comprehensive Reforms vs Status Quo



                                 1
                              0.99
                              0.98
                              0.97
  Efficiency of Oligopolist




                              0.96
                              0.95                        Educated prefer status quo
                              0.94
                              0.93
                              0.92
                              0.91
                               0.9                                                             Educated prefer
                              0.89                                                             comprehensive
                              0.88                                                             reforms
                              0.87
                              0.86
                              0.85
                                     10.5            11              11.5              12         12.5               13
                                                                        Number of Educated


          has α 0.5,
This graph=      =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 .
                                                                  - 63 -




                                                                Figure 3: Re form O utcome s




                                   1
                                0.99
                                                                                                                        C
                                0.98
                                                   No reforms
                                0.97
    Efficiency of Oligopolist




                                0.96
                                0.95
                                0.94
                                              A
                                0.93
                                0.92                                                                  B
                                0.91
                                 0.9
                                0.89                                                                  Pro-market
                                0.88                                                                  reforms
                                                         D
                                0.87          Pro-market
                                0.86          reforms
                                0.85
                                       10.5       11                11.5              12       12.5                13
                                                                       Number of Educated


          has α 0.5,
This graph=      =   β 0.3 , γ =36, u = 100 , δ = 1 .
