                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             IS THERE HEDGE FUND CONTAGION?

                                          Nicole M. Boyson
                                          Christof W. Stahel
                                           René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 12090
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12090


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Boyson is at Northeastern University, Stahel is at George Mason University, and Stulz is at The Ohio State
University, NBER, and ECGI. Corresponding author is Stulz: stulz@cob.osu.edu, (614) 292-1970. We wish
to thank participants in seminars at the University of Kansas and Bentley College. We also wish to thank
Jake Vukelic at Standard and Poor’s and Lisa Martin at Hedge Fund Research for assistance regarding their
firms’ products. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Nicole M. Boyson, Christof W. Stahel and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is There Hedge Fund Contagion?
Nicole M. Boyson, Christof W. Stahel and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 12090
March 2006
JEL No. G11, G12, G18

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine whether hedge funds experience contagion. First, we consider whether extreme

movements in equity, fixed income, and currency markets are contagious to hedge funds. Second,

we investigate whether extreme adverse returns in one hedge fund style are contagious to other hedge

fund styles. To conduct this examination, we estimate binomial and multinomial logit models of

contagion using daily returns on hedge fund style indices as well as monthly returns on indices with

a longer history. Our main finding is that there is no evidence of contagion from equity, fixed

income, and foreign exchange markets to hedge funds, except for weak evidence of contagion for

one single daily hedge fund style index. By contrast, we find strong evidence of contagion across

hedge fund styles, so that hedge fund styles tend to have poor coincident returns.

Nicole M. Boyson
Northeastern University
n.boyson@neu.edu

Christof W. Stahel
George Mason University
cstahel@gmu.edu

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
    Assets managed by hedge funds have grown tremendously, with more than $1 trillion in assets under

management in the United States alone. 1 This growth has led regulators to become concerned about the

risks that hedge funds might create for the financial system. Hedge funds could create systemic risk if

normal relations between hedge funds and financial markets break down when financial markets perform

poorly, and the probability of extreme negative returns for hedge funds when financial markets

experience extreme negative returns is much higher than could be predicted based on correlations

between hedge funds and financial markets. Paradoxically, however, a major reason for the tremendous

growth in assets managed by hedge funds is that investors believe these funds offer a valuable source of

diversification because of low correlations between hedge fund returns and returns on other asset classes.

For example, in a 2003 survey of institutional pension managers sponsored by State Street Global

Advisors, 77% of the respondents cited diversification as an “important” or “extremely important” reason

for including hedge funds in a portfolio.2 If there is contagion between hedge funds and financial

markets, the diversification benefit of investing in hedge funds would be least valuable when it is needed

most, i.e., when financial markets in general perform poorly. In this paper, we investigate whether there is

contagion between hedge funds and financial markets and within the hedge fund sector.

    Studies have shown that hedge fund returns do not follow a normal distribution, that they tend to be

heavily skewed, and that their correlations with risk factors are not stationary.3 It is well-known that

correlation is a poor measure of dependence under such conditions (see, e.g., Embrecht, McNeil, and

Straumann, 2002). Consequently, the correlations that play a central role in modern portfolio theory can




1
  A survey by Hedge Fund Manager magazine and Advent Software administered in November, 2005, which
included 44 hedge fund administrators, indicated that assets of about $1.3 trillion are managed by U.S. hedge funds.
The total assets under management worldwide is estimated at over $2 trillion. See full results at:
 http://www.advent.com/collateral/HFMAdventNOV2006surveyfinal.pdf
2
  Survey was administered by InvestorForce and included 111 large pension sponsors. See full results at:
http://www.investorforce.com/images/flonetwork/Hedge_Fund_Survey_2003.pdf.
3
  See, for example, Agarwal and Naik (2000), Amin and Kat (2004), Bacmann and Gawron (2004), Brealey and
Kaplanis (2001), Chan, Getmansky, Haas, and Lo (2005), Fung and Hsieh (1997, 1999, 2001), Geman and Karoubi
(2003), Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004) and Lo (2002).
                                                         2
lead to misleading inferences about the risk of hedge fund investments and the systemic risks created by

the growth of the hedge fund industry.

    The most worrisome weakness of correlation, given the properties of hedge fund returns, is that it

fails to adequately capture contagion if contagion is present.    By contagion, we mean the phenomenon

that regardless of the general correlation between assets, during bad times these assets tend to move

together more closely than could be predicted using correlations. Hence, contagion measures a nonlinear

effect that is not captured by correlation. For instance, during periods of contagious emerging market

crises, there is a greater probability that many markets perform poorly which is not what one would

expect if relying solely on correlations (see, for instance, Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2003, hereafter BKS).

    The possibility of contagion from traditional asset classes to hedge funds as well as between hedge

funds is important for investors, for risk managers, and for regulators. If there is a high probability of

contagion from traditional asset classes to hedge funds, the diversification benefits of hedge funds do not

extend to periods of extremely poor returns in traditional asset classes. If there is a high probability of

contagion within the hedge fund sector, diversification across hedge fund styles does not offer good

protection against extremely poor returns in a specific style. Further, there should be more of a concern

of systemic risk from hedge funds if there is contagion between hedge fund styles, because in bad times a

significant number of hedge funds will perform poorly.

    Our paper contributes to a large and growing literature on the exposure of hedge funds to risk factors.

A number of studies, including Fung and Hsieh (1997, 1999, 2001), Brown, Goetzmann and Ibbotson

(1999), Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (1999), and Agarwal and Naik (2000,

2004), have examined the relationship between hedge fund returns and broad market returns. The studies

that focus on linear measures of association, such as beta, generally find a weak relationship between

market returns and hedge fund returns. However, when studies relax the assumption of linearity, a more

complicated relationship is uncovered. For example, Edwards and Caglayan (2001) examine performance

in up and down markets, and show that, on average, hedge funds have stronger positive correlations with

                                                     3
broad market indices during bear markets, but that three hedge fund styles – Market-neutral, Event

Driven, and Global Macro – provide some measure of downside protection during bear markets.

Similarly, Schneeweis, Karavas, and Georgiev (2002) estimate unconditional and conditional correlations

between hedge funds and stock market indices and find that correlations differ between up and down

markets. Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) show that most risk arbitrage hedge funds are positively correlated

with market returns in down markets but uncorrelated with the market in up markets. Liang (2004)

reports a similar result for a broader range of hedge fund styles. Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001), Mitchell

and Pulvino (2001), and Agarwal and Naik (2004) show that exposures to risk factors of hedge funds

have option-like properties, so that exposures can vary with the performance of broad market indices

when these indices are chosen as risk factors.

    In contrast to this earlier literature, we focus explicitly on extreme returns in risk factors and hedge

funds to study contagion. We follow the existing contagion literature and adopt the binomial logit

approach pioneered by Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1996) and a multinomial logit extension thereof.

The multinomial logit approach is similar to that used by BKS, who study financial contagion in Latin

America and Asia, and focuses on extreme positive and extreme negative returns. Rather than calculating

correlations, BKS measure joint occurrences of extreme returns and estimate a model of these

occurrences using a multinomial logit regression. They find that large negative returns appear to be

contagious within Latin America, and that Latin American returns tend to spread to other regions in the

world.

    We avoid parametric tests of correlations in this study because, as Baig and Goldfajn (2002) and

Forbes and Rigobon (2002) argue, there are statistical difficulties involved in testing changes in

correlations across up and down markets. Further, using correlations is problematic in this type of test, as

correlations are linear measures of association that are not appropriate to investigating behavior during

extreme market conditions, while the contagion approach specifically focuses on nonlinearities in return

distributions.

                                                     4
    An alternative approach would be to employ extreme value theory (EVT) as in Longin and Solnik

(2001). Such an approach is implemented using monthly hedge fund indices by Geman and Kharoubi

(2003) and Bacmann and Gawron (2004). Geman and Kharoubi find that, while above-threshold

correlations between hedge fund returns and the S&P 500 index go asymptotically to zero for positive

returns as the threshold increases, this is not the case for negative returns. Bacmann and Gawron find no

asymptotic dependence of hedge funds and bonds, but find some dependence of hedge funds and stocks

which disappears when August 1998 is removed from the sample. While EVT, which uses copulas,

makes it possible to examine tail dependence without resorting to using correlations, it does not permit

explicit conditioning on additional risk factors and, hence, makes it difficult to explore the determinants

of contagion. A third approach is used by Chan, Getmansky, Haas, and Lo (2005). They address

systemic risk using risk models that include non-linear exposures to various markets such as squared and

cubed returns on the S&P 500 index and also apply regime-switching models to hedge fund returns.

    We use both daily and monthly hedge fund index return data for our analysis. The use of daily data

represents an important innovation since earlier hedge fund research uses monthly data only. There are

both benefits and costs in using daily data. The main benefit of using daily data is that it makes our tests

more powerful. We focus on 5% tail events which occur less than once every twenty months with

monthly data. Since hedge fund index monthly time-series data rarely extends past fifteen years, a study

using monthly data would be based on a sample with only nine tail events. The three main costs of daily

data are that the indices that report daily returns include only a subset of hedge funds, namely transparent

hedge funds willing to provide daily pricing, that the indices are available for a relatively short period of

time, and that there are legitimate concerns about how meaningful daily valuations are for hedge funds

that use over-the-counter instruments. Monthly return indices are less affected by these problems, but

their sample size is much smaller. To cope with the reduced sample size, we focus on 15% tail events

(rather than 5%) when we use monthly returns.



                                                     5
      Using the daily returns, we examine whether hedge fund styles move with each other and with broad

market indices differently during extreme market conditions. That is, when broad markets have extreme

returns, are hedge funds more likely to have extreme returns than could be predicted based on the normal

relation between market and hedge fund returns? Additionally, when one hedge fund style has an

extreme return, are other hedge fund styles more likely to have extreme returns than could be predicted

using the normal relation between hedge fund style returns? If the behavior of hedge funds when markets

have extreme returns or when other hedge funds have extreme returns can be understood by relations that

hold when returns are not extreme, there is no contagion, in the sense that there is no nonlinear effect of

extreme returns.4

      We use two sets of daily hedge fund indices: the first provided by Standard and Poor’s (S&P)

encompasses the period from October 1, 2002 to June 15, 2005, and the second provided by Hedge Fund

Research (HFR) begins April 1, 2003. While the S&P data covers a longer time period, the HFR set is

more detailed. We condition on a number of economic control variables, including interest rates,

exchange rates, market volatility, and broad market indices.

      The    S&P     data   covers   three   comprehensive   hedge   fund   style   categories:   Arbitrage,

Directional/Tactical, and Event Driven. Though the number of observations is limited as daily data is not

available before October 1, 2002, the time frame does cover a variety of market conditions including the

period of poor performance of the U.S. markets at the end of 2002.

      The HFR data covers eight hedge fund style categories: Convertible Arbitrage, Distressed Securities,

Equity Hedge, Equity Market Neutral, Event Driven, Macro, Merger Arbitrage, and Relative Value

arbitrage. The HFR data series is shorter than the S&P data series (it begins April 1, 2003) but includes

more styles. We study the S&P data with a binomial logit approach, and the HFR data using both a

binomial logit and a multinomial logit approach.




4
    See also Forbes and Rigobon (2002).
                                                      6
    Our study of the S&P hedge fund indices results in two key findings. First, we find no evidence of

contagion from equity or currency markets to any of the three hedge fund indices. In contrast, there is

strong evidence of contagion between the three hedge fund indices. If one index experiences an extreme

negative return, the increases in probability that each of the other indices will experience an extreme

negative return are statistically significant. The results using the HFR daily data are generally consistent

with the S&P results, with the exception that there is evidence of contagion from fixed income markets to

Arbitrage hedge funds, but not to Directional or Event Driven hedge funds. In addition, the evidence of

contagion between hedge fund styles is slightly weaker than for the S&P indices, although there is still

evidence of contagion between Event Driven and Arbitrage funds and Event Driven and Directional

funds.

    The second part of the paper examines contagion within sub-categories of hedge fund styles, using

the HFR daily data. Since the HFR data encompasses eight separate hedge fund styles, rather than three

as with the S&P data, we employ a multinomial logit model to study whether contagion affects more than

one sub-category of each hedge fund style concurrently. We group the individual eight styles into the

three broad S&P categories (Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven) and count the number of sub-

category indices within each index category that experience extreme returns on a given day. This

COUNT variable is assigned a value of zero (no extreme returns), one (one sub-category has an extreme

return), or two (two or more sub-categories have extreme returns) and is the dependent variable in a

multinomial logit model.

    The results from the multinomial logit analysis of the HFR index data show clear evidence of

contagion between all three hedge fund styles and evidence of contagion from fixed income markets to

Arbitrage hedge funds. Contagion between Directional hedge funds and Event Driven hedge funds is

quite strong. In particular, it is more likely that one, two or more sub-categories in either of these styles

experience extreme poor returns the more sub-categories in the other style experience poor performance.

The relationship between the Arbitrage and the Event Driven styles suggests that the likelihood of one

                                                     7
sub-category experiencing an extreme poor return increases the more sub-categories in the other style

experience a poor return. Finally, the relationship between the Arbitrage and Directional styles suggests

that the likelihood of two or more sub-categories experiencing an extreme poor return increases the more

sub-categories in the other style experience a poor return. This evidence indicates that the somewhat

weaker contagion results for the HFR aggregated indices are likely due to the aggregation method, as

documented by the stronger contagion evidence uncovered once the styles are disaggregated.

    The final section of the paper performs the above analyses using monthly hedge fund data from HFR

which has the same categories as the daily data. The monthly data covers the period January 1990 to May

2005. As noted above, we use a 15% cut-off for extreme returns rather than the 5% cut-off used for daily

data. The results from the monthly analysis indicate no significant evidence of contagion to hedge funds

from broad markets. However, there is strong evidence of contagion between Event Driven and Arbitrage

and Event Driven and Directional funds, consistent with the daily results.

    The paper is organized as follows. In Section I we describe the data for daily hedge fund index

returns. Section II uses the S&P (and HFR) daily hedge fund indices, first analyzing the determinants of

extreme returns for each hedge fund style and next studying the relationship between extreme hedge fund

returns and broad market returns. This section concludes by examining the incidence of co-movements

between hedge fund styles. Section III uses the HFR daily index data and a multinomial logit approach to

investigate the occurrence of contagion within and between the eight HFR hedge fund style categories.

Section IV repeats the tests from Section II using HFR monthly data, Section V performs robustness

checks, and Section VI concludes.



I. Data

    We discuss successively the S&P data and the HFR data that we use. In our study of contagion, we

focus on contagion between hedge funds and three representative markets: the stock market, the fixed-

income markets, and the currency markets. We use the return of the Russell 3000 index to proxy for the

                                                    8
return of equities, the daily return on the Lehman Bond index to proxy for the return of the fixed-income

markets, and the change in the FRB Dollar index to proxy for the return of the currency markets. We

therefore also present data on these indices.

I.1. Daily hedge fund index data from Standard and Poor’s (S&P)

    Standard and Poor’s (S&P) provides daily hedge fund index data at the industry level and the style

level. It has indices for three broad styles: Arbitrage, Directional/Tactical, and Event Driven. Each style

in turn consists of three strategies. The goal of the Arbitrage style is to exploit pricing discrepancies

between closely related securities, and contains the following three strategies: Equity Market Neutral,

Fixed Income Arbitrage, and Convertible Arbitrage. The goal of the Directional/Tactical style is to

exploit broad market trends in equities, interest rates, or commodity prices, and contains the following

three strategies: Equity Long/Short, Managed Futures, and Macro.5 The final style, Event Driven,

attempts to exploit discrete events such as bankruptcies, mergers, and takeovers, and contains the

following three strategies: Merger Arbitrage, Distressed, and Special Situations.       S&P does not provide

separate index data for the strategies within each style category.

    Daily returns on the indices are reported since October 1, 2002. Each style index is an equally-

weighted measure of the three strategies that comprise the index. The strategies are equally-weighted to

ensure well-rounded representation and to avoid overrepresentation of any one strategy. The number of

individual funds in each of the nine strategies ranges from 3 to 5, for a total of forty funds.              In

determining the number of funds in each index, S&P performed both qualitative and statistical analyses

and concluded that forty funds represents a reasonable sample that fairly represents the risk, return, style,

and correlation characteristics of the broader hedge fund universe.6

    S&P requires that funds have at least $100 million in assets under management and a three-year track

record to be eligible for inclusion in the index. Additionally, funds must be open to new investment,


5
 Appendix A contains detailed descriptions of the nine S&P strategies.
6
  See Standard and Poor’s Hedge Fund Index: Structure, Methodology, Definitions, and Practices, January, 2003,
http://www3.standardandpoors.com/spf/pdf/index/S&PHedgeFundPaper.pdf.
                                                       9
provide daily pricing, and pass a number of due diligence tests, including manager background checks.

All portfolio positions are verified independently by a third party. Additionally, S&P reserves the right to

remove funds from the index for various reasons, including style drift, legal or ethical problems, major

business disruptions, lack of operational compliance, or lack of capacity for additional investment. If

funds are removed from the index, regardless of the reason, the index’s history is not restated. Additions

and deletions to the index are scheduled annually in January, unless during another time a special event

occurs and the Index Committee deems changes are necessary.               All S&P hedge fund indices are

rebalanced to equal weighting in January, and any changes are announced in advance on the S&P website.

    Thus, according to S&P, the indices are representative, investible (although not directly), and

transparent. There are two issues with the indices that might affect our analysis. First, the requirement

that funds have at least $100 million in assets restricts the indices to relatively large funds. To the extent

that large and small funds might have systematically different returns or other characteristics, this could

be a cause of concern, and in interpreting the index results it is important to keep this in mind.

    The second issue is that the S&P index data are published daily but “finalized” monthly after a review

of the month’s returns. Due to illiquidity in some holdings or difficulty in obtaining prices, there may be

differences between the daily and monthly series. S&P does not restate the daily data to match finalized

month-end values. We investigate whether this is an issue for our analysis by aggregating the daily return

series into a monthly series and comparing it to the “finalized” S&P monthly series published on their

website. The simple correlations between the finalized monthly returns and the returns aggregated from

the daily data are 0.83, 0.98, and 0.94 for Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven, respectively. The t-

tests of differences in means are never significant at standard levels. Finally, we count the number of

times that the monthly index is lower than the aggregated daily index to determine if there is a systematic

bias, and find that for the Arbitrage index, the daily aggregated returns are lower than the “finalized”

monthly returns 12 out of 26 times and are higher 14 out of 26 times. For the Directional and Event

Driven indices, the counts are lower 12 and 10 times and higher 14 and 16 times than the finalized

                                                      10
indices, respectively. Thus, the correlations are high and there appears to be no systematic directional

bias between the aggregated daily and finalized monthly index returns. Given these results and our

understanding of the S&P methodology, we use these indices in the analyses that follow, subject to the

above caveats.

I.2. Daily hedge fund index data from Hedge Fund Research (HFR)

      In addition to the S&P indices, we also use the Hedge Fund Research (HFR) daily indices. These

indices are published by HFR and consist of eight single strategy indices. They are fully investible both

directly through HFR and also through a number of indexed products offered by companies such as

Citigroup, ABN Amro, and UBS Warburg. The daily data for the indices begins on April 1, 2003. The

eight single-strategy indices include: Convertible Arbitrage, Distressed Securities, Equity Hedge, Equity

Market-neutral, Event Driven, Macro, Merger Arbitrage, and Relative Value Arbitrage. 7 All indices

contain only hedge funds that are open for new investment.                The individual strategy indices are

rebalanced on a quarterly basis and have been designed to offer daily pricing, consistent fund selection

through cluster analysis, stringent risk management, and strict reporting standards.

      Additionally, HFR imposes a minimum asset size of $50 million and a minimum track record of 2

years, slightly different from the S&P requirements of $100 million and 3 years. There are currently

sixty-nine funds in the index, spread across the 8 styles as appropriate to ensure that the styles are

representative of the strategies they represent. The more detailed categorization of the HFR indices –

eight versus three categories – allows us to perform additional analyses. Specifically, in Section III, we

use a multinomial logit model to test contagion at the sub-index level.

I.3. Monthly hedge fund index data from Hedge Fund Research (HFR)

      In Section IV, we perform tests of contagion using monthly data provided by HFR. This data extends

from 1990 to 2005 and covers a much longer time frame than the daily data. While the HFR monthly data

covers the same eight categories as the HFR daily data, the indices are constructed differently. The first

7
    See Appendix B for HFR’s description of the eight style categories.
                                                          11
difference relates to the number of funds in the indices. While the daily indices include only sixty-nine

funds, the monthly indices include over 1,600 funds. Second, there is no required asset-size minimum for

inclusion in the indices, in contrast with the daily indices which require a fund have at least $50 million in

assets for inclusion. Third, there is no required length of time a fund must be trading to be included, as

compared to the daily indices which require at least 2 years of trading history. Finally, the monthly

indices also include funds that are closed to new investment.8



II. Hedge fund contagion with daily index returns

      In this section, we investigate hedge fund contagion using daily returns. We examine contagion to

hedge fund style index returns from two sources: extreme returns in market risk factors and extreme

returns in other hedge fund styles. We focus on whether extreme realizations of market risks and hedge

fund style returns have a qualitatively different impact on the probability of extreme hedge fund returns

than other realizations of the risk factors. Section II.1a describes the risk factors and reports summary

statistics for the three S&P hedge fund indices, and Section II.1b reports summary statistics for the HFR

indices. Section II.2 presents the approach we use to estimate contagion. Section II.3 studies contagion

between equity, fixed income, and currency markets and the hedge fund indices, and Section II.4

examines contagion between hedge fund indices.

II.1a. Daily S&P hedge fund indices: Summary statistics

      The data used are daily returns for the period October 1, 2002 through June 15, 2005 (684 daily

observations) from the S&P hedge fund indices which include the Arbitrage index, the

Directional/Tactical index, and the Event Driven index. Table I.A reports correlations and summary

statistics for the three hedge fund indices and the market indices. Panel 1 reports the returns and

correlations for the three hedge fund styles and the control variables. Among the three styles, the Event

Driven style has the highest average return (about 0.037% per day) and the lowest standard deviation.


8
    See Appendix C for further detail on the construction of the HFR monthly indices.
                                                          12
The correlations are not particularly high among the hedge fund indices, but there are several high

correlations between the hedge fund indices and the control variables. These correlations indicate that our

chosen risk factors appear to capture the linear risks of hedge funds quite well.

    The Arbitrage index is positively correlated with S&P 500 implied volatility and the return on the LB

bond index and negatively correlated with the proxy for a long put option and the Russell 3000 index.

The Directional index is positively correlated with the proxy for a long put option, the Russell 3000

index, the return on the LB bond index, and the Treasury bill return, and negatively correlated with

changes in the FRB dollar index and changes in S&P 500 implied volatility. Finally, the Event Driven

index is positively correlated with the proxy for a long put option and the Russell 3000 index but

negatively correlated with changes in S&P 500 implied volatility and the return on the LB bond index.

    We also examine autocorrelation for each hedge fund index. First-order autocorrelation is negative

for the Arbitrage index, and positive and marginally significant for the Directional and Event Driven

indices. The Ljung-Box test rejects the hypothesis of no autocorrelation for the first six lags of returns for

both the Arbitrage and Event Driven indices. While there is some evidence of autocorrelation, it is not as

strong as found in previous literature (see, e.g., Asness, Krail, and Liew, 2001, and Getmansky, Lo, and

Makarov (2004)).     For example, Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov report first and second-order serial

correlation among Event Driven hedge funds as 20.8% and 6.4%, while we report much lower values of

6.3% and 2.9%. The reason serial correlations differ so much is likely due to differences in data: they use

monthly, individual hedge fund data over a longer time frame while we use daily index data over a shorter

time frame. Another possible explanation for lower autocorrelation is that funds that price daily generally

have more liquid assets or less discretion in pricing.

    It is well-known that hedge fund returns are not normally distributed. For example, Geman and

Kharoubi (2003) find that hedge funds exhibit high kurtosis and that Jarque-Bera tests strongly reject

normality. Similarly in our sample, all three S&P style indices also exhibit high excess kurtosis, and

Jarque-Bera tests strongly reject normality.

                                                         13
      Table I.B provides a first look at the relationship among hedge fund index returns and market returns

during up and down market conditions. Up markets are defined as periods when the market return is in

the top half of all returns for the period, while down markets comprise periods where the market return is

in the bottom half of returns. Our choices of conditioning market returns include the Russell 3000, LB

bond index, and the FRB dollar index. Using this simple categorization of up and down markets, the

conditional correlations among hedge fund indices and between hedge fund indices and stock, fixed

income, and currency indices do not vary much from the unconditional correlations reported in Table I.A.

II.1b. Daily HFR Indices: Summary statistics

      The HFR indices are reported for eight categories, in contrast with three categories for the S&P

indices. To compare the HFR results with the S&P results, we aggregate the HFR indices into the same

three categories.9     The combined HFR Arbitrage style index includes the HFR sub-categories of

Convertible Arbitrage, Relative Value, and Equity Market Neutral. The combined HFR Directional style

index includes the HFR sub-categories Macro Index and Equity Hedge. Finally, the combined HFR

Event Driven style index includes the HFR sub-categories of Merger Arbitrage, Distressed Securities, and

Event Driven. While recognizing that our grouping methodology is imperfect and the time frames

covered are not exactly the same, our methodology nonetheless allows us to analyze contagion in roughly

the same way as for the S&P hedge fund indices.

      Table II.A reports summary statistics for the HFR combined categories. The data are daily for the

period April 4, 2003 through June 15, 2005 for a total of 557 observations. The mean returns and

unconditional correlations are mostly consistent with the results for the S&P indices, with a few

exceptions. One difference between the S&P and HFR indices is that the S&P Arbitrage index has a

positive mean while the HFR Arbitrage index has a negative mean. Also, the HFR Arbitrage and HFR

Event Driven indices are positively correlated while the S&P Arbitrage and S&P Event Driven indices are

negatively correlated. The correlation between the Directional and Event Driven indices is higher for the


9
    We follow the methodology of S&P and calculate equally-weighted average returns within each style.
                                                        14
HFR than for the S&P indices, although in both cases the correlation is positive. Similar to the S&P

indices, the return series of each group exhibits excess kurtosis and normality tests are strongly rejected.

    The HFR Arbitrage style exhibits negative autocorrelation at lag one, while the other two styles show

significant positive autocorrelation at lag one and up to lag 3, respectively. In addition, Ljung-Box tests

reject the hypothesis of no autocorrelation in the first six lags for both the Event Driven and Directional

indices. These significant positive autocorrelations are higher than in the earlier results for the S&P

indices, and are more in line with what we would expect based on previous literature. While the negative

autocorrelation should not introduce spurious results into the analysis, the positive values for the

Directional and the Event Driven indices should be kept in mind when interpreting the results. To address

this issue, in Section V we perform robustness checks that control for autocorrelation. The results of

Section V are consistent with the results in this section.

    Table II.B presents the conditional correlations among the combined HFR hedge fund indices and the

market indices. The results are again similar to those for the S&P indices with one notable exception.

For the HFR indices, when the conditioning (market) variable is below the median, there is generally a

positive correlation among the three hedge fund indices as compared with the S&P hedge fund index

correlations which are not always positive. The next section introduces the model we use for contagion

tests.

II.2 The regression approach

    Below, we use a logit model to examine contagion in hedge funds by estimating the probability that a

hedge fund will have an extreme return. If there is no contagion, a regression model in which the values

of risk factors that affect hedge fund returns enter linearly should describe the probability that a hedge

fund will have an extreme return. By contrast, with contagion from a specific risk factor, the probability

that a hedge fund will have an extreme return is greater when that risk factor has an extreme realization

than would be predicted by a model in which the risk factors enter only linearly. To account for this



                                                      15
nonlinear dependence, we add to the regression model, in which risk factors enter linearly, indicator

variables that take the value one when the risk factors have extreme realizations.

    Much of the analysis uses a binomial logit model. However, some of the analysis also uses a

multinomial logit model. The following paragraphs describe the multinomial logit model closely

following the description in BKS. Multinomial logistic regression models are used to estimate the

probabilities associated with events captured in a polychotomous variable (see Maddala (1986) and

Hosmer and Lemeshow (1989)). If Pi is the probability associated with a category i of m possible

categories, then we define a multinomial distribution as



                                              G ( β i′x )
                                Pi =                                                        (1)
                                              ∑ G (β ′ x )]
                                              m −1
                                       [1 +                     j
                                              j =1




where x is the vector of covariates and β i the vector of coefficients associated with the covariates. The

function G ( β i′x) is often simplified using a logistic function exp( β i′x) , reducing Equation (1) to a

multinomial logistic model. Maximum likelihood with the (log-) likelihood function is used to estimate

the model for a sample of n observations as




                                              ∑∑I log P
                                               n     m
                                    log L =                ij       ij                        (2)
                                              i =1 j =1




where I ij is an indicator variable that equals one if the ith observation is in the jth category, and zero

otherwise.




                                                          16
Goodness-of-fit is measured using McFadden’s (1974) pseudo-R2 approach, where both unrestricted (full

model) likelihood, Lω, and restricted (constants only) likelihood, LΩ, are compared:



                                                        log Lω
                                      pseudoR2 = 1 −                                              (3)
                                                        log LΩ



    In Section III, this multinomial logit model is used to test whether the eight HFR indices exhibit

contagion. In the following analysis the binomial logit version is used for the S&P hedge fund indices.

The indicator variable Ii on a given day i is set equal to one if an index’s return on that day is in the top or

bottom five percent of all the daily returns for that index for the entire sample period. If the index’s return

on that day is not in the top (bottom) five percent, the indicator variable is set equal to zero. If a return is

in the top or bottom five percent of all returns it is called an “extreme return.” Positive and negative

outcomes are estimated separately. Then, using the notation for the multinomial logit (which is easily

reduced to the binomial logit form), the probability of an extreme return outcome of a specific level Pi is

computed by evaluating the covariates at their unconditional values,




                                       *         exp( βi′x* )
                                     Pi =                                                                   (4)
                                                 ∑ exp(β ′ x )
                                                 m −1
                                                                 *
                                            1+               j
                                                 j =1




where x* is the unconditional mean of x. From this measure and following Greene (2000, chapter 19),

we compute the marginal effects – the change in probability for a small change in one of the independent

covariates – to assess the economic significance of this change.




                                                        17
II.3. Contagion between daily S&P hedge fund indices and market indices

     Hedge fund returns are related to a number of risk factors, including equity, fixed income, and

commodity factors as well as non-linear factors such as at-the-money put options on the S&P 500 index. 10

We follow Agarwal and Naik (2004) and control for the general distribution of hedge fund returns using

the following risk factors: the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in the Federal Reserve Bank

competitiveness-weighted dollar index (hereafter FRB dollar index), the return on the Lehman Brothers

U.S. fixed-income index (hereafter LB bond index), and the return on the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill.

Additionally, we control for the negative portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for the payoffs from a

long put option, and the change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index which is calculated as the

simple average of the implied volatilities from call and put options on the S&P 500.

     In our regressions, we let hedge fund returns be related linearly to the index returns that represent the

equity market (Russell 3000), the fixed-income market (LB bond index), and the currency market (FRB

dollar index) to allow for correlation effects. In addition, we include indicator variables that represent

extreme returns (top or bottom 5%) for each of these markets to allow for non-linear contagion effects.

For the “negative tail” case, the “same-direction” market indicator variable is set to one if the relevant

market has an extreme negative return and zero otherwise. When both the hedge fund index and a market

experience extreme negative returns, the coefficient on the market indicator variable will be positive,

indicating contagion among extreme poor returns. In contrast, a negative coefficient on the market

indicator variable implies that there is no contagion of extreme poor returns. We interpret this outcome as

evidence of a weak form of crash protection being provided by the hedge fund index. Similarly for the

“positive tail” case, the same direction market indicator variable is set to one if the market has an extreme

positive return and zero otherwise. When both the hedge fund index and the market index experience

extreme positive returns, this indicates contagion among good returns.           We are most interested in



10
 See, for example, Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001), Ackermann, McEnally and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (1999),
Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), and Agarwal and Naik (2000, 2004).
                                                     18
instances of contagion during down periods as indicated by a positive coefficient on the “negative tail”

market indicator variable.

     Table III presents the results of this analysis. The first two regressions are for the negative and

positive tails of the Arbitrage style index. Focusing on the linear measures of the risk factors, the

Arbitrage style index is significantly more likely to have an extreme negative return and significantly less

likely to have an extreme positive return when the Russell 3000 has a high return. In addition, the

Arbitrage index is more likely to have an extreme negative return when changes in the FRB dollar index

are positive and when returns on the T-Bill are high. For example, for a return on the Russell 3000 that is

1% higher than its mean return in the sample, the probability that the Arbitrage index will have a negative

extreme return increases by 2%, and for a 1% increase in the FRB dollar index, the probability that the

Arbitrage return will have a negative extreme return increases by 2%. Given the large standard deviations

of these two control variables, these marginal effects are economically relevant.11 However, the large

marginal effect of 1.166 on the T-Bill is economically irrelevant; a one standard deviation return shock of

0.006% in the T-Bill results in an economically very small change in probability of approximately only

0.007% that an extreme negative event occurs in the Arbitrage index.

     Turning to the contagion variables which model non-linear effects, an extreme return on the Russell

3000 index makes it significantly less likely that the hedge fund index will have an extreme return in the

same direction. Consequently, extreme returns on the Russell 3000 are not contagious. There is no

evidence that extreme returns on the hedge fund index are related to same direction extreme returns on the

LB bond index or the FRB dollar index.




11
   It is helpful to compare these results with prior literature, which uses different data. Agarwal and Naik (2004) use
a linear measure of the hedge fund index return as the dependent variable in their regressions, as opposed to our logit
approach which uses an indicator variable. Using a number of Arbitrage indices, they show a positive relationship
with a short put option on the S&P 500 and a positive relationship with the Russell 3000 index, in contrast with our
results which indicate no relationship with the negative part of the S&P 500 index (our proxy for a put option) and a
negative relationship with the Russell 3000. Clearly, extreme events in the Arbitrage style have different exposures
to market factors than do linear measures of the same style.
                                                         19
     The next two regressions are for the Directional style index. A higher return on the FRB dollar index

makes it more likely that the hedge fund index will have an extreme negative return and less likely that it

will have an extreme positive return. A large negative return on the LB bond index makes an extreme

negative return less likely and an extreme positive return more likely. Further, a high return on the

Russell 3000 makes an extreme positive return more likely, and a large negative return on the S&P 500

index (our proxy for a long put option) makes an extreme positive return less likely.12 The results for the

market indicator variables provide no evidence of contagion; rather, they indicate the opposite, which is

that these hedge funds are less likely to have extreme returns when stocks, bonds, and currencies have

extreme returns. This is because, strikingly, all six indicator variables have negative coefficients (of

which four are statistically significant), so that extreme market realizations make it less likely that the

hedge fund index will have a same-direction extreme return.

     The last two regressions are for the S&P Event Driven index. This index is more likely to have either

an extreme negative or an extreme positive return when the FRB dollar index return is high and is more

likely to have an extreme positive return when the Russell 3000 index has a high return. Finally, the

Event Driven index is more likely to have an extreme negative return when the return on the LB bond

index is high.13 There is no evidence of contagion from market risks whatsoever, but there is weak

evidence of crash protection against extremely poor returns in fixed income markets.

     As a robustness check, Table IV performs the same analysis for the HFR aggregate indices. While

there are some differences with the S&P indices with respect to the linear measures of market risk, the

results for extreme returns are fairly consistent. The main differences are that for the HFR Arbitrage



12
  We again compare our results to those of Agarwal and Naik (2004) (who use a linear measure of the hedge fund
index return as the dependent variable in their regressions, as opposed to our logit approach which uses an indicator
variable). Using a Directional index, they show a positive relationship with the Russell 3000 index, similar to our
results which indicate a positive relationship with the Russell 3000. In this case, extreme positive returns in the
Directional style have similar exposures to market factors as linear measures of the same style.
13
  Using a linear measure for the Event Driven index, Agarwal and Naik (2004) show a positive relationship with a
short put option on the S&P 500 and a positive relationship with the Russell 3000 index and lagged Russell 3000, in
contrast to our results for the negative part of the S&P 500 but similar to our results for the Russell 3000 index.
                                                        20
index there is no evidence that extreme negative returns in the Russell 3000 make extreme negative

returns on the indices less likely, and there is evidence that extreme positive returns in the Russell 3000

are contagious to the HFR Arbitrage index. Also for the HFR Arbitrage index, in contrast to the S&P

Arbitrage index, there is evidence of contagion in extreme poor returns from fixed income markets to

Arbitrage funds.   For the Event Driven index, there is no evidence of the downside protection against

fixed income markets observed with the S&P daily index. Finally, the explanatory power for the HFR

regressions is typically lower compared to the S&P regressions, perhaps due to the shorter sample period

for the HFR indices or the aggregation method.

    Except for weak evidence of contagion in negative returns from fixed income markets to Arbitrage

hedge funds, we find no evidence of contagion between hedge fund indices and the equity, fixed-income,

and currency markets. Additionally, there is evidence that Directional hedge funds are less likely to incur

extreme losses when extreme negative returns take place in these markets. The next section examines

contagion between hedge fund indices.

II.4. Are extreme returns contagious between daily S&P hedge fund style indices?

    In this section, we focus on contagion between hedge fund styles. If there is a high probability of

contagion between hedge fund styles, diversification within this asset class will not offer protection

against extremely poor returns in a specific style. Additionally, contagion of bad performance between

hedge fund styles raises the concern of systemic risk.

    To explore contagion between hedge fund styles, we include additional variables in the above

regressions.   In particular, we create separate positive and negative same-direction extreme return

indicator variables for each hedge fund index. The indicator variable is set to one if the return on the

hedge fund index is an extreme positive (negative) return and zero otherwise. There are six indicator

variables in total: one positive and one negative for each index.

    These regressions include all previous linear measures of risk factors as well as the market indicator

variables from Tables III and IV. It is important to include these risk factors as they help explain hedge

                                                     21
fund returns. By contrast, we do not include linear measures of the hedge fund index returns in the

regressions that follow since these returns are correlated with the included broad market risk factors

which subsume the linear hedge fund index data (see Tables I and II). Our approach is consistent with

prior literature (see, for example, Agarwal and Naik (2004)), and implies that the broad market risk

factors act in our regressions as instrumental variables for the general risks inherent in hedge fund returns.

    We focus on the coefficients on the same-direction indicator variables representing extreme events in

the other two hedge fund styles. The interpretation of the coefficients is similar to previous tables: a

positive coefficient on the indicator variable in the case of negative extreme returns implies contagion

between negative returns, while a negative coefficient implies weak-form downside protection.               A

positive coefficient on the indicator variable in the case of positive extreme returns implies contagion

between positive returns. Again, we are most interested in evidence of negative contagion. Table V

performs this analysis for the S&P hedge fund indices.

    For the Arbitrage index, there is contagion in extreme negative returns with both the Directional and

Event Driven indices. This result is particularly striking since the Arbitrage and Event Driven indices are

negatively correlated. Additionally, there is contagion in extreme positive returns with the Directional

index. For the Directional style there is evidence of contagion in extreme negative returns with both the

Arbitrage and Event Driven indices.         There is also contagion in extreme positive returns with the

Arbitrage index. Finally, for the Event Driven style, there is weak evidence of contagion in extreme

negative returns with both the Directional and Arbitrage indices although the results are not significant at

traditional levels. Taken together, these results indicate contagion between hedge fund styles, particularly

with respect to extreme negative returns.

    As a robustness check, the same analysis is performed in Table VI using the HFR aggregate hedge

fund indices in lieu of the S&P hedge fund indices. The results in Table VI are generally consistent with

the S&P index results, with two exceptions. First, the evidence of contagion between negative returns in

Arbitrage and Directional indices no longer exists.         Second, the evidence of contagion between

                                                     22
Directional and Event Driven is stronger and more significant. As before, the Pseudo R2s for the analysis

of HFR indices are typically lower (particularly for the Arbitrage style) than for the analysis of the S&P

hedge fund indices.

    In summary, while there is little evidence of contagion between broad market indices and hedge fund

indices, there is substantially more evidence of contagion between hedge fund indices. The next section

presents a more detailed analysis of this phenomenon, using the daily HFR index data.



III. Multinomial logit tests of daily HFR indices

    In this section we investigate contagion in more detail using all eight HFR sub-indices. We test

whether an extreme event in a financial market affects more than one sub-index within an aggregated

hedge fund style. Furthermore, we examine whether the occurrence of simultaneous extreme events

within an aggregated hedge fund style predicts extreme events for several sub-indices of either of the

other two aggregated hedge fund styles. In this respect, the multinomial analysis is more detailed as it

allows us to identify how many of the sub-indices within each broad index are affected by contagion.

    We proceed as follows with the multinomial analysis. For each day and each aggregate HFR style

(Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven) we count the number of extreme returns experienced by the

sub-indices within each style. As an example, take the case of the aggregate HFR Arbitrage index. The

sub-indices for HFR Arbitrage include Convertible Arbitrage, Relative Value, and Equity Market Neutral.

We create a variable called COUNT which takes the value of zero if none of the sub-indices experiences

an extreme return, one if one of the sub-indices experiences an extreme return, and two if two or more of

the sub-indices experience extreme returns.      COUNT is then used as the dependent variable in a

multinomial logit regression, where the independent variables include the control variables described in

Section II.1a., six (0/1) indicator variables for positive (negative) extreme returns for each of the market

indices (Russell 3000, LB bond, and FRB dollar), and the COUNT variables for the other two aggregate



                                                    23
hedge fund styles (in this example, these would include the HFR Directional and HFR Event Driven

indices).

    The estimated coefficients for the market indicators and the COUNT variables are reported in Table

VII. The table reports for each independent variable of interest two coefficients – one is related to the

event that the hedge fund style examined has an extreme return in only one sub-index (COUNT=1) and

the other is related to the event that the style has extreme returns in two or more sub-indices (COUNT=2).

The omitted variable, COUNT=0, is the base case and all results are reported relative to this case.

    To facilitate the interpretation of the coefficients, the table reports marginal effects calculated at the

mean of the explanatory variables. Generally speaking, a positive coefficient on a broad market indicator

variable implies contagion in the same direction from that market to the hedge fund style. A positive

coefficient on a COUNT variable for any of the other hedge fund indices implies contagion in the same

direction between styles. Negative coefficients on the other hand imply weak-form downside protection.

    As before, we focus on extreme negative returns. For the Arbitrage hedge fund style, there is mixed

evidence of contagion with fixed-income markets.       When the LB bond index has an extreme negative

return, the probability that one Arbitrage sub-index will have an extreme negative return increases

significantly. However, the probability that two or more Arbitrage sub-indices will have an extreme

negative return decreases significantly in this situation, providing evidence of downside protection against

poor outcomes in fixed income markets. For the HFR Directional and Event Driven styles, there is

evidence of crash protection with the LB bond index. Specifically, the probability that two or more of the

HFR Directional or Event Driven sub-indices will have extreme negative returns decreases when the LB

bond index has an extreme negative return. This same form of crash protection is provided against falling

currency markets by the Directional index but not by the Event Driven index. These results indicate that

even when examining sub-indices there is little evidence of contagion from broad markets to hedge funds.

    The table also offers valuable additional insight into contagion between hedge funds. While prior

tests on the HFR aggregate indices in Table VI indicate no contagion between the Arbitrage and

                                                     24
Directional indices, the results from the more detailed analysis do indicate contagion.         The more

Directional sub-indices experience extreme negative returns, the more likely it is that two or more of the

Arbitrage sub-indices will also experience extreme negative returns. Additionally, the contagion from

Event Driven to Arbitrage documented in Table VI holds for one, but not more Arbitrage sub-indices.

The same result holds for contagion from Arbitrage to Event Driven – the more Arbitrage sub-indices

experience extreme bad returns, the more likely it is that one, but not more, Event Driven sub-index will

experience extreme negative returns. This contagion from Arbitrage to Event Driven funds was not

evident in the aggregate tests performed in Table VI.

    Finally, the strong contagious relationship between Directional and Event Driven funds continues to

hold in this more detailed analysis. The more Directional sub-indices that experience extreme poor

returns, the more likely it is that one, two, or more Event Driven sub-indices will experience extreme poor

returns. This relationship also holds in reverse, from Event Driven to Directional. The results of this

table are consistent with the aggregate analysis of the S&P hedge fund indices presented in Table V and

suggest that the weaker results reported for the equally-weighted average HFR indices in Table VI are

likely the consequence of the aggregation method.

    The results of this section imply that except for conflicting results regarding contagion from fixed

income markets to Arbitrage hedge funds, there is little evidence of contagion from broad markets to HFR

indices at the sub-index level. However, when examining contagion between hedge fund indices, certain

relationships that do not exist or are rather weak at the aggregate level are quite significant at the sub-

index level. These sub-index results indicate strong contagion between HFR hedge fund sub-indices

which is consistent with the results reported for the S&P indices in Table V.



IV. Tests of contagion using HFR monthly index data

    As noted earlier, there is a trade-off between using daily and monthly hedge fund data to perform

contagion tests. The daily data provide more observations but cover a shorter time period. By contrast,

                                                    25
monthly data provide fewer observations over a longer time period, but using a 5% tail cut-off to define

“extreme returns” with monthly data results in too few tail observations. However, the longer time period

available for monthly data – which encompasses a number of market crises, including the Asian and

Mexican currency crises and the failure of Long Term Capital Management – makes a monthly analysis

worthwhile on its own. To improve the power of the monthly tests that follow, we use a 15%, rather than

a 5%, cut-off to define “extreme” or “tail” returns. The logic for using 15% is that with a 15% threshold

the monthly analysis has roughly the same number of extreme events as the daily analysis. The monthly

index data is provided by HFR and is categorized and aggregated in the same manner as the daily data.

The data is available from January 1990 to May 2005.

    Table VIII.A. provides summary statistics and correlations for the HFR monthly indices. The data in

Panel 1 indicate much higher positive unconditional correlations between hedge fund indices for monthly

data than for daily data as reported in Table II. Two reasons that these correlations are higher than for

daily data are that the monthly data includes over 1,600 funds, so that there is more diversification at the

index level, and that monthly returns are likely less volatile at the fund level than daily returns, perhaps

because hedge funds reporting daily are invested in more liquid assets than the general population of

hedge funds. Additionally, in contrast to the daily data statistics in Table II, the correlations with the

Russell 3000 index and the put proxy on the S&P 500 index are large and positive for all the HFR

monthly hedge fund indices. The results for the put proxy are broadly consistent with Agarwal and Naik

(2004) and Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) who show that hedge fund returns are positively correlated with

the returns on long put options.

    There is a fairly high degree of first-order autocorrelation for all three indices, and the Ljung-Box

tests reject the hypothesis of no autocorrelation for the first six lags for both the Arbitrage and Event

Driven indices. These results are consistent with Getmansky, Lo, and Makarov (2004) and other prior

literature. Finally, the respective normality tests are strongly rejected for the Arbitrage and the Event

Driven styles but not for the Directional style (see Panel 3).

                                                      26
     Turning to the conditional correlations in Table VIII.B., the strong positive correlations among the

hedge fund indices persist, regardless of the conditioning variable and regardless of the direction of the

market. This finding is consistent with Liang (2004) and Capocci and Hubner (2004) who report large

and positive correlations among monthly hedge fund data in both up and down markets.14 For the

correlations with market indices, Table VIII.B shows that, in five of the six cases, all hedge fund styles

show strong positive correlations with the Russell 3000 index.            The exception occurs when the

conditioning variable is the Russell 3000 being above the median. Additionally, the correlations with the

FRB Dollar index are typically small and not statistically significant, while correlations with the LB Bond

index are positive and sometimes statistically significant.

     Though some of the correlations – both between hedge fund indices and between hedge fund indices

and market indices – are fairly high, this does not affect our analysis as our contagion tests investigate the

nonlinear relationship between hedge fund indices and between hedge fund indices and broad markets.

Furthermore, we control for this correlation by including the linear market factors as control variables

which act as instruments for the general risk exposures of hedge funds. In the following table we test for

contagion over and above the linear relationship implied by these relatively high correlations.

     Table IX examines contagion between the HFR monthly hedge fund indices and market indices as

well as contagion between hedge fund indices. The regressions are identical to those performed in Tables

V and VI for daily data, except that the definition of “extreme return” uses a 15% tail cut-off rather than

5%. The 15% cut-off is used for both the hedge fund index returns and the same-direction market

indicator variables. As in Tables V and VI, a positive coefficient on the same direction market indicator

variable indicates contagion in both the negative and positive tail cases, while a negative coefficient

indicates downside protection in the negative tail case.




14
  Liang uses monthly individual fund and index provided by Zurich Capital Markets. Capocci and Hubner use
monthly individual fund and index data provided by Managed Account Reports (MAR) and Hedge Fund Research
(HFR). Their results hold for both index and aggregated individual fund data.
                                                     27
    Examining Table IX, the results for contagion from broad market indices to hedge funds are

consistent with the daily results – there is no evidence of contagion. In contrast to the daily results, there

is evidence that the Arbitrage style provides downside protection against extreme returns in the Russell

3000, while there is no evidence that either the Directional style or the Event Driven style provides

downside protection against any of the broad markets.

    Next, we turn to the tests of contagion between hedge fund indices. Consistent with the findings

using HFR daily data, the results indicate evidence of contagion between hedge fund styles. There is

strong evidence of contagion between the Arbitrage and Event Driven styles, the Directional and Event

Driven styles, and the Event Driven and both the Arbitrage and Directional styles. These results are

strong for both extreme good and extreme negative returns, in contrast to the daily results which are

typically only significant for extreme negative returns.

        In summary, the results from the monthly tests are generally consistent with the results from the

daily tests. While there is no evidence of contagion from broad markets to hedge funds, there is strong

evidence of contagion between all three hedge fund styles. These results suggest that the daily contagion

results are not confined to the shorter period of time for which daily data is available, but rather, that non-

linearities have been prevalent in hedge fund returns for the last fifteen years.



V. Robustness tests

        This section performs robustness tests on the daily and monthly data. First, we investigate

whether we miss contagion from fixed-income markets because of a flight to safety phenomenon. For

instance, during the crisis of 1998, interest rates fell. We re-estimate our regressions allowing for extreme

positive returns in fixed-income markets to increase the probability of extreme negative returns for hedge

fund indices. This robustness test does not lead us to alter our conclusions.

        Second, as discussed in Sections II.1a. and II.1.b., both the S&P and HFR daily indices exhibit

some evidence of autocorrelation in returns. Additionally, the monthly HFR indices discussed in Section

                                                      28
IV also exhibit autocorrelation. To ensure that autocorrelation is not driving our contagion results in

Tables V (S&P daily), VI (HFR daily) and IX (HFR monthly), we perform additional tests.

        For each of the indices, we remove the autocorrelation by fitting individual autoregressive

time-series models of varying lag lengths for the returns. The lag length for each series is selected based

on the partial autocorrelation coefficients following the Box-Jenkins methodology (see, for example,

Hamilton (1994)). These “filtered” returns are then used in the analyses.

        For the S&P daily indices, we use an AR(2) structure for the Arbitrage index and AR(1)

structures for each of the Directional and Event Driven indices. Results from this analysis (not reported,

but available from the authors) are consistent with the results in Table V. Specifically, there is no

evidence of contagion from broad markets to hedge funds, while there is strong evidence of contagion

between hedge fund indices.

        For the HFR daily indices, we use AR(1) structures for the Arbitrage and Directional indices and

an AR(2) structure for the Event Driven index. The results from this analysis are also consistent with the

results in Table VI. Finally, for the HFR monthly indices, we use an AR(3) structure for the Arbitrage

index and AR(1) structures for the Directional and Event Driven indices. The results from this analysis

are consistent with the results in Table IX. There is no evidence of contagion from broad markets to

hedge funds and the evidence of contagion between hedge fund indices remains strong.



VI. Conclusion

    In this paper, we use a unique approach to study contagion in hedge funds. Our approach, which

builds on Bae, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003), avoids many of the issues inherent in tests of correlations. This

methodology uses the binomial and multinomial logit models and focuses on co-incidences of extreme

returns in markets of interest. Specifically, we examine the co-incidence of extreme returns (very good

and very poor returns) between hedge fund indices and broad markets, and analyze this relationship

between hedge fund indices.

                                                    29
    Strikingly, we find almost no evidence of contagion after accounting for correlation between market

factors and hedge fund returns. In other words, extreme market returns do not have a heightened impact

on hedge fund returns. For daily returns, extreme returns in market factors often make it less likely that a

hedge fund will experience an extreme return, which is the opposite of what one would expect if

contagion were present (the exception is contagion between fixed income markets and Arbitrage hedge

funds, and this result only holds using aggregated HFR daily data). We also find no evidence of contagion

using monthly returns.

    However, we find strong evidence of contagion between hedge fund styles. Our data is categorized

into three styles representing Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven hedge funds, and we find evidence

of contagion between all three styles. These contagion effects are strongest among extreme poor returns

for both daily and monthly indices, and exist in both the S&P and HFR return series, with the exception

that the daily HFR indices do not indicate contagion between Arbitrage and Directional funds.

    This contagion continues to exist when we perform our tests using sub-index data and a multinomial

logit approach. The three indices (Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven) are further divided into eight

sub-indices, and we examine the co-incidences of extreme returns in other hedge fund indices conditional

upon the number of sub-indices that experience extreme returns within an aggregate index. These tests

provide even stronger evidence of contagion between hedge fund indices, including evidence of contagion

between Arbitrage and Directional funds which was not found in the aggregated daily HFR tests.

    Our study is the first to examine contagion among hedge fund returns and also the first to use daily

hedge fund data, which only recently became available.            Our results are relevant for investors,

policymakers, and regulators. Our finding of little contagion from financial markets to hedge funds

suggests an additional benefit from investing in hedge funds. While the literature has emphasized the

diversification benefit from investing in hedge funds, our paper suggests that there is an additional benefit

in that hedge funds appear to be relatively insulated from extreme negative returns in the traditional asset

classes.

                                                     30
    However, our finding of significant contagion between hedge fund styles indicates that diversifying

between hedge funds within a portfolio does not reduce downside risk associated with extremely poor

returns. Finally, from the perspective of regulators and policymakers, poor performance in one sector of

the hedge fund industry is likely to be associated with poor performance throughout the industry.

However, there is little evidence that poor performance in the broad markets is contagious to the hedge

fund industry. These results imply that systemic risk arising from poor performance in the broad markets

is not amplified by contagion to the hedge fund industry.




                                                    31
         Table I.A: Summary statistics of daily returns for S&P hedge fund indices and common risk factors: October 1, 2002 to June 15, 2005
Summary statistics for daily data on the S&P 500 hedge fund indices and the risk factors used in the paper are reported below. The hedge fund indices include Arbitrage, Directional, and Event
Driven and are described more fully in Section II and Appendix A. The risk factors are from Datastream and include the negative portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for a long put option, the
change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index calculated as the average of the implied volatilities from call and put options on the S&P 500, the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in the
Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index (the FRB Dollar Index), the daily return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the daily return on the three-month U.S. Treasury
Bill. Number of observations is 684. Correlations between all the variables are reported in Panel 1. The autocorrelations for each of the hedge fund indices as well as Ljung-Box test statistics for
autocorrelation from lags 1-6 are reported in Panel 2. The second row in the autocorrelation table reports t-values in parentheses. Panel 3 reports Jarque-Bera test statistics for normality with p-values
reported in parentheses. Bold and italic bold results indicate significance at the 5% level or better and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                              Panel 1: Summary statistics and simple correlations

                              Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven         -[S&P 500]          Δ in S&P 500        Russell 3000        Δ in FRB dollar         Return on LB         T Bill
                               return            return             return               return         implied volatility      return                 index               bond index          return
 Number of observations          684               684                684                  684                  684               684                    684                   684               684
 Mean                          0.007%           0.025%             0.037%               -0.331%              -0.038%            0.066%                -0.019%                0.011%           -0.001%
 Median                        0.002%           0.033%             0.038%               0.000%               -0.506%            0.081%                -0.009%                0.056%             0.000
 Standard deviation             0.211             0.305              0.127                0.539                5.539             0.979                  0.293                 0.419             0.006
 Skewness                       0.092            -0.279              0.254               -2.013                0.639             0.315                  0.311                -2.335             0.643
 Excess kurtosis                0.983             1.386              3.006                4.552                1.001             1.612                  0.533                14.331             7.119
 Correlations
 Arbitrage                       1.000                                                   -0.405              0.308               -0.520                -0.031                  0.119            0.035
 Directional                     -0.030           1.000                                   0.200              -0.163               0.207                -0.535                  0.134            0.146
 Event Driven                    -0.178           0.218               1.000               0.316              -0.297               0.406                -0.054                 -0.095            -0.058

                                                                  Panel 2: Autocorrelations and Ljung-Box test

 Autocorrelations              Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven
 lag 1                         -0.20658          0.09757            0.06301
                                (-5.40)            (2.55)            (1.65)
 lag 2                         -0.11755           -0.0143           0.02932
                                (-2.95)           (-0.37)            (0.76)
 lag 3                          0.02289           0.01355           0.10095
                                 (0.57)            (0.35)            (2.63)
 lag 4                          0.01588           0.04638           0.06609
                                 (0.39)            (1.20)            (1.70)
 lag 5                          0.00122           0.00307           0.00934
                                 (0.03)            (0.08)            (0.24)
 lag 6                          0.05511          -0.04427           0.04502
                                 (1.37)           (-1.14)            (1.16)
 Ljung-Box test (1-6)            41.46              9.65             14.82
 p-value                        (0.000)           (0.140)           (0.022)

                                                                                 Panel 3: Normality test

                             Arbitrage         Directional      Event Driven
 Jarque-Bera Test               27.612            62.076            259.549
 p-value                        (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
                                                                                                   32
                                   Table I.B: S&P daily hedge fund index correlations conditioned on financial market variables
Conditional correlations for the hedge fund indices and three market variables are calculated. The conditioning market variables include the return on the Russell 3000 index, the
return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index. Correlations are conditional upon the market
variable being above or below its median for the entire time period studied. Bold and italic bold results indicate significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.


                                                                            Conditioning variable: Russell 3000 Index
                                       Conditioning variable above median                                             Conditioning variable below median

                   Arbitrage     Directional
                                                 Event     Russell    Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                    Arbitrage    Directional
                                                                                                                                Event     Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                 Driven     3000     dollar index    bond index                                 Driven     3000      dollar index    bond index
 Arbitrage           1.000                                 -0.419      -0.007         0.045          1.000                                -0.310       -0.032           0.096
 Directional         0.015         1.000                   -0.040      -0.526         0.138          0.107         1.000                   0.174       -0.584          0.224
 Event Driven       -0.130         0.093         1.000      0.253       0.019         -0.026         0.013         0.223        1.000     0.275        -0.158          -0.086

                                                                              Conditioning variable: LB Bond Yield
                                       Conditioning variable above median                                             Conditioning variable below median


                 Arbitrage     Directional
                                               Event      Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                    Arbitrage    Directional
                                                                                                                                Event     Russell    Δ in FRB       Return on LB
                                               Driven      3000      dollar index    bond index                                 Driven     3000     dollar index     bond index
 Arbitrage          1.000                                 -0.521       -0.028         0.020           1.000                               -0.495      -0.028          0.049
 Directional       -0.032        1.000                     0.283       -0.489          0.066         -0.889         1.000                  0.250      -0.543          -0.051
 Event Driven      -0.100        0.263         1.000       0.407       -0.041         -0.110         -0.257         0.211       1.000     0.393       -0.113          -0.085

                                                                            Conditioning variable: FRB Dollar Index
                                       Conditioning variable above median                                             Conditioning variable below median


                 Arbitrage     Directional
                                               Event      Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                    Arbitrage    Directional
                                                                                                                                Event     Russell    Δ in FRB       Return on LB
                                               Driven      3000      dollar index    bond index                                 Driven     3000     dollar index     bond index
 Arbitrage          1.000                                 -0.531        0.015          0.100          1.000                               -0.504       0.058           0.120
 Directional       -0.090        1.000                     0.249       -0.446          0.037         -0.036         1.000                  0.275      -0.312          0.099
 Event Driven      -0.244        0.284         1.000       0.411       -0.136         -0.115         -0.104         0.185       1.000     0.402       -0.022          -0.070




                                                                                       33
         Table II.A: Summary statistics of daily returns for HFR hedge fund indices and common risk factors: April 4, 2003 to June 15, 2005
Summary statistics for daily data on the Hedge Fund Research hedge fund indices and the risk factors used in the paper are reported below. The hedge fund indices include Arbitrage, Directional, and
Event Driven and are described more fully in Section II and Appendix B. The risk factors are from Datastream and include the negative portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for a long put option,
the change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index calculated as the average of the implied volatilities from call and put options on the S&P 500, the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in
the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index (the FRB Dollar Index), the daily return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the daily return on the three-month U.S.
Treasury Bill. Number of observations is 557. Correlations between all the variables are reported in Panel 1. The autocorrelations for each of the hedge fund indices as well as Ljung-Box test
statistics for autocorrelation from lags 1-6 are reported in Panel 2. The second row in the autocorrelation table reports t-values in parentheses. Panel 3 reports Jarque-Bera test statistics for normality
with p-values reported in parentheses. Bold and italic bold correlation results indicate significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.
                                                                        Panel 1: Summary statistics and simple correlations

                               Arbitrage       Directional        Event Driven        -[S&P 500]           Δ in S&P 500        Russell 3000       Δ in FRB dollar         Return on LB          T Bill
                                return           return              return              return          implied volatility      return                 index              bond index           return
 Number of observations          557               557                 557                 557                 557                 557                  557                     557               557
 Mean                          -0.001%           0.018%              0.031%             -0.267%              -0.047%             0.072%               -0.017%                 0.006%           -0.001%
 Median                        -0.001%           0.031%              0.039%              0.000%              -0.689%             0.093%               -0.017%                 0.054%            0.000%
 Standard deviation             0.123             0.241               0.127               0.428               5.553               0.783                0.313                   0.430             0.006
 Skewness                       0.194            -0.358              -0.288              -1.711               0.751              -0.002                0.300                  -2.449            -0.093
 Excess kurtosis                2.049             1.070               0.257               2.446               1.166              -0.023                0.265                  15.300             2.925
 Correlations
 Arbitrage                       1.000                                                   -0.023               -0.001              0.070                -0.143                  0.071            0.077
 Directional                     0.099            1.000                                   0.403               -0.260              0.466                -0.462                 -0.015             0.112
 Event Driven                    0.172            0.460               1.000               0.434               -0.365              0.527                -0.091                 -0.059            -0.008

                                                                  Panel 2: Autocorrelations and Ljung-Box test

 Autocorrelations              Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven
 lag 1                         -0.07683           0.22279            0.14352
                                (-1.81)            (5.26)             (3.39)
 lag 2                          -0.0197           0.0688             0.20597
                                (-0.46)            (1.55)             (4.76)
 lag 3                          0.0771            0.06131            0.11312
                                 (1.81)            (1.37)             (2.52)
 lag 4                          0.02665           0.00793            0.07891
                                 (0.62)            (0.18)             (1.74)
 lag 5                          0.08517           0.02287            0.08952
                                 (1.98)            (0.51)             (1.96)
 lag 6                          0.01166           -0.0191            0.11224
                                 (0.27)           (-0.43)             (2.44)
 Ljung-Box test (1-6)            11.43             33.10              57.67
 p-value                         0.076             0.000              0.000

                                                                                 Panel 3: Normality test

                             Arbitrage         Directional       Event Driven
 Jarque-Bera Test               98.177            37.358              9.059
 p-value                        (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.011)
                                                                                                    34
                                  Table II.B: HFR daily hedge fund index correlations conditioned on financial market variables
Conditional correlations for the hedge fund indices and three market variables are calculated. The conditioning market variables include the return on the Russell 3000 index, the
return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index. Correlations are conditional upon the market
variable being above or below its median for the entire time period studied. Bold and italic bold correlation results indicate significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                                            Conditioning variable: Russell 3000 Index
                                      Conditioning variable above median                                                Conditioning variable below median

                  Arbitrage    Directional
                                              Event      Russell     Δ in FRB       Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage      Directional
                                                                                                                                  Event      Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                              Driven      3000      dollar index     bond index                                   Driven      3000      dollar index    bond index
 Arbitrage          1.000                                -0.112        -0.046          -0.010          1.000                                 0.056        -0.247          0.177
 Directional        0.014        1.000                    0.246        -0.476          -0.023          0.254          1.000                  0.419        -0.509          0.070
 Event Driven       0.135        0.274        1.000       0.405        -0.025          -0.065          0.285          0.466        1.000     0.416        -0.158          0.010

                                                                                Conditioning variable: LB Bond Yield
                                      Conditioning variable above median                                                Conditioning variable below median


                  Arbitrage    Directional
                                              Event      Russell     Δ in FRB       Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage      Directional
                                                                                                                                   Event     Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                              Driven      3000      dollar index     bond index                                    Driven     3000      dollar index    bond index
 Arbitrage          1.000                                -0.104        -0.093           0.072          1.000                                 -0.002       -0.146          -0.068
 Directional        0.035        1.000                    0.505        -0.418           0.029          0.164          1.000                   0.441       -0.518          -0.121
 Event Driven       0.211        0.488        1.000       0.527        -0.084          -0.099          0.148          0.434        1.000      0.524       -0.135          -0.042

                                                                             Conditioning variable: FRB Dollar Index
                                      Conditioning variable above median                                                Conditioning variable below median


                  Arbitrage    Directional
                                              Event      Russell     Δ in FRB       Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage      Directional
                                                                                                                                   Event     Russell     Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                              Driven      3000      dollar index     bond index                                    Driven     3000      dollar index    bond index
 Arbitrage          1.000                                -0.003        -0.099          -0.001          1.000                                 -0.144       -0.133          0.129
 Directional        0.102        1.000                    0.519        -0.376          -0.107          0.036          1.000                   0.479       -0.272          -0.056
 Event Driven       0.205        0.485        1.000       0.553        -0.202          -0.100          0.125          0.460        1.000      0.501        0.055          -0.030




                                                                                         35
Table III: Contagion of extreme events in financial markets to extreme events in S&P daily hedge fund
                                                indices
 The event of an extreme daily positive or negative return in each S&P hedge fund index is separately modeled as the outcome of
 a binary variable and estimated as a logit model. A daily return is classified as extreme if it belongs to either the top or bottom
 5% of all returns of that style. The independent variables include the negative portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for a long
 put option, the change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index calculated as the average of the implied volatilities from call
 and put options on the S&P 500, the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-
 weighted dollar index (the FRB Dollar Index), the daily return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the daily return on
 the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill. The extreme event dummy variables on the equity, bond, and currency markets are equal to
 one if the respective return belongs to either the top or the bottom 5% of all values of that series. Below the coefficients are the
 t-values in parentheses and the marginal effects. The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the explanatory variables
 (see Greene, 2000, equation (19-12)). The pseudo R2 is McFadden's likelihood ratio index. Bold and italic-bold coefficients
 indicate significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                           S&P Arbitrage             S&P Directional           S&P Event Driven
  Continuous Variables                                 Negative       Positive     Negative      Positive     Negative     Positive

  Constant                                              -4.0596       -3.5678       -4.8546      -4.9582       -3.3636     -3.2932
                                                        (-11.93)      (-10.49)      (-7.65)      (-9.88)       (-9.47)     (-10.48)
  -[S&P 500]                                            -1.2826       0.3138        -1.5453      -1.7829       0.3061       -0.2322
                                                        (-1.63)       (0.46)        (-1.48)      (-2.34)       (0.34)       (-0.25)
                                                         -0.02         0.00          -0.01        -0.02         0.00          0.00
  Russell 3000                                          1.4413        -1.8585       -0.4002       1.7856       -0.7591      1.1333
                                                        (5.22)        (-3.05)       (-0.59)       (4.12)       (-0.97)      (2.95)
                                                         0.02          -0.02          0.00         0.02         -0.01        0.02
  Change in S&P500 implied volatility                   0.0034        -0.0253       0.0025        0.0173       0.0656       0.0267
                                                        (0.08)        (-0.60)       (0.04)        (0.39)       (1.42)       (0.65)
                                                         0.00           0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00         0.00
  Change in FRB dollar index                            1.5119        0.0914        6.6468       -5.6213       1.6274       1.3174
                                                        (2.00)        (0.13)        (6.31)       (-5.21)       (2.21)       (1.77)
                                                         0.02          0.00          0.03         -0.05         0.02         0.02
  Return on LB bond index                               1.1305        -0.8128       -2.0335       2.0936       1.6053       0.2233
                                                        (1.44)        (-2.01)       (-2.85)       (1.83)       (2.84)       (0.49)
                                                         0.02          -0.01         -0.01         0.02         0.02         0.00
  3 month T-Bill return                                 78.2507      -17.6722       -6.5566      -34.4914      32.5143      -18.111
                                                         (2.19)       (-0.84)       (-0.22)       (-1.09)       (1.01)      (-0.68)
                                                         1.166         -0.23         -0.03         -0.30         0.47        -0.33
  Market Indicator Variables
  Same direction extreme event Russell 3000            -13.6863      -10.0511       -2.2974      -3.1774       0.3223       -0.7641
                                                        (-9.93)       (-9.73)       (-1.84)      (-1.98)       (0.42)       (-0.81)
                                                         -0.20         -0.13         -0.01        -0.03         0.00         -0.01
  Same direction extreme event LB bond index            1.1558        0.8556        -4.6236      -0.8387      -13.3734     -13.8387
                                                        (1.00)        (1.22)        (-1.58)      (-0.79)       (-16.33)    (-30.53)
                                                         0.02          0.01          -0.02        -0.01          -0.19       -0.25
  Same direction extreme event FRB dollar index         1.1821        -0.9891       -9.3316      -8.1582       0.0254       -1.3483
                                                        (1.23)        (-0.79)       (-9.80)      (-8.38)       (0.02)       (-1.14)
                                                         0.02          -0.01         -0.04        -0.07         0.00         -0.02
  McFadden's Pseudo R2                                   0.215         0.212         0.421        0.289         0.155        0.127
  Table IV: Contagion of extreme events in financial markets to extreme events in HFR aggregated
                                     daily hedge fund indices

This table repeats the analysis of Table III, using the HFR aggregated hedge fund indices in lieu of the S&P hedge fund indices.
The event of an extreme daily positive or negative return in each HFR hedge fund index is separately modeled as the outcome of
a binary variable and estimated as a logit model. A daily return is classified as extreme if it belongs to either the top or bottom
5% of all returns of that style. The independent variables include the negative portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for a long
put option, the change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index calculated as the average of the implied volatilities from call
and put options on the S&P 500, the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-
weighted dollar index (the FRB Dollar Index), the daily return on the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the daily return on
the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill. The extreme event dummy variables on the equity, bond, and currency markets are equal to
one if the respective return belongs to either the top or the bottom 5% of all values of that series. Below the coefficients are the
t-values in parentheses and the marginal effects. The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the explanatory variables
(see Greene, 2000, equation (19-12)). The pseudo R2 is McFadden's likelihood ratio index. Bold and italic-bold coefficients
indicate significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                         HFR Arbitrage             HFR Directional          HFR Event Driven
 Continuous Variables                                 Negative       Positive     Negative     Positive    Negative      Positive

 Constant                                              -3.3687       -2.8036       -4.2942     -3.7672      -3.4911       -3.1171
                                                       (-9.49)       (-8.89)       (-9.69)      (-7.64)     (-9.41)       (-8.69)
 -[S&P 500]                                            -0.8156       1.4259        -1.2038      3.7039      1.4852        0.4077
                                                       (-0.94)       (1.75)        (-1.60)      (1.63)      (1.62)        (0.42)
                                                        -0.03         0.06           0.00        0.02        0.02          0.01
 Russell 3000                                          0.0397        -1.5489       -0.8488      1.6512      -2.2054       0.9011
                                                       (0.08)        (-3.27)       (-1.29)      (2.90)      (-2.70)       (1.57)
                                                        0.00          -0.06          0.00        0.01        -0.04         0.02
 Change in S&P500 implied volatility                   -0.0435       -0.0729       -0.0514      0.0561      0.1314        0.046
                                                       (-0.79)       (-1.43)       (-0.84)      (1.18)      (3.25)        (0.98)
                                                         0.00          0.00          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00
 Change in FRB dollar index                            1.1475        -0.5065       4.3471      -4.2898      1.5122        -0.5846
                                                       (1.79)        (-0.62)       (5.26)      (-4.27)      (1.77)        (-0.66)
                                                        0.05          -0.02         0.02        -0.02        0.02          -0.01
 Return on LB bond index                               0.3418        -0.3766       0.9385      -0.2983      0.7868        -0.1226
                                                       (0.58)        (-0.59)       (1.18)      (-0.40)      (0.97)        (-0.27)
                                                        0.01          -0.02         0.00         0.00        0.01           0.00
 3 month T-Bill return                                 -5.272        27.2759      -25.8921     -11.699     -10.5594      19.2303
                                                       (-0.16)        (1.15)       (-0.62)     (-0.26)      (-0.23)       (0.79)
                                                       -0.225          1.10         -0.10       -0.06        -0.17         0.43
 Market Indicator Variables
 Same direction extreme event Russell 3000             -0.2727       2.2845        -0.0847     -2.9542       -0.44        0.1981
                                                       (-0.29)       (2.59)        (-0.11)     (-2.26)      (-0.58)       (0.21)
                                                        -0.01         0.09           0.00       -0.02        -0.01         0.00
 Same direction extreme event LB bond index            1.7496        1.2031       -16.5539     -0.8785      -0.206        -0.1873
                                                       (1.97)        (1.42)        (-11.69)     (-0.60)     (-0.15)       (-0.16)
                                                        0.07          0.05           -0.07       0.00        0.00           0.00
 Same direction extreme event FRB dollar index         0.4744        0.2065       -12.2192     -8.8852      0.1204       -11.694
                                                       (0.40)        (0.18)       (-14.62)     (-9.24)      (0.09)       (-16.26)
                                                        0.02          0.01          -0.05       -0.05        0.00          -0.26
 McFadden's Pseudo R2                                   0.040         0.051         0.301       0.260        0.240         0.082
                Table V: Contagion of extreme events between S&P daily hedge fund indices

The event of an extreme daily positive or negative return in each hedge fund style is separately modeled as the outcome
of a binary variable and estimated as a logit model. A daily return is classified as extreme if it belongs to either the top or
bottom 5% of all returns of that style. The continuous variables and market indicator variables are described in Table IV,
above. The other hedge fund index indicator variables are set equal to one if the return is classified as an extreme return
in the respective style on the same day. Below the coefficients are the t-values in parentheses and the marginal effects.
The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the explanatory variables (see Greene, 2000, equation (19-12)). The
pseudo R2 is McFadden's likelihood ratio index. Bold and italic bold coefficients indicate significance at the 5% and the
10% level, respectively.

                                                    S&P Arbitrage             S&P Directional          S&P Event Driven
                                                  Negative  Positive         Negative  Positive        Negative Positive
 Continuous variables
 Constant                                          -4.2602      -3.6171       -4.9821      -5.2314      -3.4427     -3.2811
                                                   (-11.31)     (-10.45)       (-7.45)     (-9.13)      (-9.82)     (-10.44)
 -[S&P 500]                                        -0.8556       0.5396        -0.961       -1.336      0.3958      -0.2899
                                                    (-1.05)       (0.76)       (-1.09)     (-1.95)       (0.46)      (-0.31)
                                                      -0.01         0.00          0.00       -0.01         0.01        0.00
 Russell 3000                                       1.5468      -2.1226       -0.9134      1.8816       -0.8138      1.0902
                                                     (5.19)      (-3.31)       (-1.64)      (4.40)      (-1.13)       (2.83)
                                                       0.02        -0.01          0.00        0.01        -0.01        0.01
 Change in S&P500 implied volatility               -0.0028      -0.0202       -0.0002      0.0277       0.0392       0.0202
                                                    (-0.07)      (-0.45)       (-0.00)      (0.63)       (0.94)       (0.55)
                                                       0.00         0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
 Change in FRB dollar index                         0.0098      -0.0346       -0.0105      0.0203       0.0542       0.0259
                                                     (0.22)      (-0.77)       (-0.18)      (0.46)       (1.16)       (0.65)
                                                       0.00         0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
 Return on LB bond index                            0.6967        0.482        6.6813      -6.0911      1.0719       1.4229
                                                     (1.04)       (0.71)        (6.02)     (-5.02)       (1.41)       (1.95)
                                                       0.01         0.00          0.03       -0.04         0.02        0.02
 3 month T-Bill return                              1.3521      -0.9396        -2.274      2.2424       1.6114       0.1866
                                                     (1.58)      (-2.19)       (-3.37)      (1.90)       (2.78)       (0.42)
                                                       0.02        -0.01         -0.01        0.02         0.02        0.00
 Market indicator variables
 Same direction extreme event Russell 3000        -14.8796      -10.517       -2.1526      -3.3492       0.4734     -0.6931
                                                   (-10.71)     (-9.66)        (-1.66)     (-1.99)        (0.60)     (-0.73)
                                                     -0.18        -0.06         -0.01       -0.02           0.01      -0.01
 Same direction extreme event LB bond index         1.3685      0.7647        -5.2419      -0.9474     -12.1843     -12.766
                                                    (1.17)       (1.05)        (-2.24)     (-0.95)      (-14.74)    (-28.30)
                                                      0.02         0.00         -0.02       -0.01          -0.18      -0.14
 Same direction extreme event FRB dollar index      0.853       -1.2127       -9.2206      -7.6628      -0.3743     -1.4302
                                                    (0.93)      (-0.96)        (-9.13)     (-7.00)       (-0.35)     (-1.21)
                                                      0.01        -0.01         -0.04       -0.05          -0.01      -0.02
 Other hedge fund index indicator variables
 Arbitrage                                                                    2.4199       2.5305       1.2163      -12.213
                                                                              (3.35)       (3.50)       (1.30)      (-29.02)
                                                                               0.01         0.02         0.02         -0.13
 Directional                                        1.8049        1.9777                                0.8353       0.3567
                                                    (2.63)        (2.80)                                (1.40)       (0.47)
                                                     0.02           0.01                                 0.01          0.00
 Event Driven                                       1.4104      -14.1298      0.9656       0.5899
                                                    (1.71)       (-33.36)     (1.67)       (0.77)
                                                     0.02          -0.08       0.00         0.00
 McFadden's Pseudo R2                               0.244          0.238      0.446         0.322        0.170        0.133
       Table VI: Contagion of extreme events between HFR daily aggregated hedge fund indices
This table repeats the analysis of Table VI, using the HFR aggregated hedge fund indices in lieu of the S&P hedge fund
indices. The event of an extreme daily positive or negative return in each hedge fund style is separately modeled as the
outcome of a binary variable and estimated as a logit model. A daily return is classified as extreme if it belongs to either
the top or bottom 5% of all returns of that style. The continuous variables and market indicator variables are described in
Table IV, above. The other hedge fund index indicator variables are set equal to one if the return is classified as an
extreme return in the respective style on the same day. Below the coefficients are the t-values in parentheses and the
marginal effects. The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the explanatory variables (see Greene, 2000, equation
(19-12)). The pseudo R2 is McFadden's likelihood ratio index. Bold and italic bold coefficients indicate significance at the
5% and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                   HFR Arbitrage           HFR Directional          HFR Event Driven
                                                 Negative  Positive       Negative  Positive       Negative  Positive
 Continuous variables
 Constant                                        -3.4292      -3.0027      -4.7641      -4.0123     -3.6747      -3.3206
                                                 (-9.41)      (-9.37)       (-8.73)     (-7.87)     (-9.31)       (-9.13)
 -[S&P 500]                                      -0.8144      1.4612       -1.4867      3.7058      2.1206        0.2249
                                                 (-0.97)       (1.74)       (-2.14)      (1.48)      (2.25)       (0.24)
                                                   -0.03         0.05          0.00        0.02        0.03         0.00
 Russell 3000                                    0.0478        -1.795      -0.6275         1.83     -2.2045       1.0137
                                                  (0.10)      (-3.44)       (-1.04)      (3.04)     (-2.77)       (1.68)
                                                    0.00        -0.07          0.00        0.01       -0.03         0.02
 Change in S&P500 implied volatility             -0.0564      -0.0865       -0.117      0.0567      0.1469        0.0521
                                                 (-1.04)      (-1.74)       (-1.75)      (1.15)      (3.24)       (1.08)
                                                    0.00         0.00          0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00
 Change in FRB dollar index                      1.1542       -0.2457       4.1629        -4.28     0.2145       -0.4116
                                                  (1.45)      (-0.29)        (5.18)     (-4.23)      (0.24)       (-0.49)
                                                    0.05        -0.01          0.01       -0.02        0.00        -0.01
 Return on LB bond index                         0.3184        -0.266       0.6275      -0.3085      0.744         0.085
                                                  (0.55)      (-0.55)        (0.83)     (-0.48)      (0.85)       (0.21)
                                                    0.01        -0.01          0.00        0.00        0.01         0.00
 3 month T-Bill return                           -6.3725      25.7483     -25.8255     -15.5838    -19.0641      13.0152
                                                 (-0.20)       (1.03)       (-0.68)     (-0.34)     (-0.39)       (0.51)
                                                   -0.27         0.95         -0.09       -0.07       -0.27         0.27
 Market indicator variables
 Same direction extreme event Russell 3000       -0.2302      2.2975        0.3411     -3.2104      -0.2212       0.1198
                                                 (-0.25)      (2.54)         (0.39)    (-2.94)      (-0.24)       (0.12)
                                                   -0.01       0.09            0.00     -0.02         0.00          0.00
 Same direction extreme event LB bond index      1.7654       1.2456      -16.2682     -0.8442      0.2771       -0.4253
                                                  (1.96)      (1.61)        (-9.29)    (-0.61)       (0.19)       (-0.37)
                                                    0.07       0.05           -0.05      0.00         0.00         -0.01
 Same direction extreme event FRB dollar index   0.5184       0.2181       -11.862     -8.7825      -0.1821     -11.6669
                                                  (0.43)      (0.20)       (-14.08)    (-9.68)      (-0.14)      (-17.04)
                                                    0.02       0.01           -0.04     -0.04         0.00         -0.25
 Other hedge fund index indicator
 Arbitrage                                                                 0.2117       1.5163      0.8972       1.4246
                                                                           (0.23)       (1.87)      (1.20)       (2.17)
                                                                            0.00         0.01        0.01         0.03
 Directional                                     -0.4461       1.166                                2.6402       0.5673
                                                 (-0.49)      (1.56)                                (3.61)       (0.93)
                                                   -0.02       0.04                                  0.04         0.01
 Event Driven                                    1.0254       1.4111       2.5736       0.4526
                                                  (1.68)      (2.17)       (4.02)       (0.69)
                                                    0.04       0.05         0.01         0.00
 McFadden's Pseudo R2                             0.047        0.081        0.383       0.278        0.324        0.105
                                           Table VII: Contagion in HFR daily sub-indices
The number of extreme daily positive or negative returns within each HFR aggregate sub-index is separately modeled as the value
of the COUNT variable and estimated as a multinomial logit model. The COUNT variable is set to zero (0) if no sub-indices have
an extreme return on that day, one (1) if one sub-index has an extreme return on that day, and two (2) if two or more sub-indices
have extreme returns on that day. The continuous variables (coefficients not reported) are as in Table VI. The market indicator
COUNT variables on the equity, bond, and currency markets are set to one if the respective return belongs to either the top or the
bottom 5% of all values of that series. The other hedge fund index indicator variables are the respective COUNT variables for
each fund style on the same day.

                                                    HFR Arbitrage             HFR Directional            HFR Event Driven
                                                 Negative     Positive      Negative      Positive      Negative       Positive
 Market indicator variables
 Same direction extreme event Russell 3000
 (COUNT=1)                                       0.4136       -0.3789       1.3458        0.3174         0.2594       -0.0952
                                                 (0.627)      (-0.332)      (1.593)       (0.478)        (0.457)      (-0.142)
                                                  0.04          -0.04        0.06          0.01           0.02          0.00
 Same direction extreme event Russell 3000
 (COUNT=2)                                       0.9787       1.7450        1.3675       -19.7330       -0.9051       -2.1659
                                                 (0.630)      (1.541)       (0.874)      (-10.607)      (-0.782)      (-1.404)
                                                  0.00         0.01          0.00           0.00          0.00          -0.00
 Same direction extreme event LB bond index
 (COUNT=1)                                       1.5266       0.3116        0.2897        -0.5467        0.7170       -0.4219
                                                 (2.205)      (0.499)       (0.231)       (-0.705)       (0.669)      (-0.610)
                                                  0.17         0.03          0.01           -0.01         0.06          -0.02
 Same direction extreme event LB bond index
 (COUNT=2)                                       -11.8027     3.6385        -8.9119      -16.0784       -15.0662      -15.0228
                                                  (-5.447)    (3.158)       (-1.739)      (-9.361)       (-7.304)     (-16.512)
                                                    -0.03      0.01           0.00          0.00           -0.04        -0.02
 Same direction extreme event FRB dollar
 index (COUNT=1)                                 -0.9303      0.5982        1.2442       -15.8922       -0.7201       -14.5803
                                                 (-0.872)     (0.776)       (1.081)      (-26.338)      (-0.950)      (-33.725)
                                                   -0.10       0.06          0.05          -0.38          -0.06         -0.69
 Same direction extreme event FRB dollar
 index (COUNT=2)                                 0.3296      -12.4802      -13.9306      -11.4700        1.6310       -12.0060
                                                 (0.220)     (-15.463)      (-8.094)      (-4.385)       (1.181)       (-8.641)
                                                  0.00         -0.05          -0.00         0.00          0.00           -0.02
 Other hedge fund index indicator COUNT
 variables
 Arbitrage (COUNT=1)                                                        0.5276         0.4614        0.8921        0.6536
                                                                            (1.440)       (1.131)        (3.011)      (2.111)
                                                                             0.023         0.011          0.070        0.031
 Arbitrage (COUNT=2)                                                        1.5601       -13.2969        0.1239        1.3169
                                                                            (1.514)      (-15.914)       (0.176)      (1.828)
                                                                             0.000         0.000          0.000        0.002
 Directional (COUNT=1)                           0.4152       0.1068                                     0.8666        0.1310
                                                 (1.183)      (0.247)                                    (2.591)      (0.372)
                                                  0.044        0.010                                      0.068        0.006
 Directional (COUNT=2)                           1.5943       0.6933                                     2.4318       -0.4252
                                                 (2.565)      (0.526)                                    (3.845)      (-0.579)
                                                  0.004        0.003                                      0.006        -0.001
 Event Driven (COUNT=1)                          0.5052       0.5476        0.7125         0.2789
                                                 (1.830)      (1.773)       (1.948)       (0.946)
                                                  0.054        0.050         0.031         0.007
 Event Driven (COUNT=2)                          0.2567       1.1416        5.8336       -15.3703
                                                 (0.646)      (1.737)       (2.130)      (-17.842)
                                                  0.001        0.005         0.000         0.000
 McFadden's Pseudo R2                             0.066        0.085         0.316         0.198         0.196         0.128
                   Table VIII.A: Summary statistics of monthly returns on aggregated HFR indices and risk factors: January, 1990 to May, 2005
Summary statistics for monthly data on the HFR hedge fund indexes and the risk factors used in the paper are reported below. The statistics include the mean, median, standard deviation, skewness,
and kurtosis. The indices include Arbitrage, Directional, and Event Driven and are described more fully in Section I and Appendix C. The risk factors are from Datastream and include the negative
portion of the S&P 500 returns to proxy for a long put option, the change in implied volatility on the S&P 500 index calculated as the average of the implied volatilities from call and put options on
the S&P 500, the return on the Russell 3000 index, the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index (the FRB Dollar Index), the daily return on the Lehman Brothers
U.S. Bond Index, and the daily return on the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill. The number of observations is 185. Correlations between all the variables and the autocorrelations as well as Jarque-
Bera test statistics for Normality are reported below the summary statistics. The second row in the autocorrelation table reports t-values in parentheses. Bold and italic bold correlation results indicate
significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.

                                                                              Panel 1: Summary statistics and simple correlations

                               Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven
                                                                                       -[S&P 500]         Δ in S&P 500         Russell 3000       Δ in FRB Dollar          Return on LB         T Bill
                                                                                         Return         implied volatility       return                 Index               Bond Index          Return
 Number of observations           185              185                 185                 185                185                  185                   185                    185               185
 Mean                           0.832%           1.307%              1.061%             -1.308%             1.198%               0.763%               -0.030%                 0.614%            0.007%
 Median                         0.930%           1.255%              1.150%              0.000%             -0.878%              1.277%                0.018%                 0.753%            0.003%
 Standard deviation              0.755            2.225               1.458               2.413              17.060               4.209                 1.873                  1.372             0.055
 Skewness                       -1.178            0.237              -1.644              -2.468              0.997               -0.568                 0.206                 -0.140             0.950
 Excess kurtosis                 5.326            0.540               7.511               7.047              2.008                0.809                 0.319                  0.551             3.298

 Correlations
 Arbitrage                       1.000                                                   0.343               -0.264               0.375                  0.027                 0.212             0.181
 Directional                     0.592            1.000                                  0.557               -0.420               0.640                 -0.003                 0.192             0.114
 Event Driven                    0.669            0.688               1.000              0.654               -0.486               0.617                  0.053                 0.052             0.011

                                                                                               Panel 2: Autocorrelations
 Autocorrelations              Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven
 lag 1                          0.4613            0.16984            0.37937
                                 (6.27)            (2.31)             (5.16)
 lag 2                          0.29172           0.05951            0.09013
                                 (3.32)            (0.79)             (1.08)
 lag 3                          0.08883           0.0191             0.03808
                                 (0.96)            (0.25)             (0.45)
 lag 4                          0.10948           0.00881           -0.00961
                                 (1.17)            (0.12)            (-0.11)
 lag 5                          0.10874           0.02538           -0.02039
                                 (1.16)            (0.33)            (-0.24)
 lag 6                          0.20529           0.05503           -0.06363
                                 (2.17)            (0.72)            (-0.76)
 Ljung-Box test (1-6)           70.310             6.890             29.750
 p-value                         0.000             0.332              0.000
                                                                                                 Panel 3: Normality test
                               Arbitrage        Directional       Event Driven
 Jarque-Bera Test               246.612            3.579             490.216
 p-value                         0.000             0.167              0.000
                                 Table VIII.B.: Aggregate HFR monthly index correlations conditioned on financial market variables
Conditional correlations for the hedge fund indices and three of the market variables are calculated. The conditioning market variables include the return on the Russell 3000
index, the negative of the change in the yield of the Lehman Brothers U.S. Bond Index, and the change in the Federal Reserve Bank competitiveness-weighted dollar index.
Correlations are conditional upon the market variable being above or below its median for the entire time period studied. Bold and italic bold correlation results indicate
significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively.


                                                                         Conditioning variable: Russell 3000 Index
                                        Conditioning variable above median                                           Conditioning variable below median

                 Arbitrage    Directional
                                             Event       Russell      Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage   Directional
                                                                                                                               Event    Russell    Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                             Driven       3000       Dollar Index    Bond Index                                Driven    3000     Dollar Index    Bond Index
 Arbitrage         1.000                                 0.138          0.117           0.239         1.000                             0.378       -0.016          0.169
 Directional       0.580        1.000                    0.182          0.129           0.093         0.544        1.000                0.583       -0.058          0.271
 Event Driven      0.551        0.601        1.000       0.007          0.161           0.004         0.695        0.628       1.000    0.704        0.044          0.036

                                                                           Conditioning variable: LB Bond Yield
                                        Conditioning variable above median                                           Conditioning variable below median


                 Arbitrage    Directional
                                             Event       Russell      Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage   Directional
                                                                                                                               Event    Russell    Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                             Driven       3000       Dollar Index    Bond Index                                Driven    3000     Dollar Index    Bond Index
 Arbitrage         1.000                                 0.267          0.087          0.104          1.000                             0.474        0.023          0.259
 Directional       0.580        1.000                    0.628          0.069          0.227          0.604        1.000                0.669       -0.059          0.158
 Event Driven      0.572        0.702        1.000       0.578          0.077          0.098          0.775        0.688       1.000    0.648        0.017          0.079

                                                                          Conditioning variable: FRB Dollar Index
                                        Conditioning variable above median                                           Conditioning variable below median


                 Arbitrage   Directional
                                             Event       Russell      Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                                                                                     Arbitrage   Directional
                                                                                                                               Event    Russell    Δ in FRB      Return on LB
                                             Driven       3000       Dollar Index    Bond Index                                Driven    3000     Dollar Index    Bond Index
 Arbitrage         1.000                                 0.484          0.150           0.110         1.000                             0.235       -0.025          0.347
 Directional       0.624        1.000                    0.683          0.156           0.067         0.549        1.000                0.599       -0.202          0.336
 Event Driven      0.743        0.756        1.000       0.683          0.088          -0.022         0.535        0.590       1.000    0.556        0.015          0.162
               Table IX: Contagion of extreme events for monthly HFR aggregated hedge fund indices

   This table repeats the analysis of Table VI, using the HFR monthly aggregated hedge fund indices in lieu of the daily hedge fund
   indices. The event of an extreme daily positive or negative return in each hedge fund style is separately modeled as the outcome
   of a binary variable and estimated as a logit model. A daily return is classified as extreme if it belongs to either the top or bottom
   15% of all returns of that style. All explanatory variables are the same as in Table VII, above. Below the coefficients are the t-
   values in parentheses and the marginal effects. The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the explanatory variables (see
   Greene, 2000, equation (19-12)).The pseudo R2 is McFadden's likelihood ratio index. Bold and italic bold coefficients indicate
   significance at the 5% and the 10% level, respectively. Number of observations is 182.

                                                       HFR Monthly                  HFR Monthly               HFR Monthly Event
                                                         Arbitrage                   Directional                     Driven
                                                    Negative    Positive         Negative    Positive         Negative    Positive
Continuous variables
Constant                                             -2.7475        -3.1387       -1.6151       -2.8059         -3.713       -2.5922
                                                     (-4.38)        (-6.64)       (-2.50)       (-4.77)        (-4.79)       (-4.62)
-[S&P 500]                                            -0.232        -0.2512       1.9407        0.3556         -0.0365       0.2554
                                                     (-0.92)        (-1.11)        (3.44)        (0.89)        (-0.10)        (0.55)
                                                       -0.02          -0.02         0.00          0.02            0.00         0.01
Russell 3000                                          -0.014        0.2291        -2.2222       0.2095         -0.2102       0.1787
                                                     (-0.10)         (1.45)       (-3.82)        (1.21)        (-0.75)        (1.00)
                                                        0.00           0.02         0.00          0.01           -0.01         0.01
Change in S&P500 implied volatility                  -0.0058        0.0045        -0.0075       0.0201         -0.0125       -0.0522
                                                     (-0.25)         (0.26)       (-0.33)        (1.05)        (-0.53)       (-2.76)
                                                        0.00           0.00         0.00          0.00            0.00         0.00
Change in FRB dollar index                           0.0613         0.1381        -0.1535       0.1826         0.0423        0.0496
                                                      (0.35)         (0.84)       (-0.72)        (0.90)         (0.20)        (0.24)
                                                        0.00           0.01         0.00          0.01            0.00         0.00
Return on LB bond index                              -0.6555        0.4004        -0.4193       0.3703         0.1382        -0.1732
                                                     (-2.09)         (1.61)       (-1.40)        (1.47)         (0.54)       (-0.78)
                                                       -0.04           0.04         0.00          0.02            0.01         -0.01
3 month T-Bill return                               -11.1113        -2.1054       -1.4732       1.6535           4.185       5.3836
                                                     (-1.69)        (-0.54)       (-0.25)        (0.39)         (0.81)        (1.31)
                                                       -0.75          -0.21         0.00          0.11            0.22         0.31
Market indicator variables
Same direction extreme event Russell 3000            -2.6097         -0.505       -0.1676       0.1023         1.3636          -1.57
                                                     (-1.97)        (-0.48)       (-0.15)        (0.12)         (0.98)       (-1.51)
                                                       -0.18          -0.05         0.00          0.01            0.07         -0.09
Same direction extreme event LB bond index           -0.2186        -0.1414       0.8609        -0.8116        0.2782        0.3773
                                                     (-0.22)        (-0.19)        (0.85)       (-0.99)         (0.27)        (0.45)
                                                       -0.01          -0.01         0.00          -0.05           0.01         0.02
Same direction extreme event FRB dollar index        1.4144         0.5841        -2.0426       0.2394         -0.1066       -0.2956
                                                      (1.58)         (0.81)       (-1.34)        (0.27)        (-0.10)       (-0.29)
                                                        0.10           0.06         0.00          0.02           -0.01         -0.02
Other hedge fund index indicator variables
Arbitrage                                                                          0.678         0.9296        3.2259         1.3729
                                                                                   (0.94)        (1.63)        (3.58)         (2.45)
                                                                                    0.00          0.06          0.17           0.08
Directional                                           0.8211        0.8115                                     1.2357         1.4344
                                                      (1.16)        (1.34)                                     (1.86)         (2.77)
                                                       0.06          0.08                                       0.07           0.08
Event Driven                                          3.1891        1.2993        0.3616         1.418
                                                      (3.86)        (2.31)        (0.49)         (2.65)
                                                       0.21          0.13          0.00           0.09

McFadden's Pseudo R2                                  0.362          0.177         0.551         0.254          0.479         0.256
                                           Appendix A


This appendix contains descriptions of the nine hedge fund strategies included in the S&P hedge
fund indices. The source of these descriptions is Standard and Poor’s.

Style: Arbitrage

Strategy: Equity Market Neutral
Funds take both long and short positions in equities. Stock positions are usually diversified, so
that no one position has a disproportionate effect on the portfolio. Related short positions hedge
out much of the systematic risk in the long positions on either a dollar- or beta-adjusted basis so
that the overall portfolio has a limited exposure to market moves.

Strategy: Fixed Income Arbitrage
Funds exploit the relative values of fixed income instruments. The manager takes positions in
government fixed incomes and investment-grade corporate fixed incomes, government agency
securities and swap contracts, and futures and options based on fixed income instruments. The
manager generally constructs the portfolio on a market neutral basis and often constrains it to be
duration neutral within a given country (often developed countries).

Strategy: Convertible Arbitrage
Convertible fixed incomes range from investment-grade credits to busted convertibles, and a fund
may concentrate on one or more of the high-delta, middle-delta, and low-delta convertible
strategies. Convertible Arbitrage funds attempt to exploit the mispricing in convertible securities.
As the mispricing in convertible securities is typically small, this strategy will usually employ
leverage. A convertible manager takes an exposure to the volatility and/or credit risk of the fixed
income, hedging out other factors such as maturity and coupon of the fixed income, the expected
future dividends of the underlying share of stock, and the interest rate. The stock exposure is
typically hedged out with a short position in the underlying company shares; thus, the strategy is
typically market neutral.

Style: Event Driven

Strategy: Merger Arbitrage
The Merger Arbitrage strategy involves taking positions in companies that are either currently or
likely to be engaged in corporate mergers and acquisitions. Merger Arbitrage funds typically buy
shares in the target and sell an appropriate quantity of shares in the acquirer in a merger deal.

Strategy: Distressed

Distressed security funds generally invest in securities of financially troubled companies
(companies involved in bankruptcies, exchange offers, workouts, financial reorganizations, and
other special credit event-related situations). These managers may identify distressed securities
in general or focus on one particular segment of the market. Investments may be accumulated
with a view to an exit via the secondary market, or with the expectation that the company will be
recapitalized, restructured, or liquidated, where the fund manager may either seek to be actively
or passively involved in the process.
                                  Appendix A (continued)

Style: Event Driven (continued)

Strategy: Special Situations

Special Situations encompasses funds that seek profit opportunities from a broad range of
corporate events. Managers are either generalists, who engage in trading keyed to corporate
events such as a merger, distressed finances or share prices, and changes to an index, or
specialists who concentrate on a specific niche they can exploit. Value-oriented funds invest in
undervalued obligations including bank debt, high-yield fixed incomes, trade claims, and equity
securities created by discrete and often extraordinary events. Niche strategies include Capital
Structure Arbitrage or other relative-value trades, such as trading between ADRs and local shares
or voting versus non-voting shares, as well as strategies involving trading a holding company
versus positions in its listed subsidiaries (a stub trade). It also includes Closed End Fund
Arbitrage.

Style: Directional/Tactical

Strategy: Equity Long/Short

Equity Long/Short funds take long and short stock positions. The manager may attempt to profit
from “alpha” generation on both long and short stock positions independently, or profit from the
relative outperformance of long positions against short positions. Equity Long/Short managers
specialize by region (e.g., global, U.S., Europe, or Asia) or by sector.

Strategy: Managed Futures

Managed Futures programs take long and short positions in liquid commodity or financial futures,
such as currencies, interest rates, or stock market indices. Investment decisions are typically
based on strict quantitative methods, notably trend-following models.

Strategy: Macro

Macro funds take long and short positions in currencies, fixed incomes, equities, and
commodities. The manager tries to exploit perceived divergences between and within these
various asset classes. The investment decisions are based on a manager’s top-down or macro
views of the world, economy, government policy, interest rates, inflation, market dynamics, and
sentiment. The manager may also base investment decisions on relative valuations of financial
instruments within or between asset classes.
                                           Appendix B
This appendix contains descriptions of the eight hedge fund strategies included in the HFR hedge
fund indices. The source of these descriptions is Hedge Fund Research.

Convertible Arbitrage
Convertible Arbitrage involves taking long positions in convertible securities and hedging those
positions by selling short the underlying common stock. A manager will, in an effort to capitalize
on relative pricing inefficiencies, purchase long positions in convertible securities, generally
convertible bonds, convertible preferred stock or warrants, and hedge a portion of the equity risk
by selling short the underlying common stock. Timing may be linked to a specific event relative
to the underlying company, or a belief that a relative mispricing exists between the corresponding
securities. Convertible securities and warrants are priced as a function of the price of the
underlying stock, expected future volatility of returns, risk free interest rates, call provisions,
supply and demand for specific issues and, in the case of convertible bonds, the issue-specific
corporate/Treasury yield spread. Thus, there is ample room for relative misvaluations.

Distressed Securities
Distressed Securities managers invest in, and may sell short, the securities of companies where
the security's price has been, or is expected to be, affected by a distressed situation. Distressed
Securities managers invest primarily in securities and other obligations of companies that are
encountering significant financial or business difficulties, including companies which (i) may be
engaged in debt restructuring or other capital transactions of a similar nature while outside the
jurisdiction of Federal bankruptcy law, (ii) are subject to the provisions of Federal bankruptcy
law or (iii) are experiencing poor operating results as a result of unfavorable operating conditions,
over-leveraged capital structure, catastrophic events, extraordinary write-offs or special
competitive or product obsolescence problems. Managers will seek profit opportunities arising
from inefficiencies in the market for such securities and other obligations.

Negative events, and the subsequent announcement of a proposed restructuring or reorganization
to address the problem, may create a severe market imbalance as some holders attempt to sell
their positions at a time when few investors are willing to purchase the securities or other
obligations of the troubled company. If manager believes that a market imbalance exists and the
securities and other obligations of the troubled company may be purchased at prices below the
value of such securities or other obligations under a reorganization or liquidation analysis, the
manager may purchase the securities or other obligations of the company. Profits in this sector
result from the market's lack of understanding of the true value of the deeply discounted
securities. Results are generally not dependent on the direction of the markets, and have a low to
moderate expected volatility.
Equity Hedge
Equity Hedge, also known as long/short equity, combines core long holdings of equities with
short sales of stock or stock index options. Equity hedge portfolios may be anywhere from net
long to net short depending on market conditions. Equity hedge managers generally increase net
long exposure in bull markets and decrease net long exposure or even are net short in a bear
market. Generally, the short exposure is intended to generate an ongoing positive return in
addition to acting as a hedge against a general stock market decline. Stock index put options are
also often used as a hedge against market risk. Profits are made when long positions appreciate
and stocks sold short depreciate. Conversely, losses are incurred when long positions depreciate
and/or the value of stocks sold short appreciates. Equity hedge managers' source of return is
similar to that of traditional stock pickers on the upside, but they use short selling and hedging to
attempt to outperform the market on the downside.

Equity Market Neutral
"Equity market neutral" strategies strive to generate consistent returns in both up and down
markets by selecting positions with a total net exposure of zero. Trading Managers will hold a
large number of long equity positions and an equal, or close to equal, dollar amount of offsetting
short positions for a total net exposure close to zero. A zero net exposure is referred to as "dollar
neutrality" and is a common characteristic of all equity market neutral managers. By taking long
and short positions in equal amounts, the equity market neutral manager seeks to neutralize the
effect that a systematic change will have on values of the stock market as a whole.

Some, but not all, equity market neutral managers will extend the concept of neutrality to risk
factors or characteristics such as beta, industry, sector, investment style and market capitalization.
In all equity market neutral portfolios stocks expected to outperform the market are held long, and
stocks expected to under perform the market are sold short. Returns are derived from the
long/short spread, or the amount by which long positions outperform short positions.

Event Driven
Event Driven investment strategies or "corporate life cycle investing" involves investments in
opportunities created by significant transactional events, such as spin-offs, mergers and
acquisitions, industry consolidations, liquidations, reorganizations, bankruptcies, recapitalizations
and share buybacks and other extraordinary corporate transactions. Event Driven trading involves
attempting to predict the outcome of a particular transaction as well as the optimal time at which
to commit capital to it. The uncertainty about the outcome of these events creates investment
opportunities for managers who can correctly anticipate their outcomes. As such, Event Driven
trading embraces merger arbitrage, distressed securities, value-with-a-catalyst, and special
situations investing.

Some Event Driven Trading managers will utilize a core strategy and others will opportunistically
make investments across the different types of events. Dedicated merger arbitrage and distressed
securities managers are not included in the Event Driven index. Instruments include long and
short common and preferred stocks, as well as debt securities, warrants, stubs, and options.
Trading Managers may also utilize derivatives such as index put options or put option spreads, to
leverage returns and to hedge out interest rate and/or market risk. The success or failure of this
type of strategy usually depends on whether the Trading Manager accurately predicts the outcome
and timing of the transactional event. Event Driven Trading Managers do not rely on market
direction for results; however, major market declines, which would cause transactions to be
repriced or break, may have a negative impact on the strategy.
Macro
Macro strategies attempt to identify extreme price valuations in stock markets, interest rates,
foreign exchange rates and physical commodities, and make leveraged bets on the anticipated
price movements in these markets. To identify extreme price valuations, Trading Managers
generally employ a top-down global approach that concentrates on forecasting how global
macroeconomic and political events affect the valuations of financial instruments. These
approaches may be systematic trend following models, or discretionary. The strategy has a broad
investment mandate, with the ability to hold positions in practically any market with any
instrument. Profits are made by correctly anticipating price movements in global markets and
having the flexibility to use any suitable investment approach to take advantage of extreme price
valuations. Trading Managers may use a focused approach or diversify across approaches. Often,
they will pursue a number of base strategies to augment their selective large directional bets.

Merger Arbitrage
Merger Arbitrage, also known as risk arbitrage, involves investing in securities of companies that
are the subject of some form of extraordinary corporate transaction, including acquisition or
merger proposals, exchange offers, cash tender offers and leveraged buy-outs. These transactions
will generally involve the exchange of securities for cash, other securities or a combination of
cash and other securities. Typically, a manager purchases the stock of a company being acquired
or merging with another company, and sells short the stock of the acquiring company. A manager
engaged in merger arbitrage transactions will derive profit (or loss) by realizing the price
differential between the price of the securities purchased and the value ultimately realized when
the deal is consummated. The success of this strategy usually is dependent upon the proposed
merger, tender offer or exchange offer being consummated.

When a tender or exchange offer or a proposal for a merger is publicly announced, the offer price
or the value of the securities of the acquiring company to be received is typically greater than the
current market price of the securities of the target company. Normally, the stock of an acquisition
target appreciates while the acquiring company's stock decreases in value. If a manager
determines that it is probable that the transaction will be consummated, it may purchase shares of
the target company and in most instances, sell short the stock of the acquiring company.
Managers may employ the use of equity options as a low-risk alternative to the outright purchase
or sale of common stock. Many managers will hedge against market risk by purchasing S&P put
options or put option spreads.

Relative Value Arbitrage
"Relative value arbitrage" is a multiple investment strategy approach. The overall emphasis is on
making "spread trades" which derive returns from the relationship between two related securities
rather than from the direction of the market. Generally, Trading Managers will take offsetting
long and short positions in similar or related securities when their values, which are
mathematically or historically interrelated, are temporarily distorted. Profits are derived when the
skewed relationship between the securities returns to normal. In addition, relative value managers
will decide which relative value strategies offer the best opportunities at any given time and
weight that strategy accordingly in their overall portfolio. Relative value strategies may include
forms of fixed income arbitrage, including mortgage-backed arbitrage, merger arbitrage,
convertible arbitrage, statistical arbitrage, pairs trading, options and warrants trading, capital
structure arbitrage, index rebalancing arbitrage and structured discount convertibles (which are
more commonly known as Regulation D securities) arbitrage.
                     Appendix C: Description of HFR Monthly Indices


The HFRI Monthly Indices (HFRI) are equally weighted performance indexes, utilized by
numerous hedge fund managers as a benchmark for their own hedge funds. The HFRI are broken
down into 37 different categories by strategy, including the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite,
which accounts for over 1600 funds listed on the internal HFR Database. Due to mutual
agreements with the hedge fund managers listed in the HFR Database, we are not at liberty to
disclose the particular funds behind any index to non-database subscribers.

Funds included in the HFRI Monthly Indices must:

   •   Report monthly returns
   •   Report Net of All Fees Returns
   •   Report assets in USD


Indices Notes:

   •   All HFRI are fund weighted (equal weighted).
   •   There is no required asset-size minimum for fund inclusion in the HFRI.
   •   There is no required length of time a fund must be actively trading before inclusion in the
       HFRI.
   •   The HFRI are updated three times a month: Flash Update (5th business day of the
       month), Mid Update (15th of the month), and End Update (1st business day of following
       month)
   •   The current month and the prior three months are left as estimates and are subject to
       change. All performance prior to that is locked and is no longer subject to change.
   •   If a fund liquidates/closes, that fund's performance will be included in the HFRI as of that
       fund's last reported performance update.
   •   The HFRI Fund of Funds Index is not included in the HFRI Fund Weighted Composite
       Index.
   •   Both domestic and offshore funds are included in the HFRI.
   •   In cases where a manager lists mirrored-performance funds, only the fund with the larger
       asset size is included in the HFRI.
                                         References


Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally, and David Ravenscraft. “The Performance of Hedge Funds:
   Risks, Returns, and Incentives,” The Journal of Finance, 1999, 54(3), 833-874.

Agarwal, Vikas and Narayan J. Naik. “On Taking the Alternative Route: Risks, Rewards, and
   Performance Persistence of Hedge Funds,” The Journal of Alternative Investments, 2000,
   2(4), 6-23.

Agarwal, Vikas, and Narayan J. Naik. “Risk and Portfolio Decisions Involving Hedge Funds,”
   The Review of Financial Studies, 2004, 63-98.

Asness, Clifford, Robert Krail, and John Liew. “Do Hedge Funds Hedge?” Journal of Portfolio
   Management, 2001, 28(1), 6-19.

Amin, Gaurav and Harry Kat. “Stocks, Bonds, and Hedge Funds: Not a Free Lunch!,” The
   Journal of Portfolio Management, 2003, 29(4), 113-120.

Bacmann, Jean_François and Gregor Gawron. “Fat Tail Risk in Portfolios of Hedge Funds and
   Traditional Investments,” 2004, Working Paper, RMF Investment Management.

Baig, Taimur and Ilan Goldfajn, "Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of Currency Crises: The Case
    of Asia," Review of International Economics, 2002, 92-112.

Bae, Kee Hong, Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz. “A New Approach to Measuring Financial
   Contagion,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2003, 16(3), 717-764.

Brealey, Richard and Evi Kaplanis. “Hedge Funds and Financial Stability: An Analysis of their
   Factor Exposures,” Journal of International Finance, 2001, 4(1), 161-187.

Brown, Stephen, William Goetzmann, and Roger Ibbotson. “Offshore Hedge Funds:
      Survival and Performance 1989-1995,” Journal of Business, 1999, 91-117.

Capocci, Daniel and Georges Hübner. “An Analysis of Hedge Fund Performance,” Journal of
       Empirical Finance, 2004, 11(1), 55-89.

Chan, Nicholas, Mila Getmansky, Shane Haas, and Andrew Lo, “Systemic Risk and Hedge
   Funds,” 2005, The Risks of Financial Institutions (NBER Book Chapter).

Edwards, Franklin and Mustafya Caglayan. “Hedge Fund and Commodity Fund Investment
   Styles in Bull and Bear Markets,” The Journal of Portfolio Management, 2001, 27(4), 97-
   108.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz. "Contagious Currency Crises: First
    Tests," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1996, 98(4), 463-484.

Embrechts, Paul, Alexander McNeil, and Daniel Straumann,.: “Correlation and dependence in
   risk management: properties and pitfalls,” in: Risk Management: Value at Risk and Beyond,
   ed. M.A.H. Dempster, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002, pp. 176-223.
Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon. “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock
   Market Co-Movements,” The Journal of Finance, 2002, 43(5), 2223-2261.

Fung, William and David Hsieh. “Empirical Characteristics of Dynamic Trading Strategies,” The
   Review of Financial Studies, 1997, 275-302.

Fung, William and David Hsieh. “A Primer on Hedge Funds,” 1999, Journal of Empirical
   Finance, 1999, 309-331.

Fung, William and David Hsieh. “The Risk in Hedge Fund Strategies: Theory and Evidence from
   Trend Followers,” 2001, The Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 313-341.

Geman, Hélyette and Cécile Kharoubi. “Hedge Funds Revisited: Distributional Characteristics,
   Dependence Structure, and Diversification,” Journal of Risk, 2003, 5(4), 55-74.

Getmansky, Mila, Andrew Lo, and Igor Makarov. “An Econometric Model of Serial Correlation
   and Illiquidity in Hedge Fund Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2004, 74 (3), 529-
   610.

Greene, William H. Econometric Analysis, 2000, Prentice Hall publishing.

Hamilton, James. Time Series Analysis, 1994, Princeton University Press.

Hosmer, David and Stanley Lemeshow, Applied Logistic Regression, 1989, John Wiley and Sons.

Liang, Bing. “On the Performance of Hedge Funds,” Financial Analysts Journal, 1999, 72-85.

Liang, Bing. “Alternative Investments: CTAs, Hedge Funds, and Funds-of-Funds,” Journal of
    Investment Management, 2004, 3(4), 76-93.

Lo, Andrew. “The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios,” Financial Analysts Journal, 2002, 58(4), 36-52.

Longin, Francois and Bruno Solnik. “Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets,” The
   Journal of Finance, 2001, 56(2), 649-476.

Maddala, G.S., Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics, 1986, Cambridge
   University Press.

McFadden, P. “The Measure of Urban Travel Demand,” Journal of Public Economics, 1974, 303-
   328.

Mitchell, Mark and Todd Pulvino. “Characteristics of Risk and Return in Risk Arbitrage,” The
   Journal of Finance, 2001, 56(6), 2135-2175.

Schneeweis, Thomas, Vassilios Karavas, and Georgi Georgiev. “Alternative Investments in the
   Institutional Portfolio,” 2002 Working Paper, University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
