NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MIGRATION AND HEDONIC VALUATION:
THE CASE OF AIR QUALITY
Patrick Bayer
Nathaniel Keohane
Christopher Timmins
Working Paper 12106
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12106
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

We would like to thank Wayne Gray, Michael Greenstone, Brian Murray, Sharon Oster, Ray Palmquist,
Kerry Smith, and seminar and conference participants at Brown, Harvard-MIT, Yale, Resources for the
Future, the 2004 AERE Summer Workshop, and the 2005 Camp Resources for their helpful comments and
insights. All remaining errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Patrick Bayer, Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Migration and Hedonic Valuation: The Case of Air Quality
Patrick Bayer, Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 12106
March 2006
JEL No. H5, Q2, Q5, R1
ABSTRACT
Conventional hedonic techniques for estimating the value of local amenities rely on the assumption
that households move freely among locations. We show that when moving is costly, the variation
in housing prices and wages across locations may no longer reflect the value of differences in local
amenities. We develop an alternative discrete-choice approach that models the household location
decision directly, and we apply it to the case of air quality in U.S. metro areas in 1990 and 2000.
Because air pollution is likely to be correlated with unobservable local characteristics such as
economic activity, we instrument for air quality using the contribution of distant sources to local
pollution – excluding emissions from local sources, which are most likely to be correlated with local
conditions. Our model yields an estimated elasticity of willingness to pay with respect to air quality
of 0.34 to 0.42. These estimates imply that the median household would pay $149 to $185 (in
constant 1982-1984 dollars) for a one-unit reduction in average ambient concentrations of particulate
matter. These estimates are three times greater than the marginal willingness to pay estimated by a
conventional hedonic model using the same data. Our results are robust to a range of covariates,
instrumenting strategies, and functional form assumptions. The findings also confirm the importance
of instrumenting for local air pollution.
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
patrick.bayer@yale.edu

1

Introduction
Since Rosen’s (1974) seminal paper, economists have used hedonic techniques to estimate the

value of a wide range of amenities, including clean air, school quality, and lower crime rates. The great
attraction of the approach is that it uses observed behavior in housing and labor markets to infer the value
of non-market goods. On the standard assumption that individuals choose the residential locations that
maximize their utility, marginal rates of substitution between local amenities and other goods will equal
the price ratio. Hence the marginal willingness to pay for those amenities can be measured by their
implicit prices, as reflected in housing prices and wages. The broad avail of this approach, along with
considerable practical interest in the estimates it provides, explains the continuing interest among
economists in the theory and identification of hedonic models.1
This paper addresses a crucial but often overlooked assumption in hedonic models, and shows
how that assumption may lead to biased estimates of willingness to pay for local amenities. Hedonic
models typically assume that people can move freely among locations when they buy homes and choose
jobs. If so, wages and rents must adjust to reflect the implicit prices of local amenities; hence, willingness
to pay can be inferred from variation in housing prices and income. The key assumption of perfect
mobility, however, ignores an important feature of the real world: migration is costly. Moving to a new
city entails not only out-of-pocket costs, but (much more important) psychic costs of leaving behind one’s
family and cultural roots. Data on residential choices suggests that such costs are significant. Table 1
relates birth location to residential location: it shows that great majority of U.S. household heads reside in
the region of their birth. A similar pattern holds at the state level. This strong revealed preference for
staying close to home belies the assumption that residential choices reflect a simple tradeoff between
local attributes and prevailing rents and wages. If migration costs enter into residential location decisions,
they should be considered by analysts measuring the value of local amenities.
How will migration costs affect estimates of willingness to pay?

Consider an exogenous

improvement in air quality in a particular city. In response, we would expect housing prices to rise and
wages to fall until a new equilibrium is reached. If migration is costless, these changes will fully reflect
the value of the cleaner air. But if migration is costly, the change in housing prices and wages must be
smaller: the benefit someone gets from moving to the city must now compensate her not only for the
higher rents and lower income, but also for the cost of moving. To see the intuition, consider someone
born in Detroit who would willingly pay $100 for the gain in air quality that she would get from moving
to an otherwise identical neighborhood in Tucson. If the disutility of moving to the new city is $40, she

1

will move only if the difference in housing prices (net of income) is less than $60. Hence the change in
housing prices and wages that accompanies a change in air quality will understate willingness to pay for
clean air. Notice also that the extent of the understatement depends on the size of migration costs relative
to the benefits from the amenity – a point to which we will return below.
Beyond the theoretical questions of identification and estimation, numerical estimates of the
value of local public goods are of great practical interest. Again consider the example of air quality,
whose protection motivates a range of government policies that impose substantial costs on firms and
consumers. A comprehensive survey of cross-sectional hedonic property value studies found wide
dispersion in estimated willingness to pay, with many instances of negligible or even negative estimates
(Smith and Huang 1995). If those low estimates are reliable, the costs of stringent air pollution regulation
may outweigh the benefits. On the other hand, evidence that such estimates understate the value of clean
air would bolster the case for government policy.
In this paper, we show how migration costs can be incorporated into a hedonic analysis. We start
by incorporating migration into the canonical wage-hedonic model proposed by Roback (1982). If
moving is costly, then the sum of the derivatives of housing prices and wages with respect to the amenity
– the standard hedonic measure of marginal willingness to pay – will no longer equal the implicit price of
the amenity. The more costly is migration relative to the marginal benefits of an improvement in the
amenity, the greater will be the bias from ignoring migration costs in the analysis.
To allow for costly mobility, we employ a different empirical strategy. The starting point for our
analysis is the household location decision, rather than the first order condition implied by a traditional
hedonic model. This approach allows us to incorporate migration costs (as the implicit disutility of
moving various distances from one’s birth state) directly into the household optimization problem.
We apply our method to the case of air quality – specifically, ambient concentrations of particular
matter (“PM10”) in metropolitan areas throughout the U.S., for the years 1990 and 2000. We study air
pollution in general, and PM10 in particular, for a number of reasons. First, an estimate of the economic
value of improvements in air quality is of central importance to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency in the regulation of air pollution under the Clean Air Act and its subsequent amendments.
Second, air quality improved significantly over the decade studied, providing useful panel variation.
Third, migration costs are likely to be large relative to the potential gains of changing locations for the
sake of air quality; hence ignoring such costs is likely to produce substantial bias in estimates of WTP for

1

The study of the theory and identification of hedonic markets in competitive settings dates back to Rosen (1974). The topic has

recently seen a resurgence with methodological papers by Ekeland, Heckman and Nesheim (2004), Heckman, Matzkin, and
Nesheim (2005), and Bajari and Benkard (2001).

2

air quality.2 Fourth, a long literature, dating back to Ridker and Henning (1967) and Harrison and
Rubinfeld (1978), has used hedonic methods to value air quality (see Smith and Huang (1995) for a metaanalysis). Finally, particulate matter is a natural choice of pollutant: it is the standard measure of air
pollution used in the literature, and an increasing body of evidence suggests that it is by far the most
important local air pollutant in terms of health effects.
Our empirical analysis proceeds in two stages. First, we use a discrete-choice model to infer the
utility associated with living in various metropolitan areas. We then regress these metro-area utilities on
air pollution concentrations in order to recover the willingness to pay for air quality. This second stage is
analogous to the traditional hedonic approach, which regresses housing prices on air pollution. An
identification problem thus arises that is endemic to hedonic analyses. As Chay and Greenstone (2005)
point out, local air quality is likely to be correlated with unobserved local economic factors that also
affect housing prices. If so, naïve estimates of willingness to pay will be biased downward – helping to
explain the low estimates reported in the existing literature.
We employ a novel instrumental variables approach to deal with this endogeneity problem. The
intuition behind our approach is simple. Although local emissions (correlated with local economic
activity) are the major determinant of local air quality, pollution also wafts in from distant sources. The
tall stacks of electric power plants spew particulate matter and other pollutants high into the atmosphere,
where they travel great distances before affecting ground-level air quality. Distant emissions, however,
are likely to be uncorrelated with local economic activity – a conjecture that is confirmed by the data.
Hence pollution from distant sources provides a natural instrument for local air pollution. We compute
this instrument using a detailed source-receptor matrix, developed for the U.S. EPA, that relates emissions
from nearly 6,000 sources to particulate matter concentrations in each county in the U.S.
Our results demonstrate the importance of accounting for endogeneity and incorporating mobility
costs. As a preliminary step, we estimate a traditional wage-hedonic model. Instrumenting for air
pollution greatly increases the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on particulate matter concentration
in a regression of housing prices on local amenities. The elasticity of housing prices with respect to air
pollution estimated by instrumental variables is -0.50 to -0.63. Income is essentially unaffected by air
pollution.

Since housing accounts for approximately one-fifth of a household’s total expenditures, and

the hedonic approach assumes that the entire value of local amenities is incorporated into housing prices
and income, this estimate corresponds to an elasticity of total willingness to pay of -0.10 to -0.13.

2

As a likely contrast, consider the case of households sorting across school districts within a single MSA in response to changes

in school quality. Here we would expect that migration costs would be low, and that households would be highly motivated,
leading to an expectation that the bias may be quite small.

3

These initial results provide a benchmark for assessing the results of our residential sorting
model. In line with intuition, the estimated value of clean air rises considerably when migration costs are
taken into account. In our full model, the elasticity of total willingness to pay with respect to air pollution
is estimated to be between -0.34 and -0.43. In dollar terms, these elasticities correspond to marginal
willingness to pay between $149 and $185. By comparison, the marginal willingness to pay estimated
from the conventional hedonic model is $55. In other words, the value of clean air implied by our
residential sorting model is roughly three times greater than that found by applying the standard hedonic
approach to the same data. Importantly, we show that our parameter estimates are robust to a range of
alternative specifications.
These results suggest that migration costs are large enough (relative to the benefits from air
quality) that only a third of the total economic value of the improvements in air quality over the 1990s
was reflected in housing prices. These results have important implications for policy, suggesting that the
economic benefits of regulations that reduced particulate matter emissions are substantially larger than
found in previous studies.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section demonstrates the difficulties
that mobility costs pose for the standard wage-hedonic model, and then develops the alternative
econometric approach we use in this paper. Section 3 describes the data we use to identify both models.
Section 4 details our empirical specification, and Section 5 presents our results. Section 6 concludes.
2

Econometric models for valuing local amenities

2.1

Incorporating mobility costs into the traditional hedonic model

Consider the following variant of Roback's (1982) model, incorporating mobility costs. We present the
simplest possible version of this model in order to demonstrate the basic intuition. At the end of the
section, we argue that extending the model to make it more realistic will only exacerbate the difficulties
introduced by mobility costs.
As in Roback's model, all individuals simultaneously choose their location along with
consumption of a composite commmodity C and a non-traded good (“housing”) H. Each location j is
characterized by a quantity Xj of a location-specific amenity (“air quality”). In addition, there is a moving
cost Mj associated with settling in city j. Following Roback, we assume that individuals have identical
preferences and abilities. To keep the model as simple as possible, we suppose that all individuals are
born in the same place, and that moving costs are a monotonic function of the amenity level. For
example, we might imagine that everyone is born in a central location, and that other cities are arranged in
concentric rings with amenities improving as one moves outward. While heroic, these assumptions are
useful in conveying the basic intuition; we discuss the consequences of more general assumptions below.

4

Each individual chooses her location j, along with consumption of C and H, to maximize her
utility subject to a budget constraint:

(1)

max U (C , H ; X j , M j ) s.t. C + ρ j H = I j

{C , H , X j }

where Ij is income in location j; ρj is the price of housing in location j; and the price of the composite
commodity is normalized to unity. In equilibrium each individual must be indifferent among locations; if
not, she would prefer to move. Hence indirect utility, denoted V, is constant:

(2)

V (I j , ρ j ; X j , M j ) ≡ V .

The individual's problem is to trade off local amenities against wages and rents (which affect the
budget constraint and determine the individual’s consumption of commodity C). Taking the total
derivative of equation (2) and using Roy’s Identity to substitute for H = −V p / VI , we arrive at the
following equation for the implicit amenity price p* :

(3)

p* = H

dρ dI VM dM
−
−
.
dX dX V I dX

Hence p* is the marginal willingness to pay: more precisely, the change in income that would exactly
compensate the individual for a marginal change in the amenity at her chosen location. The first two
terms on the right-hand side of equation (3) are the familiar terms from Roback’s analysis. If mobility is
costless (VM = 0), or mobility costs are constant (dM = 0), then the model is identical to Roback’s. In
those cases, the implicit price of the amenity X can be measured as the extra cost of housing minus the
compensating wage increase.
When mobility costs are positive and vary with location, the familiar equation no longer holds.
Suppose that the amenity increases with distance from 0. In this case, VM < 0 (since mobility is costly)
and dM/dX > 0. Thus the true value of a marginal change in the amenity, given by p*, is greater than the
sum of the housing price and wage effects. Intuitively, when it is more costly to move to locations with
better amenities, the housing and labor markets will appear to undervalue those amenities: in order to
induce anyone to move to the more attractive locales, rents must be lower (or wages higher) than they
would in a world without mobility costs.

5

Even this simple model poses difficulties for empirical analysis. If moving costs could be
directly observed, then dM/dX could be estimated much as the housing price (dρ/dX) and income (dI/dX)
gradients are, and the implicit price p* could be inferred. But M is likely to be unobservable, since it
represents the disutility of moving to an unfamiliar place far from home. Moreover, the restrictive
assumptions we have made so far amount to the best case scenario for the traditional model. For
example, suppose that individuals are born in different locations. Then the indifference condition (2)
need no longer hold for all individuals in all locations, invalidating the total differential approach that
determines the key marginal conditions given by equation (3). Or suppose that mobility costs do not vary
systematically with location; then there is no longer any reason to expect that the implicit price must be
equal across locations, which is the central identifying assumption of the hedonic model. We conclude
that when mobility costs are likely to be significant, a different empirical strategy is necessary.

2.2

A model of residential sorting

To surmount these difficulties, we develop a structural approach that explicitly models the location
decision as taking place prior to the consumption of housing and the composite commodity. Essentially,
we push the analysis back a step, examining the utility maximization problem in (1) rather than simply
analyzing the equilibrium condition implicit in (3). Estimation proceeds in two steps. First, we specify a
discrete-choice model of the household location decision. Doing so allows us to estimate city-specific
fixed effects that represent the composite utility of local attributes. Second, we regress these estimated
fixed effects on local amenities, using instrumental variables to correct for likely endogeneity.
We start by assuming the following utility function for individual i living in location j and
consuming quantities Ci and Hi of the numeraire good and housing, respectively:

(4)

U i , j = Ciβ C H iβ H X j β X e

M i , j + ξ j + ηi , j

As before, Xj denotes the local amenity of interest (here, air quality).

Mi,j measures the long-run

(dis)utility of migration associated with moving from i’s birth location to destination j. This formulation
is meant to capture mobility constraints, broadly defined.

Unobservable attributes of location j are

captured in ξj . Finally, ηi,j represents an individual-specific idiosyncratic component of utility that is
assumed independent of mobility costs and city characteristics.
Individuals maximize their utility subject to the budget constraint in equation (1). Incorporating
that budget constraint into the utility function, differentiating with respect to Hi, and rearranging yields:

6

(5)

Hi*, j =

βH

Ii , j

β H + βC ρ j

Equation (5) states that housing expenditure accounts for a constant fraction of income, given by βH /(βH +

βC ). For the sake of exposition, we assume that ρj (the price of housing services in location j) is known; in
the empirical analysis we will estimate it from the data, as described in Section 4 below.
Substituting for H* in (4) and using the budget constraint yields the indirect utility function:

(6)

Vi , j = Iiβ, Ij e

M i , j − β H ln ρ j + β X ln X j + ξ j + ηi , j

,

where β I ≡ βC + β H . Marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for the amenity Xj equals the marginal rate
*
β X I i, j
. Note that while the
of substitution between Xj and income: i.e., for individual i, MWTPi =
βI X j

coefficient on the amenity, βX, is constant across individuals, MWTP varies with income.
The analysis so far assumes that income Ii,j is known for every individual in every region. In
practice, of course, we must estimate what income would have been in regions not chosen. Thus we
decompose income into a predicted mean and an idiosyncratic error term: i.e., I i , j = Iˆi , j + ε I i , j . (In
Section 4, we describe how we estimate income from the data.) Substituting this into equation (6) and
taking logs yields:

(7)

ln Vi , j = β I ln Iˆi , j + M i , j + θ j + υi , j

(8)

θ j = − β H ln ρ j + β X ln X j + ξ j

(9)

υ i , j ≡ β I ε iI, j + η i , j

where

and

7

θj comprises all of the utility-relevant attributes of location j that are constant across individuals.
Meanwhile, υi,j is an error term that summarizes individual i’s idiosyncratic preferences for location j.
Each individual chooses her location to maximize her utility. We assume that the idiosyncratic
city preferences, i.e., the {υi,j}, are independently and identically distributed as type I extreme value. This
implies that the share of the population choosing to live in city j is given by a logit specification. In
practice, it is convenient to divide the right-hand side of equation (7) by βI, the marginal utility of income.
~
Let tildes denote variables multiplied by 1/βI, e.g., θ = θ / β I . Hence the probability that individual I
settles in location j can be written

e
~
~
P(ln Vi, j ≥ ln Vi ,l ∀ l ≠ j ) = J

(10)

~
~
σ (ln Iˆi , j + M i , j + θ j )

∑e

~
~
σ (ln Iˆi ,q + M i , q + θq )

.

q =1

The parameter σ ≡ 1 / β I is a logit scaling parameter. We estimate equation (10) by maximum likelihood.
~
We recover the {θ } as parameters in the logit estimation. These city-specific fixed effects
represent the indirect utility (somewhat loosely, the “quality of life”) from residing in each city,
~
independent of mobility costs or income. In the second stage of estimation, we regress the estimated {θ }
on local air pollution concentrations and other local amenities. From equation (8), we have

~
~
~
~
θ j = − β H ln ρ j + β X ln X j + ξ j .

(11)

~

Xj
 I*
 i, j

Notice that β X = MWTPi × 


 . Thus the coefficient on ln Xj in equation (11) provides an estimate



of the negative of the elasticity of willingness to pay with respect to air quality.

2.3

Relationship between the two approaches

The discrete-choice model just outlined is closely related to the Roback model. In the latter setting, all
individuals are identical (i.e., ηi,j ≡ 0) and indifferent among locations, hence V is constant. Taking the
total derivative of equation (6) and setting it equal to zero yields (after some algebra and treating ξj like
another element of Xj with a coefficient equal to 1):

8

(12)

1 dV β I dI
dM β X
d ln ρ
=
+
+
− βH
=0
V dX
I dX
dX
X
dX

(13)

⇒ p* =

βX
dρ dI VM dM
I = H*
−
−
βI
dX dX V I dX

which is identical to equation (3). Nonetheless, the identifying assumptions of the two models are very
different. The Roback model uses individuals’ indifference among locations to derive the result in
equation (13). Since in that model individuals equate their marginal rate of substitution with the implicit
amenity price, estimating the elements of (13) amounts to inferring the marginal willingness to pay.
In contrast, our discrete-choice model relies on location decisions to reveal preferences about
local amenities. In our model, individuals sort among locations on the basis of idiosyncratic tastes, and
thus have strict preferences over location. If we are willing to assume that a city's appeal is a weighted
sum of the city's characteristics, and that the weights are constant among individuals, then we can identify
the underlying marginal willingness to pay directly from an equation such as (11). These additional
assumptions represent the cost of our approach. The benefit is that it readily allows us to incorporate
mobility costs. As we showed above, the presence of mobility costs complicates inference in the
traditional hedonic model. In the empirical analysis that follows, we confirm that allowing for mobility
costs makes a large difference in the estimated value of clean air.
Our discrete-choice model also highlights the question of how the size of a city should be used in
inferring the value of local amenities. City size plays only an indirect role (i.e., through equilibrium
housing prices and incomes) in the conventional wage-hedonic model. In contrast, our approach – by
relying on residential location to reveal preferences – infers higher utility for places chosen by a larger
~
share of individuals. All else equal, bigger cities must have larger estimated values of θ j . If big cities

are big because of the observable amenities they offer, then the larger estimated city fixed effects convey
useful information about how people value local attributes. On the other hand, city size might enter into
individuals’ utility directly (e.g., positively through agglomeration effects or negatively via congestion
costs). If city size is also correlated with local amenities (e.g., larger cities have more manufacturing
facilities and thus poorer air quality), then omitting it will introduce bias. Accordingly, in our empirical
analysis we report results from specifications with and without population included as a covariate.

2.4

Identification

Two final econometric issues must be addressed in estimating equation the second stage of our model,
given by equation (11). First, the price of housing services, ρj, varies with observable characteristics of

9

city j, and is likely correlated with unobserved local characteristics in ξj. We solve this (minor) problem
~
ρ H*
by moving β H ln ρ j to the left-hand side of the regression equation. Note that β~H = j * i , the share of
Ii, j
income devoted to housing. We set this parameter equal to its median value in our sample, which is 0.2.3
Second, amenity levels are likely correlated with local unobservable attributes. In our case of air
quality, local economic activity is likely to be positively correlated with local air pollution as well as local
rents and wages. As a consequence, naïve estimation of equation (11) by OLS is likely to yield biased
parameter estimates. To address this potential source of bias, previous research has attempted to isolate a
component of air pollution that is orthogonal to economic activity. In a recent paper, for example, Chay
and Greenstone (2005) use discontinuities implicit in the Clean Air Act to isolate a source of pseudorandom variation in regulatory intensity across similar locations.
Following Chay and Greenstone, we combine two strategies to deal with this potential
correlation. First, we estimate equation (11) in first differences, using panel data from 1990 and 2000:

(14)

~
~
~
~
∆θ j + β H ∆ ln ρ j = β X ∆X j + ζ j ,

~ ~
~
~
~
where, for example, ∆θ j ≡ θ 2000 − θ1990 ; and ζ j is the time varying component of the unobservable ξ j .
~
Note that we have moved β H ∆ ln ρ j to the left-hand side of the regression equation. Taking first
differences eliminates any bias due to correlation between persistent air pollution and permanent
unobserved city characteristics – for example, a concentration of highly polluting manufacturing
industries, or perennial traffic congestion. However, one might still worry about potential correlation
~
between ζ j and ∆Xj.4 Hence we also need to find an instrument for air pollution.
We develop a novel instrument that exploits the geography of particulate matter formation and
transmission. Pollution travels long distances: particulates emitted from Midwestern power plants, for
example, contribute substantially to air pollution in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic. At the same time,
such emissions are likely to be uncorrelated with housing prices or local economic activity. Drawing on
this intuition, we instrument for changes in local air pollution using changes in particulate matter
3

The estimate of 0.2 corresponds to the share of income spent on housing in our sample of individuals in the microcensus data,

using a 30-year fixed mortgage rate of 9%, which is the average of the values in 1990 and 2000. In our empirical analysis, we
show that our results are robust to other choices of this parameter.
4

Suppose, for example, that ζ~j includes the effects of an economic recession in location j. If reduced economic activity is

~
correlated with reductions in PM pollution from reduced economic activity, the estimate of β X may be biased upward

10

originating from distant sources. In particular, for the years 1990 and 1999, we compute the particulate
matter in location j that is attributable to all sources located at least 80 kilometers from that location, and
use the difference between the two measures as our instrument for the change in air pollution. We
describe the construction of the instrument in detail in Section 3. The key step is the use of a county-tocounty source-receptor (S-R) matrix developed for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. This
matrix relates emissions from nearly 6,000 sources throughout the U.S. to pollution concentrations in the
3,080 receptor counties. By excluding sources within a chosen radius, we can construct a measure of the
pollution concentration for a given city that is attributable to distant sources.
Figure 1 illustrates our instrumenting strategy. The figure depicts the computed contributions of
emissions from counties more than 80 kilometers away to local air quality in the Raleigh-Durham (NC)
MSA. Darker shading represents source counties with greater contributions to the ambient concentration
of particulate matter. Because the prevailing winds in the United States blow from west to east, the
greatest sources of pollution are counties to the west of Raleigh-Durham. As might be expected, two
urban counties in North Carolina contribute the most pollution: Mecklenburg County to the southwest
(whose seat is the city of Charlotte) and Forsyth County to the west (Winston-Salem). However, the third
most significant contributor to ambient particulate matter concentrations in the Raleigh area is nearly 800
km away in western Tennessee: the enormous coal-fired Johnsonville power plant operated by the
Tennessee Valley Authority.

3

Data

3.1

Primary data sources

The data used for this analysis come from several sources, all publicly available. For the discrete choice
model of residential location decisions, as well as the regressions used to estimate individual income and
the price of housing services at the MSA level, we draw on the one and five percent micro data samples
of the 1990 and 2000 U.S. Population Censuses, respectively. The census data describe attributes of the
household head along with the household’s composition. The data set we use for our analysis consists of
random samples of 10,000 household heads in each year who are under the age of 35 and reside in one of
242 metropolitan statistical areas. We treat the household head as the decision-maker, and focus on
his/her attributes, along with those of the dwelling in which the household resides. Migration variables
are calculated from data describing the household’s state of birth and the location of each MSA. We
exclude household heads over 35 years old to ensure that location decisions are driven by current local
attributes. The 242 MSAs that comprise our choice set include the larger U.S. cities, and contains
approximately 86 percent of the total U.S. metropolitan population in both 1990 and 2000. Appendix
Table A1 describes the key census variables used in the analysis.

11

To estimate willingness to pay for air quality, we require data on pollution, local economic
activity, and a range of local amenities. We describe the construction of our air pollution measures and
instruments in detail below.

Information on income, population, and employment comes from the

Regional Economic Information System database maintained by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data
on other local amenities are taken from various editions of the County and City Data Book and the Places
Rated Almanac (Savageau and Boyer 1993; Savageau and D’Agostino 2000).5 Table 2 presents summary

statistics and a full description of the variables used in the analysis.

3.2

Air quality measures

Our measure of air pollution is the ambient concentration of particulate matter.6 Particulate matter refers
to airborne small particles, fine solids, and aerosols that form as a result of activities as diverse as the
fossil fuel combustion, mining, agriculture, construction and demolition, and driving on unpaved roads.
While most of the particles resulting from these processes are relatively large in size (i.e., approximately
1/7th the diameter of a human hair), smaller particles result from chemical processes that occur when
sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile organics react with other compounds in the atmosphere. The
result is an array of pollutants, collectively known as “PM10” (because they are all smaller than 10
micrometers in size), that carry with them serious health consequences.7

5

Data from the REIS and CCDB are at the county level. We aggregate up to the metro-area level using the same MSA

definitions as we use in the pollution data (based on MSA designations in 1990). Doing so ensures that our definitions of MSAs
remain constant in both years, even as the official Census designations changed.
6

In an ideal world, we would estimate our model on other measures of ambient air pollution as well, such as sulfur dioxide (SO2)

or ground-level ozone (O3).

However, we are unaware of any fine-grained source-receptor matrix for other pollutants

comparable to the PM10 S-R matrix we use here. This prevents us from implementing our instrumental variables strategy for
other pollutants; our empirical results confirm the importance of doing so. A consolation is that PM10 is far and away the most
important air pollutant in terms of human health effects. Moreover, it is the pollutant that has been most commonly studied in the
previous literature (albeit under its previous guise of “Total Suspended Particulates,” or TSP.) Finally, to the extent that PM10
concentrations are correlated with other important pollutants, our results will apply more broadly. Such correlation is probably
more likely for SO2 (which results from similar anthropogenic processes and transported similar distances) than for O3, whose
creation depends on poorly understood interactions between manmade NOx emissions and biogenic volatile organic compounds.
7

Beginning with the Harvard Six City Study (Dockery et al., 1993), thousands of analyses have found serious health effects from

atmospheric particulate matter. These are most severe for the young and the elderly – especially those suffering from asthma
(Lin et al., 2002; Norris et al., 1999; Slaughter et al., 2003; Tolbert et al., 2000). Fine particles have been shown to enter the
bloodstream, increasing the risk of heart attacks and strokes (Hong et al., 2002; Tsai et al., 2003; D’Ippoliti et al., 2003). Studies
have also found evidence of lung tissue inflammation (Ghio et al., 2000), reduced lung function in children (Gauderman et al.,
2002), increased risk of lung cancer (Pope et al., 2002), and even the possibility of heritable diseases (Samet et al., 2004).

12

We estimate ambient pollution concentrations for each MSA in 1990 and 1999 using data on
emissions of particulates and sulfur dioxide (a precursor to PM10).8 The data are taken from the National
Emissions Inventory maintained by the EPA. To translate emissions into concentrations of particulate
matter, we use the PM10 module of the Source-Receptor (S-R) Matrix Model, described in Latimer
(1996) and Abt (2000).9 This model, used by EPA and its contractors to estimate the health effects of
particulate emissions, draws on an atmospheric model called the Climatological Regional Dispersion
Model (CRDM). The great advantage of this S-R matrix is its fine-grained resolution: it is a source-tocounty matrix of transfer coefficients, where cell (s,r) contains the transfer coefficient relating emissions
of a particular pollutant in source county s to PM10 concentrations in receptor county r. The full matrix
for each pollutant includes a transfer coefficients from 5903 sources to 3080 receptor counties. The
coefficients account for “area sources” in each of 3080 counties (stationary sources of pollution too small
to be individually identified – e.g., construction sites); 565 individually identified major point sources
(e.g., tall stacks at electric power plants); and miscellaneous smaller point sources grouped at the county
level in 2228 counties (e.g., shorter stacks at manufacturing facilities).
With these matrices in hand, generating estimated PM10 concentrations in each county for each
year is simply a matter of matrix algebra. Let StPM and StSO2 denote the (1 x 5903) vectors of emissions of
particular matter and sulfur dioxide, respectively, from all sources in year t; and let ΓPM and ΓSO2 denote
the corresponding S-R matrices. Then the estimated vector of county-level PM10 concentrations in year t
is PMt = StPM ΓPM + StSO2 ΓSO2 .

We calculate the metro-area concentration by averaging across the

constituent counties in each MSA. These computed concentrations provide our measures of air pollution
in a given location in a given year. They represent average ambient concentrations of particulate matter
throughout the year, based on actual emissions and prevailing meteorological patterns.10
Figures 2 and 3 illustrate our pollution data, depicting computed PM10 concentrations in 1999 for
each of the 242 MSAs in our data. Darker shadings correspond to greater concentrations of particulate
matter. The western and eastern United States are depicted separately, but the same shading gradient is
used. Note that ambient concentrations of particulates generally increase from west to east, mirroring the

8

We use data for 1999 rather than 2000 because the National Emissions Inventory is collected at three-year intervals.

9

We thank Wayne Gray and his co-authors for generously sharing the S-R matrix with us. The discussion of the matrix is based

in part on the discussion in Shadbegian, Gray, and Morgan (2004).
10

We use the predicted measures for two reasons: first, they do not depend on the placement of particular air monitors or

idiosyncratic weather events and wind patters; second, they lend themselves well to our instrumental variables strategy.
Importantly, our computed measures of air quality are positively correlated with EPA data based on air quality monitors, with
correlations significantly different from zero at p < 0.001.

13

underlying weather patterns. Thus the cities of the West Coast have relatively low levels of particulates
on the whole, while the nation’s highest concentrations occur in Atlanta and New York.

3.3

Instrumental variables approach

To create our instruments, only a slight twist is needed. First, we calculate distances from the center of
each source county (or the actual location of point sources) to the center of each receptor county.11 Given
some distance D, we then compute PMtD = StPM ΓDPM + StSO2 ΓDSO2 , where ΓDPM (for example) is the S-R
matrix for particulate emissions, with the transfer coefficient in cell (s,r) replaced by a zero if the distance
from source s to county r is less than D. In the empirical analysis, we use a distance of D = 80 km (50
miles). Since the regressor is the change in the natural logarithm of PM10 concentrations (i.e., ∆lnPM),
we use as the basis for our instrument the corresponding change in the estimated logarithm of the
80
80
contribution of distant sources, i.e., ∆ ln PM 80 ≡ ln( PM1999
) − ln( PM1990
) .

The validity of this approach depends on the orthogonality of distant pollution and local
economic activity. One potential concern in this context might be regional variation in how distant U.S.
sources affect local air pollution. Because prevailing winds blow from west to east, the contribution of
distant sources to local air pollution increases in the same direction. For example, the relative importance
of distant sources is likely to be very different in Syracuse than in San Diego. If cities in a given region
also experience common economic shocks, our instrument may fail the exclusion restriction. To solve
this problem, we take two important steps. First, we condition the full analysis on a set of nine Census
regional dummies. Second, in creating our instruments, we interact our estimates of “distant pollution” –
i.e., the vector ∆lnPM80 – with dummy variables for the nine census regions used in the analysis. Thus
our instrument for ∆PM is ∆PM R80 ≡ ∆PM 80 × R , where R is a J × 9 matrix with cell R(j,r) equal to 1 if
city j is in region r, and zero otherwise. This approach is a conservative one. Having conditioned on
region, our model must identify the effects of air pollution entirely off of intra-regional effects.
Moreover, as we show in the empirical analysis, our results are robust to using the “unconditional”
instrument – that is, the measure of distant air pollution alone, without regional interactions.
Table 3 presents evidence supporting our instrumenting strategy. The table reports correlations
between three measures of air pollution and observable characteristics at the metro-area level. We present
three measures of pollution: estimated pollution from all sources (i.e., PM); the estimated contribution to
air pollution from sources greater than 50 km distant (i.e., PM50); and the estimated contribution from
sources greater than 80 km distant (i.e., PM80). Note that the first of these is our measure of ambient air
11

For MSAs with multiple counties, we apply the distance exclusion for each source uniformly for all counties within the MSA,

based on the distance of the nearest county in the MSA to the particular source.

14

quality, while the third is the basis of our instrument. We consider correlations between these measures
of air quality and local economic activity, as measured by the number of manufacturing establishments,
total employment, and total income. We report correlations for the years 1990 and 1999, and for the
change between those years. For our instruments, we report correlations with and without conditioning
on the census region. Numbers in boldface are significantly different from zero at the 5% level.
The first column of the table shows correlations between local economic activity and the
computed MSA PM10 concentration. Local pollution and local economic activity are strongly and
positively correlated in the levels. This confirms the intuition that a naïve regression of housing prices (or
city fixed effects) on local air quality is likely to yield biased results. Note that we find a strong but
negative correlation in the differences, for total employment and income. This result is driven by falling
PM10 concentrations and growing economic activity in four of the largest cities in the U.S. (New York,
Los Angeles, Chicago, and Houston).
The cells in the next four columns and the bottom set of rows report correlations between local
economic activity and variations on our instrument. As shown in the far right-hand column, our primary
instrument (based on pollution from sources more than 80km away and conditional on region) is
essentially uncorrelated with manufacturing establishments, employment, or income. These near-zero
correlations suggests that the portion of PM10 concentration due to sources outside 80km is uncorrelated
with local economic activity and thus is a reasonable instrument. The correlations are somewhat larger
(but still insignificant) for the less restrictive instrument that excludes sources within 50 kilometers.
Table 3 illustrates as well the importance of conditioning the analysis on regional dummies;
compare the correlations in columns (4) (without regional controls) and (5) (with regional controls). Of
course, the ultimate source of concern is the correlation between our instrument and unobservable
characteristics of metropolitan regions. Nonetheless, Table 3 provides as much support for our approach
as observable data might be expected to provide.

4

Econometric specification

Several steps are needed to implement the residential sorting model outlined in Section 2. First, we must
estimate housing prices and incomes in each location. Next, we must choose a representation of mobility
costs. We can then use a logit model of location choice to estimate the city-specific fixed effects.
Finally, we regress those fixed effects on local attributes. We discuss the details of each step in turn.
Throughout this analysis, we use i to index households, j to index locations (MSAs), and t to index the
year (1990 or 2000). We will often pool data from both years. Note that while the set of metropolitan
areas is the same in each year, the set of households is not.

15

One approach to housing prices would be to take an aggregate measure of housing prices – for
example, the median value of a home in each MSA. However, such an approach raises potentially serious
problems of aggregation bias. In particular, home values might rise because of unobserved changes in the
quality of the housing stock, rather than changes in local amenities. If these changes in housing supply
are correlated with local amenities, an endogeneity problem arises.12
We employ a different approach that takes explicit account of the characteristics of individual
homes. Let Pi,j,t denote the value of the home owned by household i in location j appearing in year t,
which we define as the value of the house (for owner-occupied housing) or monthly rent (for rental units).
We model Pi,j,t as a function of the characteristics of the dwelling, given by a vector hi,t, and a scaling
parameter ρj,t specific to city j and year t:

(15)

Pi , j ,t = ρ j ,t e

h i ,t φ t + λ j ,t Ω i ,t + ε iH, j ,t

.

Ωi,t is a dummy variable that equals 1 if household i owns its home and 0 otherwise; thus λj,t measures the
premium on owned housing. Taking logs, equation (15) becomes:

(16)

ln Pi , j ,t = ln ρ j ,t + λ j ,t Ωi ,t + h i ,t φ t + ε iH, j ,t .

Along with housing characteristics, the parameters φt yield an index of “housing services” each period,
defined as H i ,t = exp(h i ,t φ t ) . Hence the parameter ρj,t measures the effective “price of housing services”
in a particular location and a particular year. Because we control for the bundle of housing services, these
prices provide a consistent measure of the true price of housing across metropolitan areas with different
housing stocks. We can readily estimate these prices as the MSA and time specific intercepts in a
regression of equation (16), using the census microdata described in Section 3.
Next, consider income. We do not observe the income that a given individual would earn in
every location, but only what he earns in his chosen city. In the micro-data used for estimation, however,
household heads with similar characteristics are scattered among locations. Hence we can impute the
income each individual would earn in every location by estimating a series of location-specific
regressions of incomes on a set of individual attributes:

12

Chay and Greenstone (2005) use median home prices at the county level as their dependent variables in hedonic estimation,

controlling for the potential bias by including a range of county-level characteristics of the housing market. As they argue, their
instrumental variables strategy should also help eliminate the bias.

16

ln I i , j ,t = α 0 , j ,t + αWHITE , j ,tWHITEi ,t + α MALE , j ,t MALEi ,t + α AGE >60, j ,t AGE > 60i ,t +

(17)

α HSDROP , j ,t HSDROPi ,t + α HSGRAD, j ,t HSGRADi ,t + α SOMECOLL, j ,t SOMECOLLi ,t +
α COLLGRAD , j ,t COLLGRADi ,t + α P1, j ,t P( RB , RD | ED) + α P 2, j ,t [ P( RB , RD | ED )]2 + ε iI, j ,t

The terms α P1, j ,t P( RB , RD | ED) and α P 2, j ,t [ P ( RB , RD | ED)]2 are semi-parametric controls for non-random
sorting of individuals across locations, following Dahl (2002). P( R B , R D | ED ) is given by:

(18)

P( RB , RD | ED ) = HSDROPi ⋅ P( RB , RD | HSDROP ) + HSGRADi ⋅ P( RB , RD | HSGRAD ) +
SOMECOLLi ⋅ P( RB , RD | SOMECOLL ) + COLLGRADi ⋅ P( RB , RD | COLLGRAD )

and measures the observed percentage of individuals with education level ED, born in region RB, that are
found to be living in region RD. This correction therefore requires that our data include individuals of
each education type migrating from every region to every region – a condition that is satisfied in the
census data for our nine-by-nine regional grid. We estimate the income equation (17) using the census
microdata. We use the results to generate predicted income Iˆi , j , t .13
Next, consider mobility costs. Table 1 suggests that households tend to settle close to where the
household head was born. We capture this feature of the data with a flexible migration cost matrix:

(19)

~
M i , j ,t ≡ f M (d i , j ,t ; µ) = µ~S d iS, j ,t + µ~R1d iR, j1,t + µ~R 2 d iR, j2,t

where diS, j ,t = 1 if location j is outside individual i’s birth state ( = 0 otherwise), diR, j1,t = 1 if location j is
outside individual i’s birth region as defined in Table 1 ( = 0 otherwise), and diR, j2,t = 1 if location j is
outside individual i’s macro-region ( = 0 otherwise).14 We normalize migration costs to zero if the
household head does not leave his birth state.
~
We now turn to estimation of the parameter vector {µ~S , µ~R1 , ~µ R 2 , σ , θ } . On the assumption that

preferences are stable over time, we can estimate a single set of behavioral parameters (the mobility

13

Note that, in fitting Iˆ j ,k ,t , one omits the Dahl correction terms described in the next paragraph of the text. These serve only to

give the error in equation (15) the needed properties for unbiased OLS estimation.
14

There are four macro-regions defined by the U. S. Census Bureau: (1) Northeast, (2) Midwest, (3) South, (4) West.

17

parameters in µ and the scaling parameter σ) for both years 1990 and 2000. We do this by pooling the
data over the two years, and calculating a single likelihood function:

(20)



~
σ (ln Iˆi , j ,t + µ~S diS, j ,t + µ~R1diR, 1j ,t + µ~R 2d iR, j2,t + θ j ,t ) 
J 
~
e

L( µ~S , µ~R1 , µ~R 2 , σ , θt ) = ∏∏∏  J
~
σ (ln Iˆi ,k ,t + µ~S diS,k ,t + µ~R1diR, k1,t + µ~R 2d iR,k2,t + θk ,t ) 
t
i
j =1 
e
 ∑

k =1

χi , j .t

where χi,j,t is an indicator function that equals one if household i observed in year t chooses location j, and
zero otherwise.15,16
~

Recall that the {θ j ,t } represent composite city-level attributes. Let PMj,t denote the air pollution
(PM10) concentration in location j and period t, computed as described in Section 3. Note that higher
~
values of PMj,t correspond to worse air quality, so that β PM < 0 if individuals are willing to pay for better
air quality. Let Zj,t denote a vector of other observable city attributes. The equation to be estimated in the
second stage is thus (updating equation (14))

(21)

~
∆θ j + 0.2∆ ln ρ j =

~
~
~
β PM ∆ ln PM j + ∆Z j β Z + ζ j .

We estimate equation (21) by instrumental variables, using ∆ ln PM R80, j as our instrument for ∆ ln PM j .
The covariates in Zj,t include a range of local characteristics of metropolitan areas, including local
economic activity, crime, local government tax and expenditure data, and rankings of MSAs in various
categories of quality of life such as health care provision, arts, and transportation infrastructure.

5

Estimation Results

5.1

Housing price and income regressions

Results from the housing price regressions described in equation (16) are reported in Table A2 for each
year. Results are as expected. Bigger, newer houses yield more housing services, as do houses on larger
plots and with complete kitchen and plumbing facilities. An inspection of the most and least expensive
15

~
In practice, when the choice set is large (as it is in our application), estimating the full vector θ by maximum likelihood can be

computationally prohibitive. Berry (1994) provides a computational algorithm whereby these values are imputed indirectly.

18

cities in the U.S. in terms of the price of housing services corresponds to conventional wisdom. The
average price of housing services (in logs) rises from 3.72 in 1990 to 4.48 in 2000, while the premium on
owned housing rises from 5.27 to 5.41. All estimates are statistically significant at the usual levels.
Table A3 summarizes the results from the MSA-specific income regressions described in
equation (17). Men earn more than women; whites earn more than minorities; and income increases with
education. Income falls significantly for those over age 60, reflecting retirement patterns. The premiums
for white and male, along with the age penalty, all diminish between 1990 and 2000. In the case of the
age penalty, this fall may reflect growing participation in the labor market after age 60. Over the same
time period, the premium for college education rises, while that for a high school diploma falls.

5.2

Estimates from the conventional model

As a benchmark for comparison with our residential sorting model, we estimate a conventional hedonic
model without mobility costs. We estimate the model with and without instruments for air pollution, as a
preliminary assessment of the severity of the bias and the success of our instrumenting strategy.
Recall that in the conventional model with costless migration, the implicit price of local amenities
– and hence marginal willingness to pay – can be estimated as the sum of the housing price and income
gradients with respect to a given amenity. Accordingly, we regress the log of per capita income in MSA j
(denoted Yj) and the price of housing services ρj (the MSA-specific intercept from the housing price
regressions) on particulate matter concentrations PMj and the matrix of regional dummies R. We
estimate these equations in first differences:

(22)

~
ln ∆Y j = γ PM ,Y ∆ ln PM j + ∆Z j β Z + γ R,Y R j + u Yj

(23)

~
ln ∆ρ j = γ PM , ρ ∆ ln PM j + ∆Z j β Z + γ R,ρ R j + u ρj

Table 4 reports OLS and IV estimates of the coefficients on PM10 concentrations, i.e., γ PM ,Y and

γ PM , ρ .17 Both OLS estimates are negative and significantly different from zero. Taken at face value,

16

~

Note that there is an arbitrary normalization of one of the θ j,t values: raising the utility of all locations by a constant amount

~

leaves location decisions unchanged. We set θ j,t equal to zero for the Houston, TX MSA.
17

For the housing price regression, the covariates in the specifications reported in columns (2) and (4) are the same as in the main

results from the residential sorting model (refer to Table 6). For the income regression, the employment rate and number of
manufacturing establishments are omitted because they are simultaneously determined with wages and salaries.

19

these coefficients imply that both housing prices and wages rise when air quality improves. The former
effect is consistent with expectations, but not the latter.
The effects of instrumenting for air pollution suggest that the OLS estimates are indeed biased.
The estimated elasticity of housing prices with respect to air pollution more than doubles in magnitude,
going from -0.30 in the OLS regression to -0.63 in the IV estimates. Meanwhile, the effect of air
pollution on per capita income vanishes. We ignore the results from the income equation in computing
MWTP.18 This is a conservative approach: since the estimates are negative, excluding them inflates the
estimates of MWTP from the conventional model. This closes the gap between those estimates and those
from our discrete choice model below, leading us to understate the importance of migration costs.

5.3

Estimates from the residential sorting model

Table 5 reports parameter estimates from the first-stage residential choice equation (20). Estimates are
highly statistically significant and have the expected signs. There is a significant utility cost (-4.31)
associated with leaving one’s birth state. Costs continue to rise with leaving one’s birth region and
macro-region, but at a declining rate (i.e., -5.58 and -6.46, respectively). The estimate of the scaling
parameter σ is 0.67. The results of primary interest from the first stage, of course, are the MSA-level
fixed effects. These are summarized in Table 2, but can be illustrated by some examples. Controlling for
population, the three least attractive metropolitan areas in the year 2000 (those with the most negative
~
values of θ j ) were New Bedford, MA; Danbury, CT; and Detroit, MI. Cities near the median included
Memphis, TN (#116 out of 242) and Hartford, CT (#125).
among the top five.

Portland, OR and Providence, RI ranked

19

These estimated MSA-level fixed effects are used as the dependent variables in the second-stage
estimation of equation (21). Table 6 reports results for a range of specifications. Columns (1) and (2)
present OLS estimates; columns (3)-(5) report results from instrumental variables estimation. To account
for the potential role played by city size, we include the logarithm of population as a covariate in the
specifications reported in columns (2) and (5).
The estimated coefficients on ∆ln(PM) are presented in the first row of the table.

These

coefficients represent the elasticity of willingness to pay (WTP) with respect to air pollution
concentrations.

18
19

As in the housing price regressions (Table 4), OLS yields statistically significant

Chay and Greenstone (2005) report a similar finding, and likewise ignore the income estimates in computing MWTP.
In the raw rankings, city size makes a big difference, as we discussed above in Section 2.3. Without controlling for

~

population, the cities with the highest estimates of θ j,t are Los Angeles, Chicago, and New York. Of course, controlling for
population has a much smaller effect on the change from 1990 to 2000.

20

estimates with the expected sign. Once again, a comparison with the IV results reveals strong evidence of
endogeneity bias.

When we instrument for air pollution, the estimated elasticity nearly triples in

magnitude: the OLS estimates are -0.13 to -0.16, while the IV estimates range from -0.34 to -0.42.
Note that these WTP elasticities are not directly comparable to the elasticities of housing prices
reported in Table 4. The estimates from the conventional model represent the percent change in housing
expenditures associated with a one percent change in air pollution. In contrast, the elasticities estimated
by the residential sorting model incorporate not only changes in housing prices, but also foregone income
and the disutility from moving. Thus the relative magnitudes of the raw parameter estimates in the
conventional model are misleading; in dollar terms, as we shall see below, the results from the residential
sorting model are more than three times as large as the results from the conventional approach. Hence
including mobility costs matters greatly for our estimates.
For some perspective on what these estimates imply, consider a concrete example. In 1990, the
computed PM10 concentration in the New Haven-Meriden MSA was 62.2 µg/m3. In the same year, the
computed PM10 concentration in the Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill MSA was 44.0 µg/m3 – roughly 30%
lower than in New Haven, or almost exactly one standard deviation away. (The standard deviation of
PM10 in the sample is 18.8 is µg/m3.) The estimated elasticity in the full specification is -0.34 (Table 6,
column 5), implying that the increase in air quality moving from New Haven to Durham would
correspond to increase in willingness to pay of 10%. Per-capita income in 1990 in New Haven was
$23,558 (in current dollars). Hence the air quality benefits of moving from New Haven to Durham were
worth roughly $2,360 in foregone consumption.
The estimated coefficients on other local amenities included in the regressions (the covariates in

Zj) vary in significance, but most have the expected signs in the IV estimates. Metropolitan areas with
higher government expenditure per capita are significantly more appealing; the fraction of revenue raised
by property taxes also has a positive effect. Areas with better health care attract more residents; note that
a positive value for ∆(Health ranking) corresponds to a worsening of health care (and likewise for the arts
and transport variables). Culture and transportation are also valued, although the estimates are imprecise.
In the specification of column (4), the size of the local economy (as measured by manufacturing
establishments) is positively and significantly correlated with the appeal of an area, but the effect vanishes
when population is included (the two variables are strongly correlated). Our other measure of local
economic activity (i.e., employment as a fraction of the total population) turns out to be insignificant.
Importantly, the inclusion of metropolitan area characteristics in general has only a small effect on the
estimated coefficient on ∆lnPM.

This robustness provides additional support for our instrumental

variables strategy. Finally, the coefficient on population is highly significant, in line with expectations.

21

Controlling for population reduces the magnitude of the estimated impact of air quality by just under
20%. Thus the specifications with and without population define the range of willingness to pay.
The coefficients on these covariates allow the computation of elasticities with respect to local
amenities other than air quality. For example, the median value of the health care ranking (across both
years) is 145.5. Thus the estimated coefficient of -0.001 on ∆(Health) from the full specification implies
that a one percent increase in a city’s health care ranking translated into a 0.15% increase in its
attractiveness, as measured by willingness to pay. Similarly, the elasticity of willingness to pay with
respect to government spending (at the sample median of 1.34, in thousands of dollars) is 0.23. By
comparison, the WTP elasticity with respect to air quality is larger but of the same general magnitude.
Alternatively, we can estimate the percentage increase in willingness to pay that resulted from the median
change in local amenities in the data. For government expenditures, the median change was 0.22,
corresponding to a 4% increase in WTP. The median change in PM concentration was a reduction of 5.7

µg/m3 – which translates into a 5% increase in WTP. Thus the median improvement in air quality was
comparable, in quality-of-life terms, to the median increase in per-capita government expenditure.
Table 7 presents estimated WTP elasticities from a range of other empirical specifications.
Panels (b) and (c) represent variation in the dependent variable: in particular, they assume a higher or
lower share of expenditures devoted to housing. The results change very little. The parameter estimates
are also robust to the precise design of the instrument. The results are very close to the base case when
we employ the unconditional instrument (i.e., ∆lnPM80, without regional interactions; see panel (d)). The
parameter estimates are slightly smaller when we use a less restrictive exclusion distance of 50 kilometers
in constructing the instrument (i.e., ∆lnPM50; see panel (e)). Indeed, this is exactly as we should expect,
since the smaller exclusion distance renders the instrument and the regressor more alike.
Finally, consider the choice of functional form. In the bottom panel of the table, we report results
when the change in PM10 concentration enters linearly (rather than in logs). The main effect is to
amplify the importance of the covariates.

Without controlling for MSA characteristics and other

amenities, the estimated elasticity is close to that in the corresponding base specification. With covariates
included, however, the log-linear specification yields a much higher estimated elasticity.

This is

presumably explained by the greater weight that the log-linear specification gives to outliers – in
particular, to a handful of large cities that experienced large drops in computed PM10 concentrations.
Based on the evidence presented in Table 7, we conclude that our base specification is a
reasonable one, and that our conclusions are robust to the choice of empirical strategy in the second stage.

22

5.4

Marginal willingness to pay

~

In our residential sorting model, β PM measures the elasticity of willingness to pay with respect to PM10
concentrations; thus we can recover an estimate of marginal willingness to pay for air quality, in dollar

~

terms, by multiplying − β PM by household income and dividing by the PM10 concentration. To calculate
a comparable MWTP for the conventional wage-hedonic model, we must first account for the share of
expenditure in housing.

Since the wage-hedonic model ignores mobility costs, it assumes that

individuals’ entire willingness to pay is captured in housing prices and incomes.

To translate the

estimates of housing price elasticities into willingness to pay, therefore, we must first multiply the
coefficients from the conventional hedonic model by the share of income devoted to housing
expenditures, or 0.2. Multiplying the resulting elasticity of willingness to pay by income, and dividing by
the PM10 concentration, yields estimated MWTP, just as in the residential sorting model.20
Table 8 reports the results of these computations, using the median values of household income
($15,679) and PM10 concentration (36.0) in our sample as our measures of income and air pollution,
respectively. Thus the reported figures for MWTP represent the median household’s willingness to pay
for a 1 µg/m3 reduction in ambient PM10 concentrations, expressed in constant 1982-1984 dollars.21 For
reference, we have also included the elasticities estimated from the regressions (expressed in terms of air
quality rather than air pollution).
The results provide striking evidence of the importance of accounting for endogeneity and
mobility costs. When we instrument for air pollution in the full model, the estimated MWTP more than
doubles, increasing from $69 to $149. Incorporating mobility costs matters even more. The marginal
willingness to pay estimated by our residential sorting model is much larger than the comparable estimate
from the conventional hedonic model: MWTP increases from $55 to $149 in comparable specifications
(compare columns (3) and (4) of Table 8). We also present MWTP for the IV specifications with other
sets of covariates (columns (3) and (4) in Table 6). The estimated elasticity of 0.38 from the specification
without MSA covariates implies a MWTP of $165. When local attributes other than population are
included, estimated MWTP rises to $185.

20

An alternative approach, more directly in line with theory (see, e.g., eqn (3)) is to calculate MWTP for the conventional model

by multiplying the estimated coefficients in Table 4 by the price of housing divided by PM10 concentration (to recover an
estimate of the derivative of housing prices with respect to air pollution) and then multiply by the bundle of housing services, H*.
Of course, this amounts to essentially the same thing; and when we carry out those calculations, using median values, we get
nearly identical estimates of WTP.
21

Measurement in 1982-1984 dollars facilitates comparison with the numbers reported by Smith and Huang (1995) and Chay and

Greenstone (2005).

23

Thus a broad statement of our results is that we find an estimated MWTP for air quality ranging
from $149 to $185, in constant 1982-1984 dollars, for a household whose head earns the median income
of $15,679. These estimates are large relative to the previous hedonics literature. Chay and Greenstone
(2005), for example, report an elasticity of housing prices with respect to particulate matter concentrations
of -0.20 to -0.35 – half as large as our conventional hedonic estimates, and roughly one-sixth the size of
the elasticities estimated by our residential sorting model.
The discrepancy is even larger in dollar values. Our model identifies marginal willingness to pay
in terms of foregone consumption of housing services and other goods. As a result, our estimates
correspond to annual marginal willingness to pay – equivalently, the willingness to pay for a one-unit
improvement in air quality that lasts for one year. The comparable estimates in Chay and Greenstone
correspond to a marginal willingness to pay of $22 for a reduction in PM10 concentrations – one-seventh
the size of our lower estimate.22 Moreover, the estimates by Chay and Greenstone were themselves much
larger than the previous literature. Part of the discrepancy between their estimates and our estimates
using the conventional hedonic approach can be explained by rising willingness to pay between the 1970s
and 1990s due to rising incomes; Smith and Huang (1995) report finding such an effect in their
comparative analysis of the previous literature. Moreover, our MWTP estimates likely capture the effects
of other pollutants whose concentrations are correlated with PM10.
The internal comparison between our estimates from the wage-hedonic model and the residential
sorting model remains striking. Incorporating mobility costs yields estimates of marginal willingness to
pay that are more than three times as large as estimates from a conventional model. In other words,
assuming that migration is costless would result in understating willingness to pay for air quality by
roughly two-thirds.

6

Conclusions

This paper argues that mobility constraints hinder the use of conventional wage-hedonic techniques to
estimate household willingness to pay for local amenities such as clean air. We develop and implement a
discrete-choice model that uses data on residential patterns, along with a flexible model of migration
costs, to infer the utility of living in individual metropolitan areas across the U.S. We then estimate the
marginal willingness to pay for a reduction in air pollution, as measured by the ambient concentration of
particulate matter (PM10), using the contribution of distant sources to local air pollution as an instrument.

22

Like the literature before them, Chay and Greenstone frame their results in terms of total suspended particulates (TSP), which

was the preferred measure of particulate pollution prior to 1987. In order to convert our WTP estimates to results in terms of
TSP, one should divide our measures by approximately 1.82.

24

Our results suggest that the conventional approach (ignoring mobility costs) substantially
understates the true willingness to pay for air quality. Our estimates imply that the median household
would pay $149 to $185 for a one-unit reduction in PM10 concentrations, in constant 1982-1984 dollars.
These estimates are three times as large as the corresponding estimate of marginal willingness to pay from
a conventional hedonic model estimated using the same data. Instrumenting for local air pollution makes
a large difference in both models – confirming the findings of Chay and Greenstone (2005).
These findings highlight the potential importance of incorporating mobility constraints into
hedonic models. We suspect that the consequences of ignoring mobility costs will be greater, the larger
are those costs relative to the benefits at stake. For example, while households value clean air, few are
likely to leave behind their hometowns and families purely for the sake of modest reductions in air
pollution. More generally, mobility costs are more likely to constrain choices among metropolitan areas,
rather than among neighborhoods within a metropolitan area.
The adverse health impacts of air pollution have prompted a wide array of legislative responses at
both the state and federal levels over the last thirty years. Evaluated according to simple criteria (i.e.,
emissions reductions and cost-effectiveness), these policies are generally considered to have been
successful. Even so, studies find that over 81 million Americans face unhealthy short-term exposure to
PM, while 66 million live with chronically high exposure (American Lung Association, 2004). This is
cause for concern, particularly in light of current legislative efforts that would reduce the capacity of the
EPA to regulate certain pollution sources (i.e., new power plants). While most of these legislative efforts
arise out of concern for the cost of compliance with EPA regulations, little is known about the size of the
benefits. This complicates careful evaluation based on efficiency criteria. The present study suggests that
the true value of clean air may be substantially greater than has been recognized.

25

References
Abt Associates. 2000. “The Particulate-Related Health Benefits of Reducing Power Plant Emissions,”
prepared for Clean Air Task Force (October).
American Lung Association. 2004. State of the Air: 2004. American Lung Association. Washington,
DC.
Bajari, Patrick and Lanier Benkard. 2001. “Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Consumers and
Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach.” NBER Technical Working Paper No.
272, July 2001.
Berry S. 1994. “Estimating Discrete Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” RAND Journal of
Economics. 25: 242-262.
Black, D. and T.J. Kneisner. 2003. “On the Measurement of Job Risk in Hedonic Wage Models.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 27:205-20.
Black, S.E. 1999. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 114:577-99
Chay KY and M Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market.”
Journal of Political Economy. 113(2):376-424.
Dahl, Gordon (2002). “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
Markets,” Econometrica. 70(6): 2367-2420.
D’Ippoliti D, F Forastiere, C Ancona, N Agabity, D Fusco, P Michelozzi, and CA Perucci. 2003. “Air
Pollution and Myocardial Infarction in Rome: A Case-Crossover Analysis.” Epidemiology. 14: 528535.
Dockery DW, CA Pope, X Xu, JD Spengler, JH Ware, ME Fay, BG Ferris, and FE Speizer. 1993. “An
Association Between Air Pollution and Mortality in Six U.S. Cities.” New England Journal of
Medicine. 329: 1753-1759.
Ekeland, Ivar, James Heckman, and Lars Nesheim. 2004. “Identification and Estimation of Hedonic
Models.” Journal of Political Economy. 112(1.2):S60-S109.
Gauderman WJ, GF Gilliland, H Vora, E Avol, D Stram, R McConnell, D Thomas, F Lurmann, HG
Margolis, EB Rappaport, K Berhane, and JM Peters. 2002. “Association Between Air Pollution and
Lung Function Growth in Southern California Children: Results From a Second Cohort.” American
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 166: 76-84.
Ghio AJ, C Kim, and RB Devlin. 2000. “Concentrated Ambient Air Particles Induce Mild Pulmonary
Inflammation in Healthy Human Volunteers.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine. 162(3 Pt.1): 981-988.
Harrison D and DL Rubinfeld. 1978. “Hedonic Housing Prices and the Demand for Clean Air.” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management. 5:81-102.

26

Heckman, James, Rosa Matzkin, and Lars Nesheim. 2004. “Nonparametric Estimation of Nonadditive
Hedonic Models.” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Hong YC, JT Lee, H Kim, EH Ha, J Schwartz, and DC Christiani. 2002. “Effects of Air Pollutants on
Acute Stroke Mortality.” Environmental Health Perspectives. 110: 187-191.
Latimer D. A. 1996. “Particulate Matter Source-Receptor Relationships Between All Point and Area
Sources in the United States and PSD Class I Area Receptors,” prepared for EPA, Office of Air
Quality Planning & Standards (September).
Lin M, Y Chen, RT Burnett, PJ Villeneuve, and D Kerwski. 2002. “The Influence of Ambient Coarse
Particulate Matter on Asthma Hospitalization in Children: Case-Crossover and Time-Series
Analyses.” Environmental Health Perspectives. 110: 575-581.
Moreira, M.J. 2003. “A Conditional Likelihood Ratio Test for Structural Models.” Econometrica.
71(4):1027-48.
Norris G, SN YoungPong, JQ Koenig, TV Larson, L Sheppard, and JW Stout. 1999. “An Association
Between Fine Particles and Asthma Emergency Department Visits for Children in Seattle.”
Environmental Health Perspectives. 107: 489-493.
Pope CA, RT Burnett, MJ Thun, EE Calle, D Krewski, K Ito, and GD Thurston. 2002. “Lung Cancer,
Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution. JAMA. 287:
9.
Palmquist RB. 1984. “Estimating the Demand for the Characteristics of Housing.” Review of Economics
and Statistics. 66:394-404.
Roback, J. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy. 90:1257-78.
Rosen, Sherwin, (1974). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition.” Journal of Political Economy. 82:34-55.
Ridker RG and JA Henning. 1967. “The Determinants of Residential Property Values with Special
Reference to Air Pollution.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 49:246-257.
Samet JM, DM DeMarini, and HV Malling.
Mutations?” Science. 304(5673):971-972.

2004.

“Do Airborne Particulates Induce Heritable

Savageau, David and Richard Boyer. 1993. Places Rated Almanac. MacMillan/Prentice Hall Travel,
New York, NY.
Savageau, David and Ralph D’Agostino. 2000. Places Rated Almanac: Millennium Edition. Hungry
Minds Inc., New York, NY.
Shadbegian RJ, G Wayne, and C Morgan. 2004. “The 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments: Who Got
Cleaner Air – and Who Paid For It?,” working paper presented at the NBER Summer Institute;
accessed from http://www.clarku.edu/faculty/wgray/publications.html.

27

Slaughter JC, T Lumley, L Sheppard, JQ Koenig, and GG Shapiro. 2003. “Effects of Ambient Air
Pollution on Symptom Severity and Medication Use in Children with Asthma.” Annals of Allergy,
Asthma, and Immunology. 91: 346-353.
Smith VK and J Huang. 1995. “Can Markets Value Air Quality? A Meta-Analysis of Hedonic Property
Value Models.” Journal of Political Economy. 103:209-227.
Tolbert PE, JA Mulholland, DD MacIntosh, F Xu, D Daniels, OJ Devine, BP Carlin, M Klein, J Dorley,
AJ Butler, DF Nordenberg, H Franklin, PB Ryan, and MC White. 2000. “Air Quality and Pediatric
Emergency Room Visits for Asthma in Atlanta, Georgia.” American Journal of Epidemiology. 151:
798-810.
Tsai SS, WB Goggins, HF Chiu, and CY Yang. 2003. “Evidence for an Association Between Air
Pollution and Daily Stroke Admissions in Kaohsiung, Taiwan.” Stroke. 34(11): 2612-2616.
U.S. EPA. 2001. National Air Quality and Emissions Trends Report, 1999. EPA 454/R–01–004.
Internet Available. http://www.epa.gov/air/aqtrnd99/toc.html.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1983. Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation with
Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Communities. GAO: Washington, DC.

28

Table 1 – Regional Mobility Patterns
Percent birth region by residence region as of the year 2000 (U.S. Census data)

BIRTH REGION

RESIDENCE IN 2000
New
England

MidAtlantic

East North
Central

West
North
Central

South
Atlantic

East South
Central

West
South
Central

Mountain

Pacific

New
England

65.02

5.87

2.35

0.94

12.68

0.47

1.88

3.05

7.75

MidAtlantic

4.03

63.34

4.55

1.03

18.04

0.22

2.13

2.49

4.18

East North
Central

0.59

1.60

73.42

2.83

9.84

2.09

2.78

2.94

3.90

West
North
Central

0.36

1.77

7.80

57.62

7.27

1.24

5.85

8.51

9.57

South
Atlantic

0.99

3.59

4.50

0.84

79.47

2.82

2.67

1.60

3.51

East South
Central

1.72

1.29

7.08

0.86

15.45

63.73

4.94

1.29

3.65

West
South
Central

0.47

1.54

2.13

1.42

6.51

2.49

77.75

3.31

4.38

0.89

1.11

3.54

2.43

3.54

1.11

5.09

69.03

13.27

0.86

1.61

3.42

1.52

5.13

1.14

2.75

7.69

75.88

Mountain
Pacific

Notes: Rows indicate birth regions; columns denote current residence. For example, the upper-left-hand cell indicates that 65.02% of household heads born in New England were
living in the region during the 2000 Census. Regions are assigned according to Census definitions: Regional Definitions: (1) New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT), (2)
Middle Atlantic (NJ, NY, PA), (3) East North Central (IL, IN, MI, OH, WI), (4) West North Central (IA, KS, MN, MO,NE, SD, ND), (5) South Atlantic (DE, DC, FL, GA, MD,
NC, SC, VA, WV), (6) East South Central (AL, KY, MS, TN), (7) West South Central (AR, LA, OK, TX), (8) Mountain (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NV, NM, UT), and (9) Pacific (AK,
CA, HI, OR, WA).

31

32

35

37

Figure 1
Contribution to PM10 Concentration in Raleigh-Durham MSA
From Sources at Least 80 km Away

38

Figure 2
Computed PM10 Concentrations in the Eastern United States23

23

PM10 concentrations are computed with actual emissions data and county-to-county source-receptor matrix.

39

Figure 3
Computed PM10 Concentrations in the Western United States24

24

PM10 concentrations are computed with actual emissions data and county-to-county source-receptor matrix.

40

Appendix
Table A1 – Data Summary
Variable
HSDROP
HS
SOMECOLL
COLL
WHITE
BLACK
ASIAN
OTHER
AGE
MALE
INCTOT
ROOM2
ROOM3
ROOM4
ROOM5
ROOM6
ROOM7
ROOM8
ROOM9
BED2
BED3
BED4
BED5
BED6
YR1
YR2
YR3
YR4
YR5
YR6
YR7
UNITS2
UNITS3
UNITS4
UNITS5
UNITS6
UNITS7
UNITS8
UNITS9
UNITS10
ACRE1_9
ACRE10
NOKITCH
NOPLUMB
OWNER
RENTER
MSA_ID
BLP

Mean
0.175
0.249
0.291
0.286
0.770
0.125
0.038
0.063
49.36
0.651
42305
0.047
0.096
0.148
0.192
0.194
0.128
0.088
0.086
0.130
0.268
0.385
0.151
0.035
0.018
0.070
0.070
0.157
0.176
0.147
0.138
0.001
0.590
0.066
0.046
0.048
0.045
0.043
0.035
0.058
0.104
0.024
0.007
0.005
0.661
0.339

Description
High school dropout
High school graduate
Completed some college (not four year degree)
College graduate
Race = White
Race = Black
Race = Asian (Chinese, Japanese, other Asian or Pacific Islander)
American Indian and other racial categories
Age of the household head
Sex of the household head (1 = MALE, 0 = FEMALE)
Total income from employment
2 rooms in dwelling
3 rooms in dwelling
4 rooms in dwelling
5 rooms in dwelling
6 rooms in dwelling
7 rooms in dwelling
8 rooms in dwelling
9+ rooms in dwelling
1 bedroom dwelling
2 bedroom dwelling
3 bedroom dwelling
4 bedroom dwelling
5+ bedroom dwelling
0-1 year-old dwelling
2-5 year-old dwelling
6-10 year-old dwelling
11-20 year-old dwelling
21-30 year-old dwelling
31-40 year-old dwelling
41-50 year-old dwelling
Boat, tent, van, other
1 family house, detached
1 family house, attached
2 family building
3-4 family building
5-9 family building
10-19 family building
20-49 family building
50+ family building
Acreage of property 1-9 acres
Acreage of property 10+ acres
Dwelling does not contain complete kitchen facilities
Dwelling does not contain complete plumbing facilities
Dwelling owned
Dwelling Rented
Metropolitan Statistical Area identification number
Birth state

41

Table A2 – Housing Services Index Parameters

1990 (N=638159)

CONSTANT
ROOM2
ROOM3
ROOM4
ROOM5
ROOM6
ROOM7
ROOM8
ROOM9
BED2
BED3
BED4
BED5
BED6
YR1
YR2
YR3
YR4
YR5
YR6
YR7
UNITS2
UNITS3
UNITS4
UNITS5
UNITS6
UNITS7
UNITS8
UNITS9
UNITS10
ACRE1_9
ACRE10
NOKITCH
NOPLUMB
R2

Estimate
4.035
0.033
0.058
0.123
0.217
0.362
0.524
0.665
0.857
0.056
0.124
0.135
0.162
0.168
0.534
0.514
0.384
0.287
0.209
0.138
0.056
1.018
1.154
1.027
1.283
1.310
1.297
1.347
1.304
1.267
0.086
0.124
-0.091
-0.448

t-statistic
477.04
2.50
4.04
8.32
14.51
23.85
34.16
42.73
54.55
4.54
9.41
10.01
11.68
11.42
79.52
139.19
104.74
97.37
69.61
45.88
15.93
103.35
261.36
186.73
217.15
220.37
217.80
224.03
204.79
203.63
28.99
24.75
-7.53
-36.09
0.942

2000 (N=3674433)
Estimate
4.982
0.096
0.115
0.126
0.208
0.347
0.495
0.634
0.855
0.029
0.107
0.155
0.221
0.281
0.479
0.428
0.363
0.250
0.129
0.092
0.064
-0.449
0.748
0.628
0.873
0.891
0.886
0.917
0.842
0.873
0.164
0.252
-0.041
-0.258

t-statistic
1504.54
19.17
22.18
23.28
37.57
61.66
86.81
109.32
145.26
6.56
22.67
31.90
43.95
51.12
161.47
238.24
206.21
179.26
97.76
67.54
47.10
-34.18
460.14
281.46
344.37
356.72
351.96
348.26
302.06
351.96
120.88
88.90
-7.38
-44.53
0.926

42

Table A3 – Summary of Income Regressions
1990
Variable
Constant
MALE
AGE>60
WHITE
HS
SOMECOLL
COLLGRAD

Average
Parameter
Estimate
8.586
0.621
-0.072
0.303
0.368
0.515
0.949

2000
Standard
Deviation of
Estimates
0.368
0.121
0.142
0.228
0.120
0.175
0.185

43

Average
Parameter
Estimate
8.982
0.549
-0.039
0.266
0.352
0.537
1.009

Standard
Deviation of
Estimates
0.259
0.098
0.149
0.133
0.114
0.164
0.158

