                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PERSISTENCE OF POWER, ELITES AND INSTITUTIONS

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                          James A. Robinson

                                         Working Paper 12108
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12108


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




We thank Alexandre Debs for excellent research assistance and Lee Alston, Timothy Besley, Alexandre
Debs, Stanley Engerman, Michael Munger, Nathan Nunn, Torsten Persson, Konstantin Sonin, GavinWright
and Pierre Yared and seminar participants at Clemson, ITAM, Princeton, Rochester, and the American
Economic Association Annual Meetings for comments. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Persistence of Power, Elites and Institutions
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 12108
March 2006
JEL No. H2, N10, N40, P16

                                             ABSTRACT

We construct a model of simultaneous change and persistence in institutions. The model consists of
landowning elites and workers, and the key economic decision concerns the form of economic
institutions regulating the transaction of labor (e.g., competitive markets versus labor repression).
The main idea is that equilibrium economic institutions are a result of the exercise of de jure and de
facto political power. A change in political institutions, for example a move from nondemocracy to
democracy, alters the distribution of de jure political power, but the elite can intensify their
investments in de facto political power, such as lobbying or the use of paramilitary forces, to partially
or fully offset their loss of de jure power. In the baseline model, equilibrium changes in political
institutions have no effect on the (stochastic) equilibrium distribution of economic institutions,
leading to a particular form of persistence in equilibrium institutions, which we refer to as
invariance. When the model is enriched to allow for limits on the exercise of de facto power by the
elite in democracy or for costs of changing economic institutions, the equilibrium takes the form of
a Markov regime-switching process with state dependence. Finally, when we allow for the possibility
that changing political institutions is more difficult than altering economic institutions, the model
leads to a pattern of captured democracy, whereby a democratic regime may survive, but choose
economic institutions favoring the elite. The main ideas featuring in the model are illustrated using
historical examples from the U.S. South, Latin America and Liberia.

Daron Acemoglu                                          James A. Robinson
Department of Economics                                 Harvard University
MIT, E52-380B                                           Department of Government
50 Memorial Drive                                       N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                and NBER
daron@mit.edu                                           jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
          “Plus ça change plus c’est la même chose.” French Proverb.

          “The domination of an organized minority ... over the unorganized majority is inevitable.
          The power of any minority is irresistible as against each single individual in the majority,
          who stands alone before the totality of the organized minority. At the same time, the
          minority is organized for the very reason that it is a minority.” Gaetano Mosca (1939, p.
          53).


1        Introduction

Current empirical work and theoretical discussions of the impact of institutions on economic
development either implicitly or explicitly assume that institutions persist (e.g., North, 1990,
Engerman and Sokoloﬀ, 1997, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, 2002). In fact, some of
the most popular empirical strategies in gauging the eﬀect of institutions on economic perfor-
mance use the persistence of institutions over centuries as part of their conceptual approach
and identification strategy. But many aspects of “institutions” show substantial change over
periods much shorter than a century. Many less-developed countries, especially those in Latin
America and Africa, have changed their political institutions all too often over the past 100
years, with frequent switches between democracy and dictatorship (see, e.g., Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2006a) and multiple changes in constitutions.1
        The same pattern also emerges when we turn to economic institutions. For example, while
many historians and economists trace the economic problems of Latin America to colonial labor
practices such as the encomienda or the mita, and those of the Caribbean to slavery and to the
plantation complex, all of these economic institutions vanished long ago.2 Beneath this pattern
of change, however, economic systems often show surprising continuity. The form of agricul-
tural labor relations in many of the Latin American and Caribbean countries changed little
after colonialism, and perhaps relatedly, these societies continued to suﬀer various economic
problems, slow growth, and economic and political instability throughout the 20th century.
Another interesting example comes from the U.S. South. Even though slavery was abolished
at the end of the Civil War, the U.S. South maintained a remarkably similar agricultural sys-
tem, based on large plantations and low-wage uneducated labor, and remained relatively poor
    1
     For instance, Colombia had 8 constitutions in the 19th century (Gibson, 1948), while Bolivia had 11 (Trigo,
1958) and Peru 9 (Palacios and Guillergua, 2003).
   2
     In Latin America, the last form of oﬃcial forced labor, pongueaje, was abolished in Bolivia in 1952 (Klein,
1992, Chapter 8). Unpaid labor services lasted in Guatemala until 1945 (McCreery, 1994). Slaves were gradually
freed, for example in 1850 in Colombia. In the British Caribbean slavery was abolished after 1834, though it
lasted until in 1886 in Cuba and 1888 in Brazil.


                                                       1
until the middle of the 20th century.
       In this paper, we provide a possible explanation for this paradoxical pattern of the coexis-
tence of frequent changes in political institutions with the persistence in certain (important)
aspects of economic institutions.3 Our approach illustrates the possibility of two diﬀerent types
of persistence. The baseline model leads to a pattern which we refer to as invariance, whereby
a change in political institutions from nondemocracy to democracy leads to no change in the
(stochastic) equilibrium process of economic institutions and of the distribution of resources
in society. Simple extensions of our baseline model lead to a richer form of persistence, which
we refer to as state dependence; the probability that a society will be democratic (and have
pro-citizen economic institutions) tomorrow is a function of whether it is democratic today.4
       The underlying idea of our approach is that equilibrium economic institutions emerge from
the interaction between political institutions, which allocate de jure political power, and the
distribution of de facto political power across social groups (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006a,
and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005b). De Facto power is power that is not allocated
by institutions (such as elections), but rather is possessed by groups as a result of their wealth,
weapons or ability to solve the collective action problem. A change in political institutions
that modifies the distribution of de jure power need not lead to a change in the equilibrium
process for economic institutions if it is associated with an oﬀsetting change in the distribution
of de facto political power (e.g., in the form of bribery, capture of the political parties, or use of
paramilitaries). The central argument in this paper is that there is a natural reason to expect
changes in the distribution of de facto political power to partially or entirely oﬀset changes
in de jure power brought about by reforms in specific political institutions as long as these
reforms do not radically alter the political structure of society, the identity of the elites, or the
source of economic rents for the elites.
       To make these ideas precise, we develop a model consisting of two groups, a landed elite
and the citizens. The key economic institution concerns the organization of the labor mar-
   3
      Throughout, persistence refers to the continuity of a cluster of institutions, for example, the extent of
enforcement of property rights for a broad cross-section of society. Lack of property rights enforcement may have
its roots in quite diﬀerent specific economic institutions, for example, risk of expropriation by the government
or elites; extreme corruption; economic systems such as serfdom or slavery preventing large segments of the
population from selling their labor freely or from investing in most economic activities; legal rules making it
impossible for those without political connections to have their contracts enforced; or entry barriers creating a
non-level playing field.
    4
      We refer to this type of persistence as “state dependence” since the probability distribution over equilibrium
political and economic institutions tomorrow depends on the “state” of the system, which is political institutions
today. See Page (2006) for a discussion of richer forms of persistence in political systems, where the past entire
sequence of events, rather than simply a low-dimensional state vector, might influence future outcomes.




                                                         2
ket, in particular, whether wages are competitive or are repressed below this level.5 In the
model, economic institutions are decided either by the landed elite or the citizens (workers)
depending on who has more political power. Political power, in turn, is determined by both
political institutions that allocate de jure power and the distribution of de facto power, which
is derived, at least partly, from a social group’s ability to solve their collective action problem.
A key observation is that landowners, by virtue of their smaller numbers and their established
position, have a comparative advantage in solving the collective action problem (Mosca, 1939,
Olson, 1965). This implies that the amount of de facto political power of the elite is an equi-
librium outcome, and responds to incentives. Nevertheless, political institutions and de jure
political power also matter for equilibrium outcomes. For example, in democracy de jure po-
litical power is allocated to the majority, so the balance of power is tilted towards the citizens
(see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006a). In addition, freedom of political organization and the
existence of political parties may help the citizens in solving their collective action problem
more eﬀectively, thus facilitating their exercise of de facto political power.
       In the model society, in every period there is a “contest” between the elite and the citizens,
and political institutions (democracy versus nondemocracy) determine how level the playing
field is in this contest. Those with greater political power determine economic institutions
today and political institutions tomorrow. The most interesting result of our framework is
that, because the elite’s de facto political power is an equilibrium outcome, it will partly or
entirely oﬀset the eﬀect of changes in political institutions. In particular, the elite will invest
more in their de facto political power in democracy than in nondemocracy.
       In the baseline model, this eﬀect is suﬃciently strong that the distribution of equilibrium
economic institutions is identical in democracy and nondemocracy–thus leading to the pattern
of invariance defined above.6 This pattern shows that it could be mistaken to infer from
frequent changes in certain dimensions of political institutions that there is little institutional
persistence. The result also starkly illustrates how changes in some specific dimensions of
political institutions can be undone by the greater exercise of de facto political power by the
elite.
       Even though in this baseline model the equilibrium probability distribution of economic
institutions is independent of whether the society is democratic or nondemocratic, this prob-
ability distribution is still aﬀected by economic fundamentals. The comparative static results
   5
     Although this setup is natural from the view point of Latin American history, it is not essential to the
results.
   6
     To be precise, there are changes in economic institutions, but the equilibrium distribution of economic
institutions is invariant to political institutions.


                                                     3
illustrate this. The most interesting among these is that the economic structure of the society,
for example the presence of sectors competing with agriculture for labor, will have a major
eﬀect on the equilibrium. The more productive are these sectors, the less the elite have to gain
from using repressive methods, and the more likely it is that institutions favor the citizens.
Second, the smaller the numbers of the elite, the more cohesive they are and the more able they
will be to solve the collective action problem and choose the institutions they favor. Finally,
and more paradoxically, the political advantage created by a democracy for the citizens may
lead to a greater domination of politics by the elite. This result follows because the democratic
advantage of the citizens creates a future cost for the elite and they are willing to invest more in
activities to increase their de facto power to avoid this future cost.7 However, when democratic
institutions create a suﬃciently large political advantage for the citizens (i.e., when they are
“suﬃciently strong”), the nature of the equilibrium changes qualitatively, and democracy may
become an absorbing state.
    The invariance result, that the de facto political power of the elite can entirely oﬀset
the eﬀect of changes in political institutions, is special. In the rest of the paper, we extend
our baseline model in a number of ways to show how, more generally, the de facto political
power of the elite only partially undoes the eﬀect of changes in political institutions, leading
to an equilibrium with a Markov regime-switching structure. The two extensions we consider
allow democracy to place limits on the exercise of de facto power by the elite (e.g., limits on
their use of paramilitaries or co-option of politicians) and introduce the feature that changing
economic institutions may be diﬃcult in the short run (e.g., because the democratic regime
has already implemented some changes favoring the citizens). Both of these extensions lead
to an equilibrium structure where the society switches between democracy and nondemocracy,
with diﬀerent sets of economic institutions in the two regimes, and exhibits state dependence
(so that nondemocracy is more likely to follow nondemocracy than it is to follow democracy).
    Finally, we analyze a richer model in which political institutions are more durable, in
the sense that, in democracy, it is more diﬃcult for the elite to change political institutions
than economic institutions. This model leads to a phenomenon which we refer to as captured
democracy; the equilibrium may feature the emergence and persistence of democracy for a
long span of time, but throughout the economic institutions will be those favoring the elite. In
   7
     It is also interesting that in this baseline model, there is greater ineﬃciency in democracy than in non-
democracy, because in democracy the economic allocations are the same as in nondemocracy, but there is
greater exercise of de facto political power by the elite, which is costly. This result suggests some insights about
why certain potential reforms in specific political institutions in many less-developed countries may have failed
to generate significant economic growth and also perhaps about why the post-war economic performance of
democracies may have been no better than those of dictatorships (e.g., Barro, 1997).


                                                         4
fact, somewhat paradoxically, this extended model predicts that the equilibrium probability
of labor-repressive institutions is higher in democracy than in nondemocracy, motivating the
term captured democracy.
    The model also sheds some light on how institutional persistence can be diminished or
broken. It suggests that an eﬀective democracy requires both reforms in specific political
institutions (such as voting rules or electoral procedures), but also a way of curbing the de
facto political power of the elite, which can be achieved directly, for example, by reducing their
ability to capture the political system, or indirectly by reforming the economic structure so
that with reduced land rents, they have less incentive to thwart democracy.
    The model’s insights enable us to interpret the experience of many less developed countries
in a diﬀerent light. For example, in the Americas, labor repression was of central importance
during the colonial era, and was achieved by various means including the encomienda, the
mita, and slavery. Yet repression did not end when the mita and slavery were abolished.
It continued with domination of politics by local landed elites, with the creation of labor
market monopsonies (Solberg, 1969, McGreevey, 1971, Coatsworth, 1974, McCreery, 1986),
and the systematic threat of violence against peasants in rural areas. Similarly, in the sugar
plantations of the British Caribbean, Natal or Mauritius, slavery was replaced by the use of
cheap indentured laborers from the Indian subcontinent (Tinker, 1974, Northrup, 1995). In the
U.S. South, slavery was replaced by monopsonistic arrangements, policies designed to impede
labor mobility, political disenfranchisement, intimidation, violence and lynching.8
    Our paper is related to the literature on the persistence of institutions in political science
(e.g., Steinmo, Thelen and Longstreth, 1992, Pierson, 2004, Thelen, 2004), though much of
this literature focuses on how specific institutions persist over long periods of time. In this
it follows works on ‘hysteresis’ by David (1985) and Arthur (1989) on the lock-in of specific
technologies based on increasing returns. In addition to these approaches, persistence of insti-
tutions can arise in models in which social conventions or norms emerge from local interactions
and learning (e.g., Young, 1998, Bednar and Page, 2006), and in models in which agents make
specific investments in activities whose value would be destroyed by changes in social arrange-
   8
     This discussion and the general approach in the paper beg the question of how the elite are able to exercise
de facto political power in democracy. This is also discussed in detail in Section 7, where we present a number
of historical case studies illustrating the pattern of persistence modeled here and also emphasize two specific
channels: the capture of the party system by the elites and the threat of violence. Both these methods were
extensively used in the U.S. South after the Civil War and are still present in many Latin American countries
such as Brazil, Bolivia or Colombia. For the U.S. South after the Civil War, see Key (1949), Woodward (1955),
Wright (1986), Alston and Ferrie (1999), and Ransom and Sutch (2001), for Colombia, see Dix (1967), Wilde
(1978), Hartlyn (1988) and Kline (1999), and for Brazil, see Chilcote (1990) and Hagopian (1996).



                                                       5
ments (Dixit, 1989a,b, Coate and Morris, 1999). Institutions could also persist because of the
existence of multiple steady-state equilibria (e.g., Krugman, 1991, Matsuyama, 1991). The
popular idea that economic inequality or certain forms of natural resource endowments tilt
the balance towards bad institutions is also diﬀerent from our notion of persistence (invariance
and state dependence), since this idea stresses the persistence of economic characteristics that
then lead to the persistence of institutions (e.g., Engerman and Sokoloﬀ, 1997, Benabou, 2000,
2005). None of these approaches have addressed the issues we discuss here, in particular, the
coexistence of persistence and change.
       From a modeling point of view, this paper extends the framework in Acemoglu and Robin-
son (2000, 2001, 2006a), where de facto political power drives changes in political institutions
and the future distribution of de jure political power.9 The major diﬀerence is that we now
model the process of the elite investing in their de facto political power, which leads to some
significant diﬀerences in the results. While our previous work emphasized that democracy is
more “pro-citizen”, the analysis here shows this may not be the case if the elite are able to
garner suﬃcient de facto political power in democracy.10 In this respect, the current paper is
related to Mulligan, Gil and Sala-i-Martin (2004) and Mulligan and Tsui (2005), which focus
on similarity of various policies between democracies and nondemocracies, though, in terms
of our terminology, they explain this similarity by lack of significant de jure power diﬀerences
between regimes, while our model emphasizes how changes in de facto power can undo real
changes in de jure power.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the basic economic and
political environment. Section 3 characterizes the equilibria of the baseline model, and es-
tablishes the invariance result and the main comparative statics. Section 4 generalizes this
framework in a number of directions and shows how under more general circumstances, only
partial oﬀset will occur, and the equilibrium will correspond to a Markov regime-switching
model, with fluctuations between democracy and nondemocracy. Section 5 introduces the
model in which changing political institutions is more diﬃcult than influencing economic in-
stitutions and shows how an equilibrium pattern of captured democracy can arise with landed
elites dictating their favorite economic institutions in democracy. Section 6 briefly discusses
how simultaneous reforms in multiple dimensions of political institutions or economic institu-
   9
    See also Ticchi and Vindigni (2005), Jack and Lagunoﬀ (2006), and Lagunoﬀ (2006) for related approaches.
  10
    See, among others, Austen-Smith (1987), Baron (1994) and Grossman and Helpman (1996) on models
models where the equilibrium policy in a democracy is aﬀected by lobbying. Our approach is more reduced-
form, but explicitly models the incentives of individual agents to contribute to lobbying-type activities, is
dynamic and endogenizes not just policies but also institutions.



                                                     6
tions can be eﬀective in breaking the cycle of persistence in economic institutions. Section 7
discusses a number of historical case studies that both motivate and substantiate the ideas in
the paper. Section 8 concludes.


2         Baseline Model
2.1        Demographics, Preferences and Production Structure

Consider an infinite-horizon society in discrete time with a unique final good and populated
by a continuum 1 of worker/citizens and (a finite) number M > 1 of the elites. All agents have
the same risk-neutral preferences with discount factor β, given by
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                                        β j cit+j                                           (1)
                                                  j=0

at time t where cit+j denotes consumption of agent i at time t + j in terms of the final good.
We use the notation i ∈ E to denote an elite agent, and i ∈ C to denote a citizen.
         All workers own one unit of labor, which they supply inelastically. Each member of the
elite i ∈ E has access to the following production function to produce the unique final good:
                                      ½ ¡ i i¢                L
                                  i     F ¡L , NL ¢ if Li ≤ M
                                YL =        L    i        i   L                             (2)
                                         F M , NL     if L > M

where Li denotes land and NLi denotes labor used by this producer, and F exhibits constant
returns to scale. This production function implies that there is a maximum land size of L/M
after which each producer runs into severe diminishing returns (where the fact that diminishing
returns start after land size of L/M is a normalization). There is a total supply of land equal
to L in the economy, with no alternative use, and each elite owns L/M units of land (and no
labor).11
         The final good can also be produced with an alternative technology, which can be in-
terpreted as small-scale production by the laborers themselves (or a low productivity proto-
industry technology). This alternative technology exhibits constant returns to scale to labor:

                                                 YA = ANA .                                                 (3)
    11
    The diminishing returns is introduced to prevent an allocation in which all land is owned by one individual,
which would solve the free-rider problem in investment in de facto political power, explained below. For the
same reason, if initially there were M 0 > M land owners, given the production function in (2), land would
become concentrated in the hands of M land owners. We do not explicitly discuss transactions in the land
market to save space.




                                                         7
                                                                                          P
Clearly, total output of the unique final good in the economy will be Y =                    i∈E   YLi + YA , and
the market clearing condition for labor is
                                               X
                                                     NLi + NA ≤ 1.                                           (4)
                                               i∈E

The main role of the alternative technology, (3), will be to restrict how low wages can fall in
this economy.
      We consider two diﬀerent economic institutions. In the first, labor markets are competi-
tive.12 Given (2), each elite will hire NLi = NL /M units of labor, where NL = 1 − NA , and
since F exhibits constant returns to scale, we can write per capita output as:
                                       µ       ¶     µ     ¶
                                           L            L
                                y=F          ,1 = f          .                                               (5)
                                          NL            NL

When there are competitive labor markets, which we denote by τ = 1, the wage rate (and the
wage earnings of each worker), as a function of labor allocated to this sector, NL , is therefore:
                                         µ     ¶          µ    ¶
                              c             L       L 0 L
                            w [NL ] ≡ f          −     f         ,                             (6)
                                           NL      NL       NL
where the superscript c denotes “competitive”. The return to landowners with competitive
markets is similarly                                             µ        ¶
                                               c             0       L
                                             R [NL ] ≡ f                      ,                              (7)
                                                                     NL
with each landowner receiving Rc L/M .

Assumption 1
                                                   f (L) − Lf 0 (L) > A.

      This assumption implies that even when NL = 1 (i.e., when L/NL = L), the competitive
wage in this sector is greater than the marginal product of labor in the alternative technology.
Therefore, both the eﬃcient allocation and the competitive equilibrium allocation will have all
workers allocated to the land sector, i.e., NL = 1. In light of this, the relevant competitive
wage and rental return on land will be

                                   wc ≡ wc [NL = 1] ≡ f (L) − Lf 0 (L) ,                                     (8)

and
                                         Rc ≡ Rc [NL = 1] ≡ f 0 (L) .                                        (9)
 12
      This implies that, by law, landowning elites cannot restrict their labor demand to aﬀect prices.


                                                         8
Consequently, factor prices at time t as a function of economic institutions are given by wt =
w (τ t = 1) = wc and Rt = R (τ t = 1) = Rc , with wc and Rc as defined in (8) and (9).13
       The alternative set of economic institutions are labor repressive (τ t = 0) and allow the
landowning elite to use their political power to reduce wages below competitive levels. They
cannot, however, force workers to work (i.e., slavery is not allowed), so workers always have
access to the alternative small-scale production technology. Consequently, when economic
institutions are labored oppressive, the lowest wage that the elite can pay the workers, while still
ensuring that NL > 0, is A. This implies that factor prices under these economic institutions
are
                                               wr ≡ A,                                              (10)

and
                                                  f (L) − A
                                           Rr ≡             .                                       (11)
                                                      L
(Recall that the landed elite are paying the wage of A to a total of NL = 1 workers). When
economic institutions are labor repressive, then we will have wt = w (τ t = 0) = wr and Rt =
R (τ t = 0) = Rr . Assumption 1 immediately implies that Rr > Rc , since with labor repressive
economic institutions wages are kept artificially low, i.e., wr < wc , so that land owners enjoy
greater rents. For future reference, we define

                                  ∆R ≡ Rr − Rc
                                       f (L) − A
                                     =           − f 0 (L) > 0.                                     (12)
                                           L
       One feature to note is that the simple environment outlined here implies that both competi-
tive labor markets and labor repression will generate the same total output, and will diﬀer only
in terms of their distributional implications. Naturally, it is possible to introduce additional
costs from labor repressive economic institutions, which may include standard monopsony
distortions or other costs involved in monitoring and forcing laborers to work at below market-
clearing wages (such as wasteful expenditures on monitoring, paramilitaries, or lower eﬃciency
of workers because of the lower payments they receive). Incorporating such costs has no eﬀect
  13
    More formally, the second welfare theorem combined with preferences in (1) implies that a competitive
equilibrium is a solution to the following program:
                                                      µ    ¶
                                                        L̃
                                            max f            NL + ANA
                                           NL .NA ,L̃   NL

subject to (4) and L̃ ≤ L. Assumption 1 ensures that the solution involves NL = 1 and L̃ = L, and the
equilibrium factor prices are given by the shadow prices of this program.




                                                   9
on the analysis, and throughout, one may wish to consider the labor repressive institutions as
corresponding to “worse economic institutions”.

2.2       Political Regimes and De Facto Political Power

There are two possible political regimes, denoted by D and N , corresponding to democracy
and nondemocracy. The distribution of de jure political power will vary between these two
regimes. At any point in time, the “state” of this society will be represented by st ∈ {D, N },
which designates the political regime that applies at that date. Importantly, irrespective of
the political regime (state), the identity of landowners and workers does not change; the same
M individuals control the land, and have the potential to exercise additional political power.
       Overall political power is determined by the interaction of de facto and de jure political
power. Since there is a continuum of citizens, they will have diﬃculty in solving the collective
action problem to exercise de facto political power. Consequently, we treat their de facto power
as being exogenous rather than stemming from their own contributions.
       In contrast, elites can spend part of their earnings to gather further de facto political power.
In particular, suppose that elite i ∈ E spends an amount θit ≥ 0 as a contribution to activities
increasing their group’s de facto power. Then total elite spending on such activities will be
     P
Zt = i∈E θit , and we assume that their de facto political power is

                                                  PtE = φZt ,                                               (13)

where φ > 0. The reason why the elite may choose to spend a positive amount on such
activities is that there is a finite number, M , of them, so each of them will take into account
that their own contribution to total spending, Zt , will have an eﬀect on equilibrium outcomes.
An important assumption implicit in (13) is that the technology for generating de facto political
power for the elite is the same in democracy and nondemocracy.14
       Even though the citizens cannot solve the collective action problem to invest in their de
facto political power, since they form the majority in society they always possess some political
power. The extent of this power depends on whether the political regime is democratic or
nondemocratic. We model the citizens’ total political power in a reduced-form manner as
follows:
                                          PtC = ωt + ηI (st = D) ,                                          (14)
  14
     There may be a number of reasons for why the elite’s ability to lobby and bribe politicians or use paramili-
taries may be more restricted in democracy, so in Section 4, we allow this technology to diﬀer between democracy
and nondemocracy.



                                                       10
where ω t is a random variable drawn independently and identically over time from a given
distribution F (·) and measures their de facto power; I (st = D) is an indicator function for
st = D, such that I (st = D) = 1 while I (st = N ) = 0; and η is a strictly positive parameter
measuring citizens’ de jure power in democracy.
       There are two important assumptions embedded in equation (14). The first is that the de
facto political power of the citizens fluctuates over time, and is hard to predict in advance.15
The second assumption is that when the political regime is democratic, i.e., st = D, citizens
have greater political power. This represents in a very simple way the fact that democracy
allocates de jure political power in favor of the majority. This will be both because of the
formal rules of democracy and also because in democratic politics, parties may partly solve
the collective action problem of the citizens. Put diﬀerently, equation (14) implies that in
democracy the political power of the citizens shifts to the right in the sense of first-order
stochastic dominance. To simplify the discussion, we make the following assumptions on F :

Assumption 2 F is defined over (ω, ∞) for some ω < 0, is everywhere strictly increasing and
         twice continuously diﬀerentiable (so that its density f and the derivative of the density,
         f 0 , exist everywhere). Moreover, f (ω) is single peaked (in the sense that there exists
         ω∗ such that f 0 (ω) > 0 for all ω < ω ∗ and f 0 (ω) < 0 for all ω > ω ∗ ) and satisfies
         limω→∞ f (ω) = 0.

       All of the features embedded in Assumption 2 are for convenience, and how relaxing them
aﬀects the equilibrium is discussed below.
       We introduce the variable π t ∈ {0, 1} to denote whether the elite have more (total) political
power. In particular, when PtE ≥ PtC , we have π t = 0 and the elite have more political power
and will make the key decisions. In contrast, whenever PtE < PtC , π t = 1 and citizens have
more political power, and they will make the key decisions.
       To complete the description of the environment, it remains to specify what these key
decisions are. We assume that the group with greater political power will decide both economic
institutions at time t, τ t , and what the political regime will be in the following period, st+1 .
       When the elite have more political power, a representative elite agent makes the key deci-
sions, and when citizens have more political power, a representative citizen does so. Since the
political preferences of all elites and all citizens are the same, these representative agents will
always make the decisions favored by their group.
  15
    This assumption is used extensively in Acemoglu and Robinson (2006a), and defended there. Briefly, given
their large numbers, whether and how eﬀectively citizens will be able to organize is diﬃcult to predict in advance,
and will change from time to time. The randomness of ωt captures this in a simple way.


                                                        11
2.3        Timing of Events

We now briefly recap the timing of events in this basic environment.
         At each date t, society starts with a state variable st ∈ {D, N }. Given this, the following
sequence of events take place:

     1. Each elite agent i ∈ E simultaneously chooses how much to spend to acquire de facto
           political power for their group, θit ≥ 0, and PtE is determined according to (13).

     2. The random variable ω t is drawn from the distribution F , and PtC is determined according
           to (14).

     3. If PtE ≥ PtC (i.e., π t = 0), a representative (e.g., randomly chosen) elite agent chooses
           (τ t , st+1 ), and if PtE < PtC (i.e., π t = 1), a representative citizen chooses (τ t , st+1 ).

     4. Given τ t , transactions in the labor market take place, Rt and wt are paid to elites and
           workers respectively, and consumption takes place.

     5. The following date, t + 1, starts with state st+1 .


3         Analysis of Baseline Model

We now analyze the baseline model described in the previous section. We first focus on the
symmetric Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE). An MPE imposes the restriction that equilibrium
strategies are mappings from payoﬀ-relevant states, which here only include s ∈ {D, N}. In
particular, in an MPE strategies are not conditioned on the past history of the game over and
above the influence of this past history on the payoﬀ-relevant state s. An MPE will consist of
                        ©     ª
contribution functions θi (s) i∈E for each elite agent as a function of the political state, and
decision variables τ (π) and s0 (π) as a function of π ∈ {0, 1} denoting which side has more
political power, and equilibrium factor prices as given by (8)-(11).16 Here the function τ (π)
determines the equilibrium decision about labor repression conditional on who has power and
the function s0 (π) ∈ {D, N } determines the political state at the start of the next period.
Symmetric MPE will in addition impose the condition that contribution functions take the
form θ (s), i.e., do not depend on the identity of the individual elite, i. Symmetry is a natural
    16
    More generally, we could have τ (π, s) and s0 (π, s), so that the choice of economic institutions and future
political institutions are conditioned on which party has political power, π, and the current state, s. Nevertheless,
since it is clear that the current state will have no eﬀect on these decisions, we use the more economical notation
τ (π) and s0 (π).



                                                         12
feature here, and simplifies the analysis. We discuss asymmetric MPE for completeness below.
A more formal definition of an MPE is also given below.
       The focus on MPE is natural in this context as a way of modeling the potential collective
action problem among the elite. Looking at subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) will allow
the elite greater latitude in solving the collective action problem by using implicit punishment
strategies. We briefly analyze SPEs in subsection 3.3.

3.1      Main Results

The MPE can be characterized by backward induction within the stage game at some arbitrary
date t, given the state s ∈ {D, N }. At the last stage of the game, clearly whenever the elite have
political power, i.e., π = 0, they will choose economic institutions that favor them, i.e., τ = 0,
and a political system that gives them more power in the future, i.e., s0 = N . In contrast,
whenever citizens have political power, i.e., π = 1, they will choose τ = 1 and s0 = D.17
This implies that choices over economic institutions and political states are straightforward.
Moreover the determination of market prices under diﬀerent economic institutions has already
been specified above (recall equations (8)-(11)). Thus the only remaining decisions are the
contributions of each elite agent to their de facto power, θit . Therefore, a symmetric MPE can
be summarized by a level of contribution as a function of the state θ (s). It will be convenient
to characterize the MPE by writing the payoﬀ to elite agents recursively, and for this reason,
we denote the equilibrium value of an elite agent in state s by V (s) (i.e., V (D) for democracy
and V (N ) for nondemocracy).
       Let us begin with nondemocracy. Since we are focusing on symmetric MPE, suppose that
all other elite agents, except i ∈ E, have chosen a level of contribution to de facto power equal
to θ (N). Consequently, when agent i ∈ E chooses θi , their total power will be
                               ¡               ¢   ¡                   ¢
                            P E θi , θ (N ) | N = φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi .

The elite will have political power if
                            ¡               ¢   ¡                  ¢
                         P E θi , θ (N ) | N = φ (M − 1) θ (N) + θi ≥ ω t .
  17
     We will see in Proposition 1 that the equilibrium distribution over economic institutions is the same in
democracy and nondemocracy, so citizens will be indiﬀerent between s0 = D and s0 = N. Throughout, we
use the tie-breaking rule that, when indiﬀerent, citizens choose s0 = D, and we impose this in the analysis.
Alternatively, in Section 5, equation (49) introduces more general preferences for the citizens, whereby they
receive other benefits from democracy, denoted by ν (D). In that case for any ν (D) > 0, s0 = D is always
strictly preferred for the citizens. We do not introduce these preferences now to simplify the analysis until
Section 5.



                                                     13
Expressed diﬀerently, the probability that the elite will have political power in this state is
                               ¡               ¢   ¡ ¡                  ¢¢
                              p θi , θ (N ) | N = F φ (M − 1) θ (N) + θi .                        (15)

We can then write the net present discounted value of agent i ∈ E recursively as
                                  ½                      µ                               ¶
                                     i
                                           ¡ i         ¢ Rr L
  V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = max −θ + p θ , θ (N ) | N            + βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D))
                            θi ≥0                          M
                                                     µ                               ¶¾
                               ¡     ¡             ¢¢ Rc L
                            + 1 − p θi , θ (N) | N         + βV (D | θ (N) , θ (D))     , (16)
                                                       M
where recall that Rc is the rate of return on land in competitive markets, given by (9) and Rr
is the rate of return on land under labor repressive economic institutions, given by (11). The
function V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) recursively defines the value of an elite agent in nondemocracy
when all other elite agents choose contributions θ (N ) in nondemocracy and θ (D) in democracy.
Similarly, V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) is the value in democracy under the same circumstances.
      The form of the value function in (16) is intuitive. It consists of the forgone consumption
because of the expenditure θi , plus the revenues and the continuation values. In particular,
given his contribution θi and those of other elite agents in nondemocracy, θ (N ), political power
                                                           ¡            ¢
will remain in the hands of the elite with probability p θi , θ (N ) | N , in which case economic
institutions will be labor repressive, and this elite agent receives revenue equal to Rr L/M (rate
of return under labor repressive economic institutions, Rr , times his land holdings, L/M ) and
the discounted continuation value of remaining in nondemocracy, βV (N | θ (N) , θ (D)). With
                 ¡               ¢
probability 1 − p θi , θ (N ) | N , citizens have greater political power, so they choose τ = 1
and labor markets are competitive. In this case a member of the elite receives revenue equal
to Rc L/M and continuation value βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)), since with power in their hands, the
citizens will choose to change the political system to st+1 = D.
      Agent i ∈ E chooses θi to maximize his net expected present discounted utility. Let the
policy function (correspondence) for the maximization in (16) be ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)], so that any
θi ∈ ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)] is an optimal policy for the value function in (16) (in state s = N ).
    Since F is continuously diﬀerentiable and everywhere increasing (from Assumption 2), so
    ¡               ¢
is p θi , θ (N ) | N , which implies a particularly simple first-order necessary condition for (16):
                                µ                                                           ¶
     ¡ ¡                      ¢¢ ∆RL
  φf φ (M − 1) θ (N) + θi               + β (V (N | θ (N) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) ≤ 1,
                                    M
                                                                                                (17)
and θi ≥ 0, with complementary slackness,18 where recall that ∆R ≡ Rr − Rc is defined in
(12), and f is the density function of the distribution function F . Moreover, it is clear that we
 18
      That is, either θi = 0 or (17) holds as equality.


                                                          14
                                                   ¡ ¡                   ¢¢
need the additional second-order condition that f 0 φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi < 0.19 The reason
why the maximization problem for individual i in this recursive formulation is so simple is
that θi does not aﬀect V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) or V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)), so diﬀerentiability of the
maximand is guaranteed.
       Expressed diﬀerently, any θi ∈ ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)] must solve (17) and satisfy the correspond-
ing second-order condition. The first-order condition is quite intuitive: the cost of forgone
consumption, which is the right hand side of (17), must be equal to (or less than) the benefit
from this contribution, which is the marginal increase in the probability of the elite having
more political power than the citizens, i.e., φf (·), and the benefit that the agent will derive
from this political power, which is the second term on the left-hand side, consisting of the
direct benefit ∆RL/M plus the benefit in terms of continuation value. Moreover, since we are
focusing on a symmetric MPE, θi > 0 is equivalent to θ (N ) > 0, so if there is any investment
in de facto power by the elite, then (17) must hold as an equality.
       Next, consider the society starting in democracy. With the same argument as above, the
elite will have political power if
                           ¡              ¢   ¡                  ¢
                        P D θi , θ (D) | D = φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θi ≥ ω t + η,

which only diﬀers from the above expression because with st = D, the citizens have an addi-
tional advantage represented by the positive parameter η. Then the probability that the elite
will capture political power in democracy is
                          ¡              ¢   ¡ ¡                  ¢   ¢
                         p θi , θ (D) | D = F φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θi − η ,                          (18)

and using the same reasoning as before, the value function for elite agent i ∈ E is
                                  ½                      µ                                ¶
                                     i
                                           ¡ i          ¢ Rr L
  V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = max −θ + p θ , θ (D) | D              + βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D))
                            θi ≥0                           M
                                                     µ                                ¶¾
                               ¡     ¡             ¢¢ Rc L
                            + 1 − p θi , θ (D) | D          + βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))      (19)
                                                        M
which has first-order necessary condition
                                µ                                                            ¶
  ¡ ¡                    i
                           ¢   ¢ ∆RL
φf φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θ − η              + β (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) ≤ 1,
                                   M
                                                                                              (20)
and θi ≥ 0, again with complementary slackness and with second-order condition
   ¡ ¡                   ¢   ¢
f 0 φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi − η < 0. Denote the policy function (correspondence) implied by
the maximization in (19) by ΓD [θ (N ) , θ (D)], so that any θi ∈ ΓD [θ (N) , θ (D)] solves (20).
  19
                     ¡ ¡                  ¢¢                         ¡ ¡                   ¢¢
    The condition f 0 φ (M − 1) θ (N) + θi < 0 is suﬃcient, while f 0 φ (M − 1) θ (N) + θi ≤ 0 would be
necessary but not suﬃcient. We impose the suﬃcient condition throughout to simplify the discussion.


                                                  15
       Consequently, denoting the decision of current economic institutions by τ (π) and future
political system by s0 (π), we can have the following definition of a symmetric MPE:20

Definition 1 A symmetric MPE consists of a pair of contribution levels for elite agents
θ (N ) and θ (D), such that θ (N) ∈ ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)] and similarly θ (D) ∈ ΓD [θ (N) , θ (D)].
In addition, economic and political decisions τ (π) and s0 (π) are such that τ (π = 0) = 0,
s0 (π = 0) = N , τ (π = 1) = 1 and s0 (π = 1) = D, and factor prices are given by (8)-(11) as a
function of τ ∈ {0, 1}.

       This definition highlights that the main economic actions, in particular, the investments
in de facto power, are taken by elite agents, so the characterization of the MPE will involve
solving for their optimal behavior.
       In a symmetric MPE, θi that solves (17) must equal θ (N ), thus when strictly positive,
θ (N ), must be given by:
                        µ                                                        ¶
                          ∆RL
         φf (φM θ (N ))       + βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = 1,                       (21)
                           M

and similarly the equilibrium condition for θ (D) (when strictly positive) is
                       µ                                                          ¶
                         ∆RL
    φf (φM θ (D) − η)          + βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = 1.                      (22)
                           M

Given Definition 1, these two equations completely characterize symmetric MPEs with θ (N ) >
0 and θ (D) > 0.
       Comparison of (21) and (22) immediately implies that

                                                                 η
                                           θ (D) = θ (N ) +        .                                         (23)
                                                                φM
Moreover inspection of (21) and (22), combined with the fact that F is continuously diﬀeren-
tiable, yields the invariance result:

                     p (D) ≡ p (θ (D) , θ (D) | D) = p (θ (N ) , θ (N ) | N ) ≡ p (N ) ,                     (24)

which also defines p (D) and p (N) as the respective probabilities of the elite gaining (or main-
taining) political power in democracy and nondemocracy.
       Intuitively, in democracy the elite invest suﬃciently more to increase their de facto political
power that they entirely oﬀset the advantage of the citizens coming from their de jure power.
  20
    This definition incorporates the best responses of elites and citizens regarding economic and political insti-
tutional, τ (π) and s0 (π), for convenience.


                                                       16
A more technical intuition for this result is that the optimal contribution conditions for elite
agents both in nondemocracy and democracy equate the marginal cost of contribution, which
is always equal to 1, to the marginal benefit. Since the marginal costs are equal, equilibrium
benefits in the two regimes also have to be equal. The marginal benefits consist of the im-
mediate gain of economic rents, ∆RL/M , plus the gain in continuation value, which is also
independent of current regime. Consequently, marginal costs and benefits can only be equated
if p (D) = p (N ) as in (24).
      It is also straightforward to specify when there will be positive investment in de facto power.
In particular, the following assumption is suﬃcient to ensure that the equilibrium will have
positive contribution by elite agents to de facto power:

Assumption 3                           ½                         ¾
                                               ∆RL           ∆RL
                                    min φf (0)     , φf (−η)       > 1.
                                                M             M

      Since V (N ) − V (D) ≥ 0 (by virtue of the fact that the elite choose nondemocracy),
this assumption ensures that in both regimes, an individual would like to make a positive
contribution even if nobody else is doing so.21 If this assumption is not satisfied, there may
also exist equilibria in which the elite make no contribution to increasing their de facto power
(see Corollary 1).

Proposition 1 (Invariance) Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. Then in the baseline model,
there exists a unique symmetric MPE. This equilibrium involves p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1), so
that the probability distribution over economic institutions is non-degenerate and independent
of whether the society is democratic or nondemocratic.

      Proof. Assumption 3 ensures that θ (D) = 0 and θ (N ) = 0 cannot be part of an equi-
librium. Since Assumption 2 implies that f (ω) is continuous and limω→∞ f (ω) = 0, both
conditions (21) and (22) must hold as equalities for some interior values of θ (D) and θ (N ),
establishing existence. The result that p (D) = p (N ) > 0 then follows immediately from the
comparison of these two equalities, which establishes (24). The fact that p (D) = p (N ) < 1
follows from Assumption 2, which imposes that F is strictly increasing throughout its support,
so for any interior θ (D) and θ (N ), F (φM θ (D) − η) = F (φM θ (N )) < 1. In addition, again
from Assumption 2, f (ω) is single peaked, so only a unique pair of θ (D) and θ (N ) could sat-
isfy (21) and (22) with f 0 (φM θ (N )) < 0 and f 0 (φM θ (D) − η) < 0 for given V (N) − V (D).
 21
      Assumption 3 also implies that η < −ω (where recall that ω < 0); see condition (26) below.


                                                       17
The fact that V (N ) − V (D) = η/ (φM ) is uniquely determined (from equation (24)) then
establishes the uniqueness of the symmetric MPE.
      This proposition is one of the main results of the paper. It shows that there will be equi-
librium changes from democracy to nondemocracy and the other way round (this follows from
the fact that the equilibrium probability distribution is non-degenerate, i.e., p (D) = p (N ) ∈
(0, 1)). Moreover, by assumption these changes in political institutions aﬀect the distribution
of de jure power, but they do not translate into changes in the law of motion of economic insti-
tutions and economic allocations, i.e., we have p (D) = p (N ).22 This is the sense in which there
is invariance in equilibrium; even when shocks change the political institutions, the probability
distribution over equilibrium economic institutions remains unchanged. This result also illus-
trates how institutional change and persistence can coexist–while political institutions change
frequently, the equilibrium process for economic institutions remains unchanged.

Remark 1 As will be discussed further below, the invariance result relies on functional form
assumptions. Section 4 will show that when there are diﬀerences in the technology of generating
de facto power for the elite in democracy and nondemocracy or when economic institutions are
costly to change in the short run, de facto power will only oﬀset the change in de jure power
partially. Other assumptions implicit in our analysis that are important for the invariance
result are: (1) that democracy shifts the power of the citizens additively (rather than ω being
drawn from general distributions FN in nondemocracy and FD in democracy, with FD first-
order stochastically dominating FN ); (2) that the technology of de facto power for the elite,
equation (13), is linear. When either of these assumptions are relaxed, we continue to obtain
the general insight that endogenous changes in de facto power (at least partially) oﬀset declines
in the de jure power of the elite, but not necessarily the invariance result. See Section 4.

Remark 2 Assumptions 2 and 3 can be relaxed without aﬀecting the basic conclusions in
Proposition 1. For example, if we relax the single-peakedness assumption on f (ω), the conclu-
sions in Proposition 1 would continue to apply, except that the symmetric MPE may no longer
be unique. Multiple equilibria here are of potential interest, as they correspond to situations in
which expectations of future behavior aﬀects current behavior (see, e.g., Hassler et al., 2003).
Also, if the parts of Assumption 2 that F is increasing everywhere and limω→∞ f (ω) = 0 are
relaxed, we may obtain corner solutions, whereby p (N ) = p (D) = 1, and there would be no
transitions to democracy from nondemocracy (essentially because returns to individual elites
from investing in de facto power may remain high, while the probability of a suﬃciently high
 22
      Yet, naturally, economic institutions will change when total power shifts from one group to another.


                                                       18
level of ω becomes 0). Alternatively, if Assumption 3 is relaxed, we can have equilibria with
p (N ) = p (D) = 0. Assumptions 2 and 3 rule out these “corner” equilibria. The following
result is interesting in this context.

Corollary 1 Suppose there exists θ̄(N ) > 0 such that
                                       µ                    ¶
                                         ∆RL/M − β θ̄(N )
                       φf (φM θ̄(N ))                         = 1,                          (25)
                                         1 − βF (φM θ̄(N ))
that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and that

                                               η > −ω.                                      (26)

Then in the baseline model, there exists a symmetric MPE in which p (N ) ∈ (0, 1) and p (D) =
0.

     Proof. Suppose there exists a symmetric MPE with p (D) = 0. Then we have V (D) =
Rc L/ ((1 − β) M ), while V (N ) is still given by (16), and the relevant first-order necessary
condition for θ (N ) > 0 is given by (21). Combining this with the expression for V (D), we
obtain θ (N ) = θ̄ (N ) as in (25), and

                                              F (φM θ̄(N ))∆RL/M − θ̄(N )
                         V (N ) − V (D) =                                 .
                                                   1 − βF (φM θ̄(N ))
Now using (21) and (22), we see that (25) is suﬃcient to ensure that positive contribution
to de facto power in nondemocracy is optimal for elite agents. Moreover, (26) implies that
f (−η) = 0, thus                          µ              ¶
                                     ∆RL/M − β θ̄(N )
                             φf (−η)                       < 1,
                                      1 − βF (φM θ̄(N ))
so that zero contribution in democracy is also optimal for the elite. Moreover, again from
(26), F (−η) = 0, which establishes the existence of a symmetric MPE with p (N ) ∈ (0, 1) and
p (D) = 0.
     Therefore, if we relax part of Assumption 3, symmetric MPEs with democracy as an ab-
sorbing state may arise. Clearly, Condition (26), which leads to this outcome, is more likely
to hold when η is high. This implies that if democracy in fact creates a substantial advantage
in favor of the citizens, it may destroy the incentives of the elite to engage in activities that
increase their de facto power, and thus change the future distribution of political regimes and
economic institutions.
     It is also interesting to note that even when Condition (26) holds, the equilibrium with
p (D) = p (N ) > 0 characterized in Proposition 1 may still exist, leading to a symmetric MPE

                                                  19
with p (D) = p (N ). Consequently, whether democracy becomes an absorbing state (i.e., fully
consolidated), may depend on expectations.
   Finally, inspection of the proof of Corollary 1 shows that Assumption 3 can be relaxed to:

Assumption 3A There exists θ̄(N ) > 0 satisfying (25), and
                                    µ                     ¶
                                       ∆RL/M − β θ̄(N )
                           φf (−η)                          > 1.
                                       1 − βF (φM θ̄(N ))

   With this modified assumption, all the results continue to hold, though we prefer Assump-
tion 3 since, despite being more restrictive, it is simpler and more transparent.

3.2   Non-Symmetric MPE

We now show that the same invariance result obtains without the restriction to symmetric
MPE. To do this, we first extend our treatment above and define an MPE more generally.
Without symmetry, the power of the elite in nondemocracy as a function of contribution θi by
                                                                                 ©       ª
agent i ∈ E and the distribution of contributions by all other agents, θ−i (N ) ≡ θj (N ) j∈E,j6=i ,
is given by                                                     Ã                               !
                            E
                                ¡    i     −i
                                                       ¢              P         j           i
                        P           θ ,θ        (N ) | N = φ                   θ (N ) + θ           .
                                                                 j∈E,j6=i

Similar to before, in nondemocracy the elite will have political power with probability
                                             Ã Ã                      !!
                        ¡ i −i        ¢             P
                      p θ , θ (N ) | N = F φ             θj (N ) + θi    .                              (27)
                                                                    j∈E,j6=i

In democracy, with the same reasoning as before, this probability is given by
                                         Ã Ã                     !      !
                    ¡ i −i        ¢              P
                  p θ , θ (D) | D = F φ               θj (D) + θi − η .                                 (28)
                                                               j∈E,j6=i

   The possibility that diﬀerent individuals will contribute diﬀerent amounts to the de facto
power of the elite implies that value functions can also diﬀer across elite agents, and must also
be indexed by i. Therefore, the net present discounted value of agent i ∈ E is
                  ¡                      ¢
              V i N | θ−i (N) , θ−i (D)                                                (29)
                    ½                          µ r                                   ¶
                               ¡             ¢   R L        ¡                     ¢
          = max −θi + p θi , θ−i (N ) | N            + βV i N | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D)
               i
              θ ≥0                                M
                                           µ                                   ¶¾
                 ¡       ¡               ¢¢ Rc L       ¡                     ¢
               + 1 − p θi , θ−i (N ) | N         + βV i D | θ−i (N) , θ−i (D)      .
                                             M
        ¡                      ¢
Here V i N | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) denotes the value of agent i in nondemocracy when all other
elite agents choose contributions θ−i (N ) in nondemocracy and θ−i (D) in democracy. Similarly,

                                                           20
   ¡                      ¢
V i D | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) is the corresponding value in democracy for agent i. The intuition
for this equation is similar to that for (16) in the symmetric case.
     Agent i ∈ E chooses θi to maximize his net expected present discounted utility. Let the
policy function (correspondence) of agent i that solves the maximization in (29) be given by
    £ −i               ¤                      £ −i             ¤
ΓN
 i θ     (N ) , θ−i (D) , so that any θi ∈ ΓN
                                            i θ (N ) , θ
                                                         −i
                                                            (D) is an optimal policy for the value
function in (29). Similarly, we have
                     ¡                   ¢
                V i D | θ−i (N) , θ−i (D)                                                  (30)
                       ½                       µ r                                    ¶
                              ¡               ¢ R L           ¡                    ¢
            = max −θi + p θi , θ−i (D) | D            + βV i N | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D)
                  i
                 θ ≥0                             M
                                            µ                                   ¶¾
                    ¡    ¡ i −i          ¢¢ Rc L       i
                                                         ¡      −i        −i
                                                                               ¢
                 + 1 − p θ , θ (D) | D            + βV D | θ (N ) , θ (D)           ,
                                              M
                                                    £ −i               ¤
and let the set of maximizers of this problem be ΓD
                                                  i θ    (N ) , θ−i (D) . Then we have the more
general definition of MPE as:
                                                                                      ©       ª
Definition 2 An MPE consists of a pair of contribution distributions for elite agents θi (N ) i∈E
    ©       ª                                         £ −i              ¤
and θi (D) i∈E , such that for all i ∈ E, θi (N) ∈ ΓN
                                                    i θ (N ) , θ
                                                                 −i
                                                                    (D) and similarly θi (D) ∈
   £ −i               ¤
ΓD
 i θ    (N ) , θ−i (D) . In addition, economic and political decisions τ (π) and s0 (π) are such
that τ (π = 0) = 0, s0 (π = 0) = N , τ (π = 1) = 1 and s0 (π = 1) = D, and factor prices are
given by (8)-(11) as a function of τ ∈ {0, 1}.

Proposition 2 (Non-Symmetric MPE and Invariance) Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold.
Then in the baseline model, any MPE involves p (D) = p (N) ∈ (0, 1).

     Proof. See Appendix.
     The only diﬀerence between symmetric and non-symmetric MPE is that in symmetric MPE
we also know that the total contributions made by the elite will be equally divided among each
elite agent. In non-symmetric MPE, this may not be the case, and depending on expectations,
some elite agents may be expected to, and consequently do, contribute more than others. This
implies that in non-symmetric MPE, diﬀerent levels of p (D) = p (N ) can arise in equilibrium.
     Nevertheless, the important conclusion that the probability of the elite dominating politi-
cal power and imposing their favorite economic institutions is independent of the underlying
form of political institutions remains. Given this result, in the rest of the paper we focus on
symmetric MPE. Before doing so, however, we can also note the following result:

Corollary 2 Among non—symmetric MPEs, the following maximizes p (N) = p (D): for i0 ∈ E,
 0          0
θi (D) = θi (N ) + η/φ, and for all i ∈ E and i 6= i0 , θi (D) = θi (N ) = 0.

                                                 21
     Proof. The proof of Proposition 2 makes it clear that in any equilibrium where con-
dition (59) in the Appendix holds as equality for some i ∈ E, so does (60) for the same
i ∈ E, and vice versa. This implies that to maximize p (N ) = p (D), we need to maxi-
           ¡                ¢
mize ∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) for all i ∈ E for whom (59) and (60) in the Appendix hold as
                                                    ¡                  ¢
equalities. Clearly, the highest value any such ∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) can take is given by
    0
      ³ 0           0
                         ´                                    0          0
∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) = η/φ for some i0 together with θi (D) = θi (N ) + η/φ. To see
                             0         0
that an equilibrium with θi (D) = θi (N ) + η/φ for i0 and θi (D) = θi (N ) = 0 for all i ∈ E
and i 6= i0 exists, note first that, since θi (D) = θi (N ) = 0 for all i ∈ E and i 6= i0 , we
          ¡                  ¢
have ∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) = 0 for all i ∈ E and i =6 i0 . Second, from (59) and (60) in the
Appendix, we have that for i0 ∈ E,
       ³ ³ 0      ´´        ³ ³ 0      ´  ´ µ ∆RL               ³ 0                ´¶−1
             i                   i                           i0   −i         −i0
   φf φ θ (N ) = φf φ θ (D) − η =                      + β∆V     θ (N ) , θ (D)          ,
                                                     M
                                    0
                                      ³ 0          0
                                                       ´          ¡                 ¢
which, in view of the fact that ∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) > 0 = V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) , implies

        ³ ³ 0    ´´   ³ ³ 0   ´   ´ µ ∆RL        ¡ −i
                                                               ¶
                                                              ¢ −1
            i             i                    i          −i
      φf φ θ (N ) = φf φ θ (D) − η <      + β∆V θ (N ) , θ (D)     ,
                                       M
                                                                                        0
for all other i ∈ E, establishing that they prefer to make zero contributions. Hence, θi (D) =
 0
θi (N) + η/φ for i0 and θi (D) = θi (N ) = 0 for all i ∈ E and i 6= i0 is an equilibrium and
achieves the highest p (N) = p (D) among all MPEs.
     Intuitively, the equilibrium that makes only one elite agent make all of the investment in
de facto power means that this agent has a lot to lose from democracy (because of the higher
investment in de facto power involved in this regime), and maximizes investments in de facto
power.

3.3    Subgame Perfect Equilibria

The analysis so far has focused on MPE. Since the landed elite form a small cohesive group,
they may be able to achieve a better equilibrium than the MPE by using threats of punishments
against each other. In this subsection, we briefly discuss SPEs (subgame perfect equilibria) of
the above game. The main result is that for suﬃciently large discount factors, the “best” SPEs
also take the same form as the MPE characterized in Propositions 1 and 2, with the equilibrium
probability distribution over economic institutions independent of the political regime.
     In characterizing the SPEs, we allow elite agents to use any kind of punishment strategies
and coordination, except that in competitive labor markets, they cannot (by law) restrict their
                                                                                ©           ª
labor demand in order to aﬀect factor prices. To define an SPE, let θ (st , t) ≡ θj (st , t) j∈E

                                               22
be the vector of contributions by elite agents at time t, when the state is st . Let ht =
(θ (s0 , 0) , π 0 , τ 0 , s1 , ..., θ (st , t) , π t , τ t , st+1 ) be the history of contributions, political outcomes
and actions up to time t, with Ht denoting the set of possible histories at time t.

Definition 3 An SPE consists of contribution functions for each elite agent i ∈ E, θi :
Z+ × {N, D} × Ht−1 → R+ specifying their contribution as a function of time t, state st
and the history Ht−1 up to that point and economic and political decision functions τ :
Z+ × {0, 1} × {N, D} × Ht−1 → {0, 1} and s0 : Z+ × {0, 1} × {N, D} × Ht−1 → {N, D} specify-
ing economic and political institution decisions as a function of time, who has political power,
the state and history, such that θi is a best response to θ−i , τ and s0 for all i ∈ E and τ and s0
                      © ª
are best responses to θi i∈E , and factor prices are given by (8)-(11) as a function of τ ∈ {0, 1}.

       As in most repeated and dynamic games, there exist many subgame perfect equilibria in
this model. Our focus is on SPEs that maximize the ex ante–time t = 0–utility of the elite.
This is natural since we are motivated to look at the SPEs to see how the ability of the elite
to coordinate their actions changes the results. We define best or “Pareto optimal” SPEs as
SPEs in which, at time t = 0, no elite agent can be made better oﬀ without some other elite
agent being made worse oﬀ.23 In addition, we refer to an SPE as “symmetric Pareto optimal”,
if it is Pareto optimal and all elite agents use the same equilibrium strategy. The main result
is the following:

Proposition 3 (Subgame Perfect Equilibrium and Invariance) Suppose Assumptions
1-3 hold. Then there exists β̄ ∈ [0, 1) such that that for all β ≥ β̄, the symmetric Pareto optimal
SPE induces equilibrium probabilities of labor repressive institutions p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1).
Moreover, as β → 1, any Pareto optimal SPE involves p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1).

       Proof. See Appendix.
       This proposition therefore shows that as long as the discount factor is large enough, the
“best” SPEs also give the same invariance result as the MPEs. Intuitively, with a high enough
discount factor, the elite act totally cohesively, as a single agent, and the same calculus as in
the MPE applies for equating the marginal cost of greater contributions to de facto power to
the marginal benefits, again implying p (D) = p (N ). When the discount factor is suﬃciently
small, however, this result may no longer be true, because a diﬀerent pattern of contributions
may be necessary to ensure “incentive compatibility” on the side of the elite agents (i.e., to
  23
       Clearly, here Pareto optimality is only among the elite and does not consider the utility of the citizens.


                                                          23
ensure that certain elite agents are willing to make the contributions they are supposed to
make along the equilibrium path).

3.4   Comparative Statics

We now return to the symmetric MPE and derive a number of comparative static results.
Comparative statics are straightforward in this case, since equations (16), (19) and (23), im-
mediately imply that
                                                      η
                                  V (N ) − V (D) =      > 0,                                 (31)
                                                     φM
where we have dropped the conditioning of the value functions on the equilibrium θ (D) and
θ (N ) to simplify the notation. Equation (31) is intuitive. In the equilibrium of Proposition 1,
the only diﬀerence between democracy and nondemocracy for the elite is that in democracy
they have to spend more in contributions in order to retain the same de facto political power.
In particular, the per elite additional spending is equal to η/φM , which is increasing in the de
jure political power advantage that democracy creates for the citizens (since, in equilibrium,
the elite totally oﬀset this advantage).
   Using (21) and (31) and denoting the equilibrium level of θ (N ) by θ∗ (N ), we have:
                                          µ              ¶
                                   ∗        ∆RL      βη
                           φf (φM θ (N ))         +         = 1.                         (32)
                                              M      φM
Similarly, denoting the equilibrium level of θ (D) by θ∗ (D), we also have
                                                µ             ¶
                                    ∗             ∆RL     βη
                           φf (φM θ (D) − η)           +        = 1.                         (33)
                                                   M      φM
   Finally, let us denote the probability that the elite will have political power by p∗ = p (D) =
p (N ), and recall that this probability corresponds both to the probability that the elite will
control political power, and also the probability that the society will be nondemocratic and
economic institutions will be labor repressive rather than competitive. Thus this probability
summarizes most of the economic implications of the model.

Proposition 4 (Comparative Statics) Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 hold. Then in the
baseline model, we have the following comparative static results:

  1. An increase in the economic rents that the elite can obtain by controlling political power
      will increase their contributions and the probability that they control political power,
      i.e.,
                              ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)          ∂p∗
                                       > 0,         > 0 and      > 0.
                               ∂∆R           ∂∆R            ∂∆R

                                               24
  2. An increase in the discount factor will increase the elite’s contributions and the proba-
     bility that they control political power, i.e.,

                               ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)         ∂p∗
                                        > 0,         > 0 and     > 0.
                                 ∂β            ∂β            ∂β

  3. An increase in the number of the elite will intensify the collective action problem among
     them, and will reduce their contributions and the probability that they control political
     power i.e.,
                              ∂θ∗ (N)      ∂θ∗ (D)          ∂p∗
                                      < 0,         < 0, and     < 0.
                                ∂M          ∂M              ∂M
  4. An increase in the advantage of the citizens in democracy will increase the elite’s contri-
     butions and the probability that they control political power, i.e.,

                              ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)          ∂p∗
                                       > 0,         > 0, and     > 0.
                                ∂η            ∂η             ∂η

  5. An increase in the eﬀectiveness of the de facto political power technology of the elite has
     ambiguous eﬀects on their contributions, but increases the probability that they control
     political power, i.e.,
                                                ∂p∗
                                                    > 0.
                                                ∂φ

   Proof. All of these comparative static results follow from (32) and (33) using the Implicit
Function Theorem (e.g., Simon and Blume, 1994, Theorem 15.2). We can use the Implicit
Function Theorem, since f is diﬀerentiable everywhere and moreover, Assumptions 2 and 3
ensure that the equilibrium is always at an interior point. We briefly sketch the argument for
some of these results. For example, for ∂θ∗ (N ) /∂∆R, use the Implicit Function Theorem on
(32) to obtain
                       ∂θ∗ (N )          f (φM θ∗ (N )) L
                                =− 0                           >0
                        ∂∆R       f (φM θ∗ (N )) M (φ∆RL + βη)
since f 0 < 0 from the second order condition. Using the Implicit Function Theorem on (33)
establishes ∂θ∗ (D) /∂∆R > 0. To obtain ∂p∗ /∂∆R > 0, note that p∗ = F (φM θ∗ (N )) and F
is everywhere strictly increasing.
   The comparative statics in part 2 with respect to β are identical.
   Using the Implicit Function Theorem with respect to M also immediately establishes
∂θ∗ (N ) /∂M < 0 and ∂θ∗ (D) /∂M < 0 as claimed in part 3. Since p∗ = F (φM θ∗ (N )),
the eﬀect on p∗ at first appears ambiguous. However, note from (32) that as M increases, the
second term on the left-hand side declines, so f (φM θ∗ (N )) has to increase. Since f 0 < 0,


                                                25
this is only possible if φM θ∗ (N ) declines, so p∗ = F (φM θ∗ (N )) also declines (given the
monotonicity of F ).
       Next, the Implicit Function Theorem also gives the results in part 4, in particular,
                           ∂θ∗ (N )          βf (φM θ∗ (N ))
                                    =− 0                            > 0,
                             ∂η       φf (φM θ∗ (N )) M (φ∆RL + βη)
and similarly, ∂θ∗ (D) /∂η > 0. The argument for ∂p∗ /∂η > 0 is again similar. The second
term on the left-hand side of (32) increases as η increases, so f (φM θ∗ (N )) has to decline.
Since f 0 < 0, this implies that φM θ∗ (N ) increases, so p∗ = F (φM θ∗ (N )) also increases,
establishing ∂p∗ /∂η > 0.
       Finally, it is straightforward to verify that the eﬀect of φ on θ∗ (N ) and θ∗ (D) is ambiguous.
However, writing (32) as
                                                      µ                  ¶
                                              ∗           φ∆RL βη
                                     f (φM θ (N))             +              = 1,
                                                           M    M
we see that an increase in φ increases the second term on the left-hand side, so f (φM θ∗ (N ))
has to decline. Since f 0 < 0, this implies that φM θ∗ (N ) increases, and p∗ = F (φM θ∗ (N ))
must also increase, establishing ∂p∗ /∂φ > 0.
       Many of the comparative statics in Proposition 4 are intuitive, and yet quite useful in terms
of economic implications. For example, the fact that an increase in ∆R induces both greater
contributions by elite agents and also increases the probability that they control political
power is very intuitive, since ∆R is a measure of how much they have to gain by controlling
political power. The greater is this gain, the more willing is each elite agent to contribute to
their collective political power.24 Since ∆R will be high when A is low, Proposition 4 also
implies ∂p∗ /∂A < 0. In other words, in a society where alternative (e.g., proto-industrial)
economic activities are less developed and where, by repressing labor the elite can obtain
large rents, political and economic institutions are more likely to be controlled by the elite,
and consequently economic institutions are more likely to be tilted towards repressive labor
relations rather than competitive labor markets.25
       The fact that a higher β also increases contributions by the elite and the likelihood of labor
repressive institutions is also interesting. In many models, a higher discount factor leads to
better allocations. Here, in contrast, a higher discount factor leads to more wasteful activities
by the elite and labor repressive economic institutions. The reason is that the main pivotal
  24
     This finding is also in line with the empirical literature on collective action which finds that it is more likely
when the benefits are higher (e.g., Wade, 1988).
  25
     The fact that the elite can never impose slavery, thus taking away the outside option of the workers, is
naturally important for the result that ∂p∗ /∂A < 0.


                                                          26
agents in this model are the elite, which, by virtue of their smaller numbers, take the eﬀect of
their contributions on equilibrium allocations into account. Contributing to de facto political
power is a form of investment, and some of the returns accrue to the elite in the future (when
they secure nondemocracy instead of democracy). Therefore a higher level of β encourages
them to invest more in their political power and makes nondemocracy and labor repressive
economic institutions more likely.
       The third set of comparative statics show that when M increases so that there are more
elite agents, the collective action problem among them becomes worse. This highlights the
latent free-rider problem in the model. Even though each elite agent contributes to the group’s
political power, their level of contribution is still suboptimal from the viewpoint of the group,
since each elite agent realizes that by contributing more he creates a positive externality on
other elites. A greater M increases the extent of this positive externality and intensifies the
free-rider problem (the collective action problem). This comparative static therefore suggests
that nondemocracy and labor repressive economic institutions are more likely to emerge when
there is a relatively small and cohesive group of elite land owners, a pattern consistent with
the historical case studies discussed below.
       The most surprising comparative static results are those with respect to η. Recall that a
higher η corresponds to democracy giving more de jure power to the citizens. We may have
therefore expected a greater η to lead to better outcomes for the citizens. In contrast, we find
that higher η makes nondemocracy and labor repressive economic institutions more likely (as
long as Assumption 3 still holds). The reason for this is that a higher η makes democracy
more costly for the elite, so it is in the interest of each elite agent to invest more in the group’s
political power to avoid democracy. This eﬀect is strong enough to increase the probability
that they will maintain political power. However, the overall impact of η on the likelihood of
democracy is non-monotonic: if η increases so much that Assumption 3 no longer holds, then
Corollary 1 applies and democracy may become fully consolidated (i.e., an absorbing state).
       Note however that both the results that higher M reduces the political power of the elite
and that higher η increases their political power depend on the functional form assumptions
already highlighted in Remark 1.26 Nevertheless, we believe that the baseline model we have
is both the simplest and the most natural one, and highlights important first-order eﬀects.
  26
     In particular, both the additive shift of the distribution function of ω in democracy and the fact that (13) is
linear are important for these comparative statics. The fact that the eﬀect of M on p∗ is ambiguous in general
is related to Esteban and Ray (2001), who emphasize that the eﬀect of an increase in the number of agents
to the total contribution of a lobby is ambiguous because, while each agent contributes less, there are more of
them.



                                                        27
    Finally, when φ increases, the technology of garnering de facto political power for the
elite improves. This may reduce their contributions to the group’s de facto power, but it will
always increase the equilibrium probability of a nondemocratic regime and labor repressive
institutions.


4     Generalizations: Markov Regime-Switching Models and State
      Dependence

The model in the previous section yielded stark results, which were partly driven by the
assumptions that the elite had the same technology to generate de facto political power in both
regimes and were able to change economic institutions immediately after they took control (in
addition to the functional form assumption noted in footnote 26). Relaxing these assumptions
leads to a richer form of persistence, in the form of a Markov regime-switching model with
state dependence. These issues are discussed in the next two subsections, and also pave the
way of our analysis of how to eﬀectively reform equilibrium institutions in Section 6.
    Another special feature of the model in the previous section was that it implicitly assumed
that changing economic institutions and changing the political system were equally easy (or
diﬃcult). An extension in which changing political institutions may require greater political
power than influencing economic policies or institutions is discussed in Section 5.
    Throughout the rest of the paper, to simplify the discussion, we focus on symmetric MPE.

4.1    Limits on De Facto Power of the Elite

Our first generalization of the above framework assumes that in democracy, because of limits
on the activities of the elite, their technology for gathering de facto political power changes to

                                             PtE (D) = φD Zt ,                                        (34)
                               P
where φD ∈ (0, φ) and Zt =        i∈E   θit .27 In other words, each unit of the final good spent by the
elite for increasing their de facto power is less eﬀective in democracy than in nondemocracy.
This is a reasonable assumption, since democratic institutions may prevent the elite from using
repression or paramilitaries or from buying politicians as eﬀectively as in a nondemocratic
regime. Therefore, in this model democracy has two simultaneous functions; it shifts the
distribution of de jure political powers towards the citizens and it limits the exercise of de
facto power by the elite.
  27
     We now write this as PtE (D) as opposed to PtE as in (13), since the technology of generating de facto
political power diﬀers between the two political regimes.


                                                    28
       We now have the probability of the elite controlling the political agenda in democracy as
                          ¡              ¢   ¡ ¡                   ¢   ¢
                         p θi , θ (D) | D = F φD (M − 1) θ (D) + θi − η ,                                (35)

and the value function in democracy is unchanged and is still given by (19). It is clear that
Definition 1 still applies to this modified model, and specifies symmetric MPEs.
    Assuming interior solutions, then the symmetric MPE is characterized by (21) and
                         µ                                                          ¶
                           ∆RL
   φD f (φD M θ (D) − η)         + βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = 1.                (36)
                            M
       We can impose a variant of Assumption 3 to ensure that the equilibrium is interior:

Assumption 3’                        ½                           ¾
                                             ∆RL             ∆RL
                                  min φf (0)     , φD f (−η)       > 1.
                                              M               M

       Now recalling that p (N ) ≡ p (θ (N ) , θ (N ) | N ) and p (D) ≡ p (θ (N) , θ (N ) | D), compari-
son of (21) and (36) immediately implies that

                                              p (N ) > p (D) .                                           (37)

To see this more explicitly, note that φ > φD implies f (φD M θ (D) − η) > f (φM θ (N )). Since
in the neighborhood of equilibrium, f (·) is decreasing and F (·) is strictly increasing every-
where, we must have φD M θ (D) − η < φM θ (N ) and p (D) = F (φD M θ (D) − η) < p (N ) =
F (φM θ (N )). Note that p (N ) is the probability of nondemocracy persisting, while 1 − p (D)
is the probability of democracy persisting. This implies that labor repressive institutions are
less likely to arise in democracy than in nondemocracy. Moreover, once the society is demo-
cratic, it has a higher probability of remaining democratic than the probability of switching
to democracy from nondemocracy. Consequently, in this model there is persistence of both
political and economic institutions.
       Assumption 3’ also implies p (D) > 0,28 so even in democracy, the elite have the potential
power to impose their favorite economic institutions, and change the political system back
to nondemocracy, and moreover from Assumptions 2 and 3’, we have p (N ) ∈ (0, 1), so the
Markov process is ergodic (irreducible and aperiodic). Next, dividing (21) by (36) yields:

                                φD f (φD M θ (D) − η) = φf (φM θ (N )) ,                                 (38)
  28
    In fact, p (D) > 0 would follow from the weaker assumption that η < −ω, though this latter assumption
would not be suﬃcient to ensure positive contributions by the elite in democracy, which we use for comparative
statics.


                                                     29
which shows that the gap between φ and φD will determine the gap between p (D) and p (N ),
thus the extent of persistence of economic and political institutions (e.g., as φD → φ, p (D) →
p (N )). This leads to the following result:

Proposition 5 (Limits on De Facto Power and State Dependence) Consider the mod-
ified model with limits on the elite’s de facto power in democracy. Suppose that Assumptions 1,
2 and 3’ hold. Then any symmetric MPE leads to a Markov regime switching structure where
the society fluctuates between democracy with associated competitive economic institutions
(τ = 1) and nondemocracy with associated labor repressive economic institutions (τ = 0), with
switching probabilities p (N ) ∈ (0, 1) and 1 − p (D) ∈ (0, 1) where p (D) < p (N ).

   The proof of this proposition is omitted since it is similar to that of Proposition 1, and
follows straightforwardly from the expressions in the text, in particular, equations, (21) and
(36), and Assumptions of 1, 2 and 3’.
   The most important implication of this modified model is that there is now a diﬀerent
type of institutional persistence–which we refer to as state dependence, since the probability
distribution over equilibrium political and economic institutions depends on the current state
of the system, s ∈ {N, D}. While Proposition 1 featured invariance in the sense that economic
institutions followed the same equilibrium process irrespective of political institutions, it did
not lead to persistence in political institutions; the fact that p (D) = p (N ) implied that
democracy was as likely to follow a democratic regime as it was to follow a non-democratic
regime. The results in Proposition 5 are diﬀerent; once in nondemocracy, the society is more
likely to remain nondemocratic than it is to switch to nondemocracy from democracy. This is
the essence of state dependence.
   Also interesting is the fact that the elite still have the ability to solve their collective action
problem and gather suﬃcient de facto power to dominate democratic politics and impose their
favorite economic institutions, i.e., p (D) > 0 (though here this also corresponds to their ability
to also change the political system from democracy to nondemocracy).
   It is also possible to obtain additional comparative static results for this case. To do this,
we need to solve for V (N ) ≡ V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) and V (D) ≡ V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)). This is
straightforward by imposing that equilibrium probabilities of the elite having more power than
the citizens are p (D) and p (N ), and combining (16) and (19), which gives

                                   θ (D) − θ (N ) + (p (N ) − p (D)) ∆RL/M
               V (N) − V (D) =                                             > 0.                  (39)
                                             1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))


                                                 30
Combining this equation with (21) and (36), we obtain (again for an interior equilibrium since
Assumption 3’ is imposed):
                      µ                                                ¶
    N                   ∆RL    θ (D) − θ (N ) + (p (N ) − p (D)) ∆RL/M
  H ≡ φf (φM θ (N ))        +β                                           − 1 = 0,                           (40)
                          M              1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))
and
                                   µ                                                               ¶
     D                           ∆RL    θ (D) − θ (N ) + (p (N ) − p (D)) ∆RL/M
 H       ≡ φD f (φD M θ (D) − η)     +β                                                                − 1 = 0,
                                  M               1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))
                                                                                                            (41)
where, clearly, p (D) = F (φD M θ (D) − η) and p (N ) = F (φM θ (N )). These equations also
define H N and H D for future reference.
       We can now perform the comparative statics using these two conditions. The diﬃculty
is that the equilibrium is no longer guaranteed to be unique, since multiple values of θ (N )
and θ (D) might satisfy these two conditions. Moreover, an equilibrium may correspond to a
situation in which there is “myopic instability” in the sense that a small increase in one of the
equilibrium variables, say θ (N ), will lead to a further increase in that variable. In these types
of situations, comparative static results are diﬃcult to obtain.29 To make more progress, we
appeal to Samuelson’s (1947) correspondence principle, which essentially restricts attention to
equilibria that satisfy a type of “myopic stability”. Under this assumption, it is possible to
obtain some comparative static results.
                                                                                        ¡          ¢
       More specifically, myopic stability would necessitate that the Jacobian matrix of H N , H D
with respect to (θ (N ) , θ (D)),
                                               Ã                    !
                                                   ∂H N     ∂H N
                                                   ∂θ(N )   ∂θ(D)
                                         J =       ∂H D     ∂H D
                                                                        ,
                                                   ∂θ(N )   ∂θ(D)

is negative definite, i.e., an increase in θ (N ) reduces H N , an increase in θ (D) reduces H D ,
and the cross-partial terms are not large enough to dominate the product ∂H N /∂θ (N ) ×
∂H D /∂θ (D).      In fact, the proof of Proposition 6 will show that ∂H N /∂θ (D) < 0 and
∂H D /∂θ (N ) > 0, and exactly the same arguments as in that proof also establish that
∂H D /∂θ (D) < 0, so myopic stability and the correspondence principle (i.e., the negative
definiteness of J ) only require the condition ∂H N /∂θ (N ) < 0.30
       Notice that if θ (N ) and θ (D) were solutions to an optimization problem, this condition
would be automatically satisfied. The reason why J may not be negative definite is that
  29
     In fact, as is well known, when there are multiple equilibria, the comparative static results will typically
be reversed for some intermediate equilibria; see, for example, Milgrom and Roberts (1994) for supermodular
games.
  30
     The condition ∂H N /∂θ (N) < 0 can always be ensured by making f (φMθ (N)) suﬃciently decreasing.


                                                       31
the system of equations (40) and (41) arise from the equilibrium interaction of elite agents
individually contributing to increasing the de facto political power of their group.
   By applying the correspondence principle, we can establish most of the comparative static
results of interest. These are stated and proved in the next proposition (again using *’s to
denote equilibrium values).

Proposition 6 (Comparative Statics for the Model with Limits on De Facto Power)
Consider the modified model with limits on the elite’s de facto power in democracy. Suppose
that Assumptions 1, 2 and 3’ hold and following the correspondence principle, assume that the
matrix J is negative definite. Then, we have the following comparative static results:

  1.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)      ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              > 0,         > 0,          > 0 and         > 0.
                      ∂∆R           ∂∆R          ∂∆R              ∂∆R
  2.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)    ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              > 0,         >0          > 0 and         > 0.
                       ∂β            ∂β         ∂β               ∂β
  3.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)      ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              < 0,         < 0,          < 0 and         < 0.
                       ∂M           ∂M            ∂M              ∂M
   Proof. We provide the proof for the first result. The other two are proved analogously.
   Let us first apply the Implicit Function Theorem and write
                     Ã               !µ           ¶    Ã       !
                        ∂H N    ∂H N                      ∂H N
                        ∂θ(N)  ∂θ(D)      ∂θ (N )         ∂∆R
                        ∂H D    ∂H D
                                                    =−    ∂H D
                                                                 ∂∆R.
                                          ∂θ (D)          ∂∆R
                        ∂θ(N)    ∂θ(D)

The fact that J is negative definite implies ∂H N /∂θ (N ) < 0 and ∂H D /∂θ (D) < 0. In
addition, it can be verified that ∂H N /∂θ (D) < 0 and ∂H D /∂θ (N ) > 0. To see this, first
consider ∂H N /∂θ (D). Diﬀerentiating (40) with respect to θ (D) and using (39), we have
                                         ∙           ½                             ¾¸
          ∂H N        βφf (φM θ (N ))         ∂p (D) ∆RL
                =                         1−                  + β [V (N ) − V (D)]
         ∂θ (D)    1 − β (p (N) − p (D))      ∂θ (D)    M
and moreover, from (35) we have
                                ∂p (D)
                                       = M φD f (φD M θ (D) − η) .
                                ∂θ (D)
The fact that M > 1 combined with the last two equations and (36) implies ∂H N /∂θ (D) < 0.
   Now with the same reasoning,
                                         ∙             ½                       ¾¸
        ∂H D     βφD f (φD M θ (D) − η)        ∂p (N ) ∆RL
               =                          −1 +             + β [V (N ) − V (D)]
       ∂θ (N )    1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))       ∂θ (N )   M

                                               32
and (15) implies:
                                  ∂p (N )
                                          = M φf (φM θ (N )) .
                                  ∂θ (N )
Combining this with the appropriate first-order condition, (17), gives ∂H D /∂θ (N ) > 0.
    Therefore, we have the following sign pattern for J :
                                           µ         ¶
                                              − −
                                       J =             .
                                              + −
Moreover, it is straightforward to verify that an increase in ∆R strictly increases both the left
hand sides of (40) and (41), i.e., ∂H N /∂∆R > 0 and ∂H D /∂∆R > 0. Then by Cramer’s rule
(e.g., Simon and Bloom, 1994, Theorem 9.4), we have
                                            µ       ¶
                                              − −
                                        det
                               ∂θ (D)         + −
                                      =               > 0.
                                ∂∆R          det J
Totally diﬀerentiating (38) implies that
                                   µ        ¶       µ         ¶
                                     ∂θ (D)           ∂θ (N )
                              Sgn             = Sgn
                                      ∂∆R              ∂∆R
(since f 0 (φD M θ (D) − η) < 0 and f 0 (φM θ (N )) < 0), which establishes that ∂θ (D) /∂∆R > 0
and ∂θ (N ) /∂∆R > 0. Finally, ∂p∗ (D) /∂∆R > 0 immediately follows from the monotonicity
of F (·).
    The same reasoning establishes the comparative statics with respect to β and M .
    This proposition therefore shows that most of the qualitative results from the baseline
model generalize to the Markov regime-switching model with state dependence. In particular,
nondemocracy and labor repressive economic institutions are more likely when the landed elite
have greater rents from repressing labor (i.e., when ∆R is high, for example because A is low),
when they are more forward-looking (i.e., when β is high), and when they form a more cohesive
(smaller) group (i.e., when M is low). However, some other results from Proposition 4, for
example, those concerning the eﬀect of φ and η, are now ambiguous.

4.2    Sluggish Economic Institutions

Next we modify the above framework in a diﬀerent direction, and assume that starting in
democracy, the elite cannot impose their favorite economic institutions immediately, for exam-
ple, democratic politics has already taken some actions that cannot be reversed within the same
period. This implies that starting in democracy, economic institutions are “slow-changing” or
sluggish. This structure is also formally equivalent to one in which the elite incur a temporary
cost when they change economic institutions from competitive to labor repressive.

                                               33
   More specifically, we now allow three diﬀerent types of economic institutions: τ t = 1,
corresponding to competitive markets, τ t = 0, corresponding to full labor repression and
τ t = 1/2 corresponding to partial labor repression, in which case, wages are reduced to some
level A ≤ w̄ < w (τ t = 1) ≡ f (L) − Lf 0 (L), and thus returns to land owners with partial labor
repression are equal to
                                                        f (L) − w̄
                                Rp ≡ R (τ = 1/2) ≡                 .                         (42)
                                                            L
Let us define λ such that
                                                Rp − R c
                                           λ≡            ,
                                                  ∆R
with ∆R as defined in (12). The fact that A ≤ w̄ < w (τ = 1) ensures λ ∈ (0, 1].
   The only diﬀerence from the analysis in Section 2 is that starting in s = D, even if the elite
gain political power, they cannot impose τ = 0, and the best they can do is to set τ = 1/2
(while starting in s = N , any τ ∈ {0, 1/2, 1} is allowed). Given this assumption, the rest of
the analysis is similar to before, with the only diﬀerence taking place in the value function in
democracy, which now takes the form:
                                 ½                     µ                               ¶
                                    i
                                          ¡ i         ¢ Rp L
  V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = max −θ + p θ , θ (D) | D           + βV (N | θ (N) , θ (D))
                           θi ≥0                          M
                                                    µ                              ¶¾
                              ¡    ¡              ¢¢ Rc L
                           + 1 − p θi , θ (D) | D         + βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))   . (43)
                                                      M
Once again, focusing on interior solutions, this maximization problem implies the first-order
condition
                                 µ                                                             ¶
  ¡ ¡                   ¢    ¢       λ∆RL
φf φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi − η              + β (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) = 1,
                                      M
                                                                                               (44)
which only diﬀers from (20) because the gain of capturing power is now λ∆R rather than ∆R.
                                               ¡ ¡                   ¢   ¢
The corresponding second-order condition is f 0 φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi − η < 0. Once again,
let the policy correspondence be denoted by ΓD (θ (N ) , θ (D)).
   The value function in nondemocracy is unchanged and is given by (16), and the first-
order condition for contributions is given by (17), with the policy correspondence given by
ΓN (θ (N) , θ (D)).
   To define an equilibrium formally, let us also recall that π = 1 stands for the citizens
having political power. Now let π = 0 stand for the elite having full power, so that they can
set τ = 0 if they want to, and let π = 1/2 denote the elite capturing political power starting
in democracy. Thus we have:



                                                 34
Definition 4 A symmetric MPE of the model with sluggish economic institutions consists of a
pair of contribution levels for elite agents θ (N ) and θ (D), such that θ (N ) ∈ ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)]
and θ (D) ∈ ΓD [θ (N ) , θ (D)]. In addition, economic and political decisions τ (π) and s0 (π) are
such that τ (π = 0) = 0, s0 (π = 0) = N, τ (π = 1/2) = 1/2, s0 (π = 1/2) = N , τ (π = 1) = 1
and s0 (π = 1) = D, and factor prices are given by (8)-(11) and w̄ and (42) when τ = 1/2.

   Given this definition of a symmetric MPE, the equilibrium condition for θ (N ) is again the
same as before, i.e., equation (22), while with the same steps as in the previous section, the
equilibrium condition for θ (D) is given by:
                     µ                                                              ¶
                        λ∆RL
   φf (φM θ (D) − η)           + β (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) = 1.       (45)
                          M
Comparison of this condition to (22) immediately establishes that as long as λ < 1, i.e., as
long as democracy does put restrictions on economic institutions that the elite can impose, we
have p (D) < p (N ).
   As before, we impose an assumption to ensure an interior equilibrium:

Assumption 3”                     ½                          ¾
                                          ∆RL           λ∆RL
                               min φf (0)     , φf (−η)        > 1.
                                           M             M

Proposition 7 (Sluggish Economic Institutions and State Dependence) Consider the
modified model with sluggish economic institutions. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2 and 3”
hold. Then any symmetric MPE leads to a Markov regime switching structure where the society
fluctuates between democracy and nondemocracy, with switching probabilities p (N ) ∈ (0, 1)
and 1 − p (D) ∈ (0, 1) where p (D) < p (N ).

   Proof. This result follows immediately from the comparison of (22) with (45), which
establishes p (D) < p (N ).
   To obtain a full solution to this model, we again need to solve (16) together with (43).
Using V (N ) and V (D) to simplify notation, this implies
                                 θ (D) − θ (N ) + p (N ) ∆RL/M − p (D) λ∆RL/M
             V (N ) − V (D) =                                                 .                 (46)
                                                1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))
Now combining this with the equilibrium conditions, (22) with (45), we have conditions char-
acterizing the equilibrium similar to those in the previous subsection:
                       µ                                                       ¶
                         ∆RL      θ (D) − θ (N ) + p (N ) ∆RL/M − p (D) λ∆RL/M
H N ≡ φf (φM θ (N ))          +β                                                 − 1 = 0,
                          M                      1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))
                                                                                     (47)

                                                 35
                          µ                                                      ¶
                              λ∆RL    θ (D) − θ (N ) + p (N ) ∆R/M − p (D) λ∆R/M
H D ≡ φf (φM θ (D) − η)            +β                                             −1 = 0.
                               M                   1 − β (p (N ) − p (D))
                                                                                    (48)
   To make more progress, we once again impose the correspondence principle, and define the
matrix J as before and assume that it is negative definite.

Proposition 8 (Comparative Statics for the Model with Sluggish Economic Insti-
tutions) Consider the modified model with sluggish economic institutions. Suppose that
Assumptions 1, 2 and 3” hold and assume that the matrix J is negative definite. Then, we
have the following comparative static results:

  1.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)      ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              > 0,         > 0,          > 0 and         > 0.
                      ∂∆R           ∂∆R          ∂∆R              ∂∆R
  2.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)    ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              > 0,         >0          > 0 and         > 0.
                       ∂β            ∂β         ∂β               ∂β
  3.
                     ∂θ∗ (N )      ∂θ∗ (D)      ∂p∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (D)
                              < 0,         < 0,          < 0 and         < 0.
                       ∂M           ∂M            ∂M              ∂M
  4.
                                    ∂θ∗ (N )         ∂p∗ (N )
                                             < 0 and          < 0.
                                      ∂λ               ∂λ

   Proof. The proofs of the first three results are identical to those in Proposition 5 and
are omitted. To obtain the last one, we can again apply the Implicit Function Theorem and
totally diﬀerentiate equations (47) and (48) to write
                       Ã               !µ           ¶    Ã           !
                          ∂H N   ∂H N                         ∂H N
                         ∂θ(N)   ∂θ(D)      ∂θ (N )            ∂λ
                          ∂H D   ∂H D
                                                      =−      ∂H D
                                                                         ∂λ.
                                            ∂θ (D)
                          ∂θ(N)   ∂θ(D)                        ∂λ

An argument similar to that in the proof of Proposition 6 establishes that ∂H N /∂θ (D) < 0 and
∂H D /∂θ (N ) > 0. Next it is also straightforward to see that ∂H D /∂λ > 0 and ∂H N /∂λ < 0.
Then applying Cramer’s rule and using the fact that det J > 0 yields
                                             µ        ¶
                                                + −
                                         det
                              ∂θ∗ (N )          − −
                                       =                 <0
                                ∂λ            det J
while the same steps imply that ∂θ∗ (D) /∂λ has ambiguous sign. Finally, ∂p∗ (N ) /∂λ < 0
follows immediately from the monotonicity of F (·).

                                                 36
    This proposition shows that in the environment with sluggish economic institutions the
main comparative static results from Proposition 4 regarding the eﬀect of economic rents, the
discount factor and the cohesion of the landed elite continue to apply. Also interestingly, a
decrease in λ, meaning more sluggish economic institutions in democracy, increases p∗ (N ).
This is intuitive; a lower λ means that democracy is more costly for the elite, because it will
take time for them to impose their favorite economic institutions even when they take control
in democracy. Consequently, the value of nondemocracy relative to democracy, V (N ) − V (D),
is higher, so in nondemocracy, the elite invest more in order to preserve this set of political
institutions (and the associated labor repressive economic institutions). The implications of
a decrease in λ on the elite’s de facto power in democracy is ambiguous, since it reduces the
immediate benefits of taking control in democracy, but also, by increasing V (N ) − V (D), it
increases the long-run benefits.


5    Durable Political Institutions and Captured Democracy

The assumption so far has been that when the elite have more political power than the citizens,
they can change both economic institutions and the political system (though in the previous
subsection, they could only change the economic institutions slowly). The historical examples
below illustrate a diﬀerent salient pattern: democracy may emerge and endure, but in a cap-
tured form, whereby the elite are able to impose their favorite economic institutions (or at the
very least, have a disproportionate eﬀect on the choice of economic institutions) in an enduring
democracy. It is therefore important to generalize the model so that there can be diﬀerences
between equilibrium political and economic institutions.
    As discussed in detail in Acemoglu and Robinson (2006a), in many situations, political
institutions are more diﬃcult to change, and may have additional “durability”. We now mod-
ify the baseline model to incorporate this feature and assume that overthrowing a democratic
regime is more diﬃcult than influencing economic institutions. More specifically, the elite
require greater political power to force a switch from democracy to nondemocracy than sim-
ply influencing economic institutions in democracy. To simplify the discussion, we assume
that when they influence economic institutions in democracy, they can choose their favorite
economic institutions, labor repression.
    Finally, for reasons that will become apparent below, we now assume that the time t




                                              37
preferences of citizens, i.e., those for all i ∈ C, are given by
                                     ∞
                                     X         ¡                 ¢
                                            β j cit+j + ν (St+j ) ,                          (49)
                                      j=0

with ν (S = N ) = 0 and ν (S = D) > 0. Therefore, these preferences allow a direct utility for
the citizens from democracy (which may in turn be because of ideological reasons or a reduced-
form for other benefits provided to the citizens by democracy). Moreover, we will assume that
ν (S = D) is large enough that citizens always prefer and vote for democracy even when this
may have economic costs for them.
   We model institutional change as follows. We assume that when s = D and PtC +ξ > PtE ≥
PtC , where ξ > 0, the elite can choose economic institutions but cannot change the political
system. If, on the other hand, PtE ≥ PtC +ξ, the elite can choose both economic institutions and
the future political system. Symmetrically when s = N and PtE + ξ > PtC ≥ PtE , the citizens
can choose economic institutions, but cannot change the political system. This formulation
builds in the assumption that changing political institutions is more diﬃcult than influencing
economic institutions in the most straightforward way.
   Throughout this section, we again focus on symmetric MPE. Also, to keep the issues sepa-
rate in this subsection, we assume that when the elite have more political power in democracy,
they can impose their most preferred economic institutions, τ = 0, as in the baseline model.
Finally, to further simplify the discussion we strengthen Assumption 2:

Assumption 2’ F is defined over (ω, ∞) for some ω < 0, is everywhere strictly increasing and
      twice continuously diﬀerentiable (so that its density f and the derivative of the density,
      f 0 , exist everywhere), and moreover we have f 0 (ω) < 0 for all ω and limω→∞ f (ω) = 0.

   Given these assumptions, the structure of the model is similar to before. The value functions
are more complicated, but have similar intuition to those in Section 3. In particular, in addition
to (18), let
                       ¡              ¢   ¡ ¡                  ¢       ¢
                     p̂ θi , θ (D) | D = F φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θi − η − ξ ,                    (50)




                                                    38
so that we have:31
                               ½
                                         ¡             ¢ Rr L
V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = max −θi + p θi , θ (D) | D           +
                         θi ≥0                            M
                         ¡       ¡             ¢¢ Rc L     ¡              ¢
                          1 − p θi , θ (D) | D         + p̂ θi , θ (D) | D βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D))
                            ¡      ¡             ¢¢M                        ª
                         + 1 − p̂ θi , θ (D) | D βV (D | θ (N ) , θ (D)) ,                     (51)

where we have already imposed that when the citizens have suﬃcient power they will choose
democracy.
       With similar arguments to before, the maximization in (51) implies the following first-order
condition
           ¡                         ¢ ∆RL
         φf φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θi − η                                                          (52)
              ¡                         M ¢
         +βφf φ (M − 1) θ (D) + θi − η − ξ (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) = 1,

which is now suﬃcient since Assumption 2’ ensures that the second-order condition is satisfied.
       The main diﬀerence of this first-order condition from the one before is that the probability
with which the elite gain the economic rent ∆RL/M is diﬀerent from the probability with
which they secure a change in the political system. For this reason, two diﬀerent densities
appear in (52). As before, denote the resulting policy correspondence as ΓD (θ (N ) , θ (D)).
       Similarly for nondemocracy, we define
                             ¡               ¢   ¡ ¡                   ¢   ¢
                           p̂ θi , θ (N ) | N = F φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi + ξ ,                                    (53)

which leads to a modification of the value function for nondemocracy as
                                ½
                                          ¡              ¢ Rr L
V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) = max −θi + p θi , θ (N ) | N            +
                          θi ≥0                             M
                          ¡       ¡              ¢¢ Rc L     ¡               ¢
                           1 − p θi , θ (N ) | N         + p̂ θi , θ (N ) | N βV (N | θ (N ) , θ (D))
                             ¡      ¡ i            ¢¢M                         ª
                          + 1 − p̂ θ , θ (N ) | N βV (D | θ (N) , θ (D)) ,                        (54)

which also has a similar structure to the value function in democracy in this case, (54). Con-
sequently, the first-order (necessary and suﬃcient given Assumption 2’) condition for optimal
  31
                                                                            ¡             ¢
     An alternative way of writing (51) would be as follows: define p̃ θi , θ (D) | D to be the probability that
the elite
       ¡ are able ¢to impose their preferred economic institutions but not change political institutions, and
let p̆ θi , θ (D) | D ¡ be the probability
                                    ¢      that they are able to change the political institutions ¡    as well.¢ Then
with probability p̃ θi , θ (D) | D , they only receive ∆RL/M, whereas with probability p̆ θi , θ (D) | D , they
receive
  ¡        ∆RL/M ¢ + β¡(V (N) − V (D)).
                                      ¢    This
                                            ¡ way of writing
                                                           ¢   the
                                                               ¡ recursive ¢formulation
                                                                                    ¡        is equivalent
                                                                                                    ¢      to (51) with
p̆ θi , θ (D) | D = p̂ θi , θ (D) | D and p̃ θi , θ (D) | D = p θ i , θ (D) | D − p̂ θi , θ (D) | D .



                                                          39
contribution by an elite agent is also similar:
          ¡                      ¢ ∆RL
        φf φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi                                                            (55)
             ¡                      M  ¢
        +βφf φ (M − 1) θ (N ) + θi + ξ (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) = 1

which again defines the policy correspondence ΓN (θ (N ) , θ (D)).
   To define an equilibrium, now introduce the additional notation such that π = (0, 0) denotes
the elite keeping total power in nondemocracy or gaining total power in democracy (i.e., PtE ≥
PtC when s = N or PtE ≥ PtC + ξ when s = D); π = (0, 1) corresponding to the elite keeping
control of de jure power but losing control of economic institutions in nondemocracy (i.e.,
PtE + ξ ≥ PtC > PtE ); π = (1, 1) means the elite loses power in nondemocracy or fails to
gain any power in democracy (i.e., PtC > PtE + ξ when s = N or PtC > PtE when s = D);
and finally, π = (1, 0) corresponds to the citizens maintaining de jure power in democracy but
losing control over economic institutions (i.e., PtC + ξ > PtE ≥ PtC ). Imposing that citizens
always prefer democracy to nondemocracy (from preferences in (49)), we have:

Definition 5 A symmetric MPE of the model with durable political institutions consists of a
pair of contribution levels for elite agents θ (N ) and θ (D), such that θ (N ) ∈ ΓN [θ (N ) , θ (D)]
and θ (D) ∈ ΓD [θ (N ) , θ (D)]. In addition, economic and political decisions τ (π) and s0 (π) are
such that τ (π = (0, 0)) = τ (π = (1, 0)) = 0, s0 (π = (0, 0)) = s0 (π = (0, 1)) = N , τ (π = (1, 1)) =
τ (π = (0, 1)) = 1, s0 (π = (1, 1)) = s0 (π = (1, 0)) = D, and factor prices are given by (8)-(11)
as a function of τ ∈ {0, 1}.

   Given this definition, a symmetric MPE with θ (N) > 0 and θ (D) > 0 is a solution to the
following two equations
                 ∆RL
φf (φM θ (D) − η)    +βφf (φM θ (D) − η − ξ) (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N ) , θ (D))) = 1.
                  M
                                                                                          (56)
               ∆RL
φf (φM θ (N ))     + βφf (φM θ (N ) + ξ) (V (N | θ (N ) , θ (D)) − V (D | θ (N) , θ (D))) = 1.
                M
                                                                                          (57)
It can be verified that Assumption 3 above is suﬃcient to ensure that zero contributions cannot
be equilibria.
   The interesting result in this case is that once the society becomes democratic, it will
remain so potentially for a long time (i.e., p̂ (D) can be small), but the elite will still be able to
control the economic institutions (i.e., p (D) could be quite large). This is stated and proved
in the next proposition.

                                                  40
Proposition 9 (Captured Democracy) Consider the modified model with durable political
institutions. Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2’ and 3 hold. Then we have a Markov regime-
switching process with state dependence and 1 > p̂ (N ) > p̂ (D) > 0. Moreover, democracy
is captured in the sense that 0 < p (N ) < p (D) < 1, i.e., democracy will survive but choose
economic institutions in line with the elite’s interests with even a higher probability than does
nondemocracy.

     Proof. The probability of labor repressive economic institutions under democracy is

                        p (D) = p (θ (D) , θ (D) | D) = F (φM θ (D) − η) ,

while it is
                          p (N ) = p (θ (N ) , θ (N ) | N) = F (φM θ (N ))

in nondemocracy. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that p (D) ≤ p (N ). This is equivalent
to
                                   φM θ (D) − η ≤ φM θ (N ) .                               (58)

Since from Assumption 2’ f is decreasing everywhere, this implies

                                f (φM θ (D) − η) ≥ f (φM θ (N )) .

This equation combined with (56) and (57) implies that

                            f (φM θ (D) − η − ξ) ≤ f (φM θ (N ) + ξ) .

Since from Assumption 2’ f is decreasing, this is equivalent to

                               φM θ (D) − η − ξ ≥ φM θ (N ) + ξ,

which, given ξ > 0, contradicts (58), establishing that p (D) > p (N ), i.e., that democracy is
captured.
     But, by the same reasoning, p (D) > p (N ) implies f (φM θ (D) − η − ξ) > f (φM θ (N ) + ξ),
thus φM θ (D)−η −ξ < φM θ (N )+ξ. Since F is strictly monotonic, this implies p̂ (N ) > p̂ (D),
establishing the Markov regime-switching structure.
     The equilibrium in this proposition is the richest and perhaps the most interesting one we
have encountered so far. The equilibrium still takes a Markov regime-switching structure with
fluctuations between democracy and nondemocracy; but in democracy, there is no guarantee
that economic institutions will be those favored by the citizens. While in all the previous

                                                41
models we studied, the elite were able to impose both their political and economic wishes at
the same time, here we have an equilibrium pattern whereby democracy persists, but the elite
are able to impose their favorite economic institutions. In fact, the proposition shows that
(given Assumption 2’) the elite will be able to impose labor repressive economic institutions
with a higher probability under democracy than in nondemocracy.
       The intuition for this (somewhat paradoxical) result is that in democracy there is an addi-
tional benefit for the elite to invest in de facto political power, which is to induce a switch from
democracy to nondemocracy. Consequently, the elite invest in their de facto power suﬃciently
more in democracy that they are able to obtain their favorite economic institutions with a
greater probability.32 Nevertheless, the elite are happier in nondemocracy, because the cost
of investing in their de facto political power in democracy is significantly higher. In fact, it
is precisely because they prefer nondemocracy to democracy that they are willing to invest
more in their de facto political power in democracy and obtain the labor repressive economic
institutions with a high probability. What about citizens? If there were no additional benefit
of democracy, ν (S = D) > 0, then citizens would actually be worse oﬀ in democracy than
in nondemocracy, because they only care about economic institutions and economic institu-
tions are more likely to be labor repressive in democracy than in nondemocracy. Thus when
ν (S = D) = 0, citizens would never choose democracy, and would be happy to remain in non-
democracy (given the limited ability that they have to solve the collective action problem).
Therefore, the ideological or other benefits of democracy encapsulated in ν (S = D) > 0 create
the possibility of the captured democracy equilibrium, whereby the citizens are willing to vote
and defend democracy, but democracy at the end caters to the wishes of the elite.
       Therefore, this model features both state dependence in political and economic institutions,
and also coexistence of change in political institutions with persistence in economic institutions
(i.e., the presence of labor repression in democracy). In fact, it is straightforward to see that
the larger is ξ, the more likely is the configuration with stable democracy choosing economic in-
stitutions in line with the interests of the elite. Consequently, this model with durable political
institutions and captured democracy provides both the richest set of predictions regarding the
persistence of economic and political institutions, and a potential explanation for the patterns
discussed in Section 7, which illustrate how many societies become and remain democratic,
  32
    This result is not independent of functional form assumptions. For example, if we relax Assumption 2’, it
is possible to obtain an equilibrium with a semi-captured democracy where political institutions still follow a
Markov-switching structure with state dependence, but the probability of labor repressive economic institutions
in democracy is positive but no higher than in nondemocracy, i.e., p (N) ≥ p (D) > 0. Nevertheless, relaxing
Assumption 2’ does not guarantee that such an equilibrium will exist; it only makes it possible.



                                                      42
but continue to pursue policies that favor the traditional landed elite.


6    Eﬀective Reform

In this section, we briefly discuss how institutional persistence can be broken by eﬀective
reforms. Our framework shows how the equilibrium path may feature invariance (i.e., labor
repressive and generally dysfunctional economic institutions remaining in place despite shocks
that change the political organization of society) or state dependence (where dictatorship is
more likely to follow dictatorship than it is to follow democracy). Are there any major reforms
that could break these various types of persistence?
    The comparative static results above suggest potential answers to this question. In par-
ticular, the results so far show that a change in political institutions from nondemocracy to
democracy is likely to be eﬀective (in terms of leading to equilibrium competitive labor mar-
kets and persistent democracy) under two alternative (but complementary) scenarios. First,
if democracy creates a substantial advantage for the citizens in the form of a large value of η,
then as shown by Corollary 1 this will end the cycle of institutional persistence and make the
permanent consolidation of democracy an equilibrium.
    Second, one of the following reforms is undertaken simultaneously with the switch to democ-
racy, then the economy is less likely to switch back to nondemocracy and labor repressive eco-
nomic institutions: (1) a reduction in φD in terms of the model of subsection 4.1, so that the
traditional elites are less able to control politics in a democratic society (for example, prevent-
ing local threats of violence or the capture of political parties by the traditional elites would
achieve such an outcome). (2) a reduction in ∆R, for example, by means of an increase in
A, which will reduce the potential rents that the landed elites can obtain and will discourage
them from investing in de facto political power.
    This discussion therefore illustrates that while politics as business-as-usual may favor the
elite even in democracy, undertaking simultaneous and significant reforms may change the
character of the political equilibrium, making democracy and competitive labor markets more
likely. An attractive example of simultaneous reform leading to a significant change in the
distribution of political power in society is the 1688 Glorious Revolution in England, which
not only changed de jure power by dethroning the Stuart monarchy, but also by substantially
increasing the role of the Parliament and the allocation of economic resources in society, ir-
reversibly altered the distribution of de facto political power (see, for example, North and
Weingast, 1989, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005a). Another interesting example of


                                                43
simultaneous reforms arises in the next section where we describe how central aspects of the
economic institutions of the U.S. South, having survived the Civil War, finally changed in the
1960s.


7         Historical Perspective

We now examine some case studies of the persistence of power, elites and institutions from the
U.S. South, Latin America and Africa (Liberia). Our objective is neither to provide a compre-
hensive historical account nor to test our model. Instead, we wish to illustrate salient cases
of coexistence of change in political institutions with persistence in the underlying economic
system, which has been the motivating empirical pattern for our theoretical analysis. In all
cases, we will interpret the historical events through the lenses of the models presented above,
though we will also attempt to highlight potential disagreements or alternative interpretations
among historians when they exist.

7.1        Persistence of the Elites in U.S. South

           “De landlord is landlord, de politician is landlord, de judge is landlord, de shurf is landlord,
           ever’body is landlord, en we ain’ got nothin.” Testimony of a Mississippi sharecropper to
           an oﬃcial of the Agricultural Adjustment Administration in 1936, Schulman (1994, p. 16).

         An important example which illustrates our thesis in the continuation of the economic
system based on labor repression, plantation and low-wage uneducated labor in the U.S. South
before and after the significant changes in political institutions brought about by the Civil
War.33
         Before the Civil War, the South was significantly poorer than the U.S. average income at
about 70% of GDP per-capita (e.g., Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992, Easterlin, 1960).34 The
South lacked industry (Bateman and Weiss, 1981, Wright, 1986, Table 2.4, p. 27) and in 1860
the total manufacturing output of the South was less than that of either Pennsylvania, New
    33
      Although many features of the Southern economic system, such as the plantation system and the reliance on
low-wage labor, persisted, as Wright (1986) emphasizes, there were also important discontinuities, for example,
the fact that the planter class transformed itself from “laborlords,” mostly relying on their slave property, to
“landlords,” more reminiscent to the large-scale plantation owners of South America.
   34
      The relative poverty of the South has been hotly debated by scholars. Although Fogel and Engerman (1974)
pointed out that if the South had been an independent country in 1860 it would have been amongst the 10
richest in the world, the consensus view is that the South was relatively backward with poor institutions in 1860
(a view which in its modern form goes back at least to Genovese, 1965). To the extent that it was relatively
prosperous compared to other parts of the world at the time, this was because it had recently benefited from
a huge boom in cotton prices (Wright, 1978) and also because it was embedded in a society whose institutions
were formed in the 17th century, before the development of the plantation economy.


                                                         44
York or Massachusetts (Cobb, 1984, p. 6). The South had very low rates of urbanization
(around 9% as opposed to 35% in the Northeast) and relatively little investment in infrastruc-
ture. For example, the density of railroads (miles of track divided by land area) was three times
higher in the North than in Southern states. The situation with respect to canal mileage was
similar (Wright, Table 2.1, p. 21). Perhaps more importantly, especially in the context of the
potential for future economic growth and industrialization, the South was not even innovative
for the sectors in which it specialized.35
       Although there is no consensus about why the South was backward, all scholars relate this
in various ways to the planation economy and slavery. Wright (1986) argues that because
slaves were a mobile asset, there was no incentive for planter interests to support investment
in public goods such as infrastructure, and so manufacturing could not develop. Bateman and
Weiss (1981) show that Southern planters did not invest in industry, even though the rate of
return was superior to that in agriculture. A plausible explanation for the lack of innovation
is that slavery limited the possibilities for productive investment. Slaves were forbidden to
own property or to become educated in most Southern states, presumably because this made
them easier to control. But this pattern of labor repression also condemned plantations to
low-skilled labor forces and possibly removed the incentives of planters to innovate. It is also
possible that the lack of urbanization and industry was a consequence of concerns about the
control of slaves and collective action, though Goldin (1976) disputes this.
       In the aftermath of the Civil War, the income per-capita of the South fell to about 50%
of the U.S. average. If the organization of the slave economy had been the reason why the
South had been relatively backward in 1865, one might have imagined that the abolition of
slavery in 1865 would have removed this blockage to Southern prosperity. The evidence and
historical interpretations show that the abolition of slavery had a surprisingly small eﬀect on
the Southern economy.36 Though planters initially tried and failed to reintroduce the gang
labor system with the freed slaves, out of the ashes of the Civil War emerged a low wage labor
intensive economy based on labor repression. Cut oﬀ from the rest of the United States, income
per-capita remained at about half the average until the 1940s when it finally began slowly to
converge.37 Just as before the Civil War, there was systematic underinvestment in education
  35
     For example, during the period 1837 to 1859 while the average numbers of patents issued per year relating
to corn and to wheat were respectively 12 and 10, it was just 1 for cotton (see Schmookler, 1972).
  36
     Despite this consensus, there is a debate on the related matter of why Southern incomes fell after the
Civil War. The interpretation by Fogel and Engerman (1974) is based on the idea that the slavery system was
relatively eﬃcient, though this has been challenged, see, for example, Ransom and Sutch (2001).
  37
     Wright (1986, p. 70) notes “the isolation of the southern unskilled labor market was a basic background
condition for virtually the whole epoch between the Civil War and World War II.”



                                                     45
(Margo, 1990).38 The main incentive for this seems to have been to impede migration (see
Wright, 1986, p. 79). In 1900 all but two of the non-Southern states had enacted compulsory
schooling laws, while none had such laws in the South except Kentucky (Woodward, 1951, p.
399). Though industrial development did begin more systematically after 1865, Cobb (1984,
p. 17) notes:

         “The industries that grew most rapidly in the post-Reconstruction decades were typical
         of an underdeveloped economy in that they utilized both cheap labor and abundant raw
         materials ... such industries hardly promised to elevate the region to economic parity with
         the rest of the nation”.


       So why did the economic system of the South change so little following the Civil War,
especially given the significant changes in political institutions? At first, this persistence of
economic institutions appears at odds with the significant changes in the distribution of de
jure power that took place after the Civil War, for example, with the enfranchisement of the
freed slaves, and the repeal of the Missouri compromise, which had previously cemented the
political power of the South in the federal government.
       We believe the answer is related to the forces emphasized in our model, in particular, to
the exercise of de facto political power by the Southern landed elites to compensate for the
loss of their de jure political power.39 Consistent with our approach, there was considerable
persistence in the identity and power of the political elites. For example, Wiener (1978) studied
the persistence of the planter elite in 5 counties of the black belt of western Alabama. Tracking
families from the U.S. census and considering those with at least $10,000 of real estate, he found
that (p. 9) “of the 236 members of the planter elite in 1850, 101 remained in the elite in 1870.”
Interestingly, this rate of persistence was very similar to that experienced in the antebellum
period; “of the 236 wealthiest planters families of 1850, only 110 remained in the elite a decade
later” (p. 9). Nevertheless, “of the 25 planters with the largest landholdings in 1870, 18
(72%) had been in the elite families in 1860; 16 had been in the 1850 elite group.”40 Table
  38
     Kousser (1974, p. 17) records a post-bellum adage “To educate a ‘nigger’ is to spoil a good field hand.”
  39
     Another possibility would be that the continuation of large plantation agriculture was because of its relative
economic eﬃciency. Yet this seems inconsistent with the available evidence. For example, Wright (1986, p.
84) argues “The plantations survived the Civil War, and their survival had little to do with their eﬃciency as
producing units ... cotton and tobacco could be grown just as eﬃciently on family-sized farms. No, the key to
the survival of the plantation was the ability of the former slave owners to hold on to their land in the midst of
intense legal and political struggles after 1865. In national politics, the planters successfully blocked proposals
for land confiscation and redistribution to the freedmen.”
  40
     Death during the Civil War appears to have had little impact on the persistence of the planter elites because
the law exempted one slaveholder from military service for every 20 slaves held (Wiener, 1978, p. 18).


                                                        46
1 reproduces these data from Wiener (1978) and shows the high degree of persistence in the
identity of Southern landed elites.41
       After the end of the Civil War, more or less the same group of planter elites controlled the
land and used various instruments to re-exert their control over the labor force. Though the
specific economic institution of slavery did not persist, the evidence shows a clear line of per-
sistence in the economic system of the South based on plantation-type agriculture with cheap
labor. This economic system was maintained through a variety of channels, including both
control of local politics and exercise of potentially violent de facto power. As a consequence,
in the words of W.E.B. Du Bois (1903, p. 88), the South became “simply an armed camp for
intimidating black folk.”
       The planter elite successfully staﬀed or co-opted the members of the Freedmen’s Bureau,
whose remit was to supervise the freed slaves. In 1865 the state legislature of Alabama passed
the Black Code, an important landmark towards the repression of black labor. Wiener (1978,
p. 58) describes this as: “The Black Code of Alabama included two key laws intended to assure
the planters a reliable supply of labor–a vagrancy law, and a law against the ‘enticement’ of
laborers”. These laws were designed to impede labor mobility and reduce competition in the
labor market.42
       In addition to moulding the legal system in their favor, “Planters used Klan terror to keep
blacks from leaving the plantation regions, to get them to work, and keep them at work, in the
cotton field” (Wiener, 1978, p. 62).43 In his seminal study of the politics of the South after
World War II, Key (1949, p. 9) sums up the pattern of persistence of the institutions of the
South both before and after the Civil War as the “extraordinary achievement of a relatively
small minority–the whites of the areas of heavy Negro population.”
       A key to the persistence of the antebellum system after the Civil War was the continued
control over land. For example, in the debate over the redistribution of 40 acres of land to the
freedmen (vetoed by President Andrew Johnson in 1865), Congressman George Washington
Julian argued (quoted in Wiener, 1978, p. 6):
  41
     Other studies find similar persistence in other parts of the South. See, for example, Ransom and Sutch
(2001, pp. 78-80) on landonwership in Dallas County Alabama, Huﬀman (1974) on Clarke County, Georgia,
and Billings (1979) on North Carolina. This research to some extent contradicted earlier studies which had seen
far more change in the identity of Southern elites after the Civil War (e.g., Woodward, 1951)
  42
     The extent to which southern planters were able to exert classical monopsony power is controversial, see
Alston and Kauﬀman (2001). Nevertheless, economic historians do agree on the use of coercion, intimidation,
violence and segregationist legislation to repress and control free black labor.
  43
     Relatedly, Alston and Ferrie (1989) show how planters controlled their labor force by oﬀering them “security”
from violence and lynching.




                                                       47
            “Of what avail would be an act of congress totally abolishing slavery ... if the old
         agricultural basis of aristocratic power shall remain?”


       A third strategy, again consistent with the emphasis on the de facto political power of the
elite in our theoretical analysis, was control of the local political system. Following the Civil
War, the period called ‘Reconstruction’ lasted until 1877 (see Stampp, 1965, and Foner, 1989).
In this period Republican politicians contested power in the South and, with the help of the
Union Army, engineered some social changes. Nevertheless, this induced a systematic backlash
in the guise of support for the Democratic Party and the so-called ‘Redeemers.’ In 1877, in the
context of a log-roll between President Rutherford Hayes and Southern national politicians,
Union soldiers were withdrawn from the South and the region left to its own devices. The period
after 1877 then marked the real recrudescence of the antebellum elite. The ‘redemption’ of the
South involved the systematic disenfranchisement of the black (and poor white) population
through the use of poll taxes and literacy tests (Key, 1949, Kousser, 1974) and the creation of
the one-party Democratic regime.44
       Key (1949, pp. 309-10), in his analysis of the primary elections of the Democratic party,
noted the hegemony of southern society’s “upper brackets” and the political marginalization
of its “lower brackets.” He discusses in detail the control of North Carolina’s economic oli-
garchy over politics, noting that (p. 211): “The eﬀectiveness of the oligarchy’s control has
been achieved through the elevation to oﬃce of persons fundamentally in harmony with its
viewpoint.”
       This picture is also confirmed by the analysis of Wright (1986, p. 78), who writes “Even
in the 1930s, southern representatives in Washington did not use their powerful positions to
push for new federal projects, hospitals, public works and so on. They didn’t, that is, as long
as the foundations of the low-wage regional economy persisted.”
       In addition to disenfranchisement a whole gamut of segregationist legislation–the so-called
Jim Crow laws–was enacted (Woodward, 1955, for the classic analysis). These laws turned the
postbellum South into an eﬀective “apartheid” society where blacks and whites lived diﬀerent
lives. As in South Africa, these laws were aimed at controlling the black population and its
labor supply.
  44
     Key (1949, pp. 8-9), for example, notes: “Two-party competition would have been fatal to the status of
black-belt whites. It would have meant in the ’nineties an appeal to the Negro vote and it would have meant
... Negro rule in some black-belt counties. From another standpoint, two-party competition would have meant
the destruction of southern solidarity in national politics ... Unity on the national scene was essential in order
that the largest possible bloc could be mobilized to resist any national move towards interference with southern
authority to deal with the race question as was locally desired.”


                                                       48
       Consequently, the South entered the 20th century as a primarily rural society. “It remained
an agrarian society with a backward technology that still employed hand labor and mule power
virtually unassisted by mechanical implements” Ransom and Sutch (2001 pp. 175-176).45 In
1900, the South’s urbanization rate was 13.5%, as compared to 60% in the Northeast (Cobb,
1984, p. 25).
       Ransom and Sutch’s (2001, p. 186) assessment of the implications of this economic and
political system in the South for economic progress is representative of the consensus view:
“Southerners erected an economic system that failed to reward individual initiative on the
part of blacks and was therefore ill-suited to their economic advancement. As a result, the
inequities originally inherited from slavery persisted. But there was a by-product of this eﬀort
at racial repression, the system tended to cripple all economic growth”:

            “When whites used threats of violence to keep blacks from gaining an education, prac-
         ticing a trade, or purchasing land, they systematically prevented blacks from following
         the three routes most commonly travelled by other Americans in their quest for self-
         advancement. With over half the population held in ignorance and forced to work as
         agricultural laborers, it is no wonder that the South was poor, underdeveloped, and with-
         out signs of economic progress” Ransom and Sutch (2001, p. 177).

       All in all, the Southern equilibrium, based on the exercise of de facto power by the landed
elite, plantation agriculture and low-wage, uneducated labor, persisted well into the 20th cen-
tury, and only started to crumble after World War II. Interestingly, it was only after the demise
of this Southern equilibrium, that the South started its process of rapid convergence to the
North.
       What caused the collapse of the Southern equilibrium? Consistent with the emphasis in
Section 6, it seems that this collapse was brought about by the juxtaposition of a variety
of factors. Initially, the depth of the Great Depression weakened the resolve of Southern
politicians to block federal policies that might integrate the Southern economy into the rest
of the nation (Schulman, 1994). Other important factors include the great outmigration and
the impact of the simultaneous mechanization of cotton picking on the labor requirements of
agriculture. As blacks became harder to trap in the South, they also became less necessary to
generate rents.46
  45
     See Whatley (1985) for a hypothesis explaining the lack of innovation in the post-bellum South in terms of
the poor incentives created by sharecropping contracts.
  46
     An interesting question, which is not central to our interpretation, is whether mechanization of cotton
reduced the cost of black migration to the Southern landed elite, who then tolerated such outmigration, or


                                                      49
    Wright’s (1999, Table 1, p. 281) data on net migration from the South shows the large
increase in black outmigration starting in the 1940s and Heinicke (1994, Table 1, p. 506) shows
the concurrent rapid spread of mechanized cotton picking. First introduced in 1949, by the end
of the 1950s mechanical cotton picking was the rule rather than the exception in the South;
half of the crop in the key cotton states was being picked mechanically.
    In addition to these changes, the Southern equilibrium was disrupted by the collective action
of the Civil Rights movement and a sequence of Supreme Court and government decisions, such
as Brown versus Board of Education in 1954, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights
Act of 1965. These significant events can be interpreted as a decline in the ability of the landed
elite to exercise de facto political power in democracy. McAdam’s (1983, Figures 1 and 2, p.
739) data on the number of civil rights collective actions (bus boycotts and sit-ins) shows a
sharp increase starting in 1960 (see also Chong, 1991), while Wright (1999, Figure 2, p. 273)
records the dramatic increase in the registration of black voters in Southern states over this
period. It thus became increasingly more diﬃcult for the Southern landed elites to control
the political process (see also the detailed analysis of the impact of the Voting Rights Act on
economic growth in the South in Besley, Persson and Sturm, 2005).

7.2    Persistence of Elites and Economic Institutions in Latin America

Despite the significant changes in political institutions that have taken place since the colonial
era in Latin America, the capture of political and economic institutions by elites is an enduring
theme of much of the historical literature on the sub-continent. There are numerous studies
documenting both the capture of democratic politics by traditional elites and the resulting
continuation of labor repressive policies in agriculture in many Central and Latin American
countries. Some notable examples include Zeitlin (1984) and Zeitlin and Ratcliﬀ (1988) on
Chile, Smith (1979) on Mexico, and Paige (1997) on Central America. A central question for
understanding the economic development (or lack thereof) in Central and Latin America and
the Caribbean is therefore how and why the economic system based on labor repression and
cheap labor in agriculture failed to change following the political reforms that have gradually
brought more democratic means of collective decision-making in these societies.
    As in the U. S. South, the answer is related to the exercise of de facto political power
by traditional elites in the context of democratic politics. The capture of democratic politics
in Colombia, for example, took many diﬀerent forms, depending on the specific conditions
and the options open to the traditional elites, with the most common forms being the actual
whether the changes in the supply of cheap labor caused by black outmigration encouraged mechanization.


                                                   50
domination of political parties by the elites, electoral fraud, blocking of entry of new parties,
and use of violence.
       The most obvious form of political capture is the actual running of political parties and
oﬃces by members of the landed elite. This has been particularly the case in much of Central
America and has been carefully documented by Stone (1975, 1990). His genealogical research
shows the extraordinary extent to which elites have persisted in Costa Rica and other Central
American countries from the colonial times.
       Figures 1 and 2 (from Stone, 1990) show the striking number of presidents since indepen-
dence in various Central American countries that are related to two conquistadors, Cristóbal
de Alfaro and Juan Vázquez de Coronado, who both arrived in Central America in the 16th
century. Figure 1 shows that no less that 48 presidents were direct descendents of Alfaro,
25 of them in Costa Rica. Alfaro’s descendents also include the Somoza dynasty who ruled
Nicaragua for most of the 20th century until the Sandinista Revolution in 1979. Figure 2 shows
the 29 presidents descended from Vázquez, including again the Somoza clan and many of the
same presidents of Costa Rica related to Alfaro.
       As a case study we now examine Colombia in more detail. Colombia became independent
from Spain in 1819 and the Liberal and Conservative parties first competed in the election
of 1850.47 These two parties have maintained their hold on political power ever since. As
early as 1856 the Liberals introduced universal male suﬀrage and as many as 40% of adult
males voted (Bushnell, 1971). After the 1863 Constitution, voting rights were determined at
the state level, but several of them maintained universal suﬀrage (see Delpar, 1981). In the
19th century, the parties contested elections, but they also fought for power. Although the
fighting sometimes took the form of civil wars, the parties also frequently reached collusive
agreements to make sure that other political parties, especially those representing peasants
and workers, were unable to enter the political system. For example, after the civil war from
1899 to 1902, the two parties introduced a power-sharing agreement, which divided all the
seats in the legislature between the two parties by means of the ‘incomplete vote’ (Mazzuca
and Robinson, 2004). This system lasted until 1929. After a civil war in the 1950s (a period
know as La Violencia), the parties resurrected this collusive agreement in 1958, splitting the
legislature 50-50 and also agreeing to take turns at the presidency for 16 years. In practice
this power sharing agreement endured until the middle of the 1980s.
  47
    The best studies of the origins of the parties are Colmenares (1968), Saﬀord (1972) and Delpar (1981).
Some trace the alignments to factions that formed in the late 1820s over whether or not Simón Bolívar should
be made Emperor, though there have also typically been significant policy diﬀerences between these two parties.



                                                      51
       The Liberals and Conservatives managed to successfully block entry of other parties to
the political system through a variety of strategies. Even after the reintroduction of universal
suﬀrage in 1936, fraud, violence, and engineering the electoral rules to create barriers to entry
were widespread.48 Electoral fraud is, in fact, a recurrent theme in Colombian politics and took
many forms (see, for example, Bushnell, 1993, and Chaves, Fergusson and Robinson, 2005).
Fraud was also used by the traditional parties to directly derail populist challenges, such as
during the attempt by Rojas Pinilla to win the 1970 presidential election.49
       Violence has also been endemic in Colombian politics. The potential “Perón” of Colom-
bia, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, who was likely to pursue populist and redistributive policies, was
murdered in 1948 just when it seemed likely he would become the leader of the Liberal party.
Luis Carlos Galán was murdered in 1990 just as he was emerging as the leader of the Liberal
party.50 In the 1980s the first alternative political party to seriously emerge since the beginning
of the National Front in 1958 was the Unión Patriótica. This party was eﬀectively obliterated
in the 1980s by the systematic murder of its candidates (see, for example, Kline, 1999).51
       Finally, as in Central America, the political parties in Colombia have featured strong
family ties. The Conservative Ospina family has provided three Presidents, Mariano Ospina
Rodríguez (1857-1861), Pedro Nel Ospina (1922-1926) and Mariano Ospina Pérez (1946-1950).
The Liberal López family provided not just Alfonso between 1934 and 1938, and again between
1942 and 1945, but also Alfonso López Michelsen between 1974 and 1978. The Liberal Lleras
  48
      This is related to the absence of a socialist party in Colombia. Some scholars have suggested that the
relatively egalitarian frontier expansion that took place in the second half of the 19th century has contributed
to the creation of a middle class of property owners, which checked radicalism in Colombian politics. This
thesis does not appear to be very convincing in view of the fact that Colombia has one of the most unequal
distributions of land ownership and income in the world (on this Antioqueño expansion see Christie, 1978).
   49
      Another factor that appears to have contributed to the continuation of the two-party system is the way
the electoral system created incentives for dissidents to stay within the traditional parties. For example, the
electoral system ensured that candidates could be elected with far fewer votes than the electoral quotient, thus
potentially guaranteeing that elite factions would get representation. At the same time, the traditional parties
allowed “dissident lists” to run, providing a platform to potential dissidents. In line with these ideas, Dix (1967,
p. 250) notes “proportional representation may have helped to a degree to reinforce the two-party system by
allowing dissident factions to gain representation according to their strength in the electorate while still not
forcing them from the party. Retaining the party label, or some version of it, they have usually been reabsorbed
into the oﬃcialist ranks after one or two elections.”
   50
      Political entrepreneurs, like Gaitán and subsequently Alfonso López Michelsen and Galán, considered form-
ing a third party, but then always returned to the fold because the electoral system made success by third
parties diﬃcult. Indeed, it is quite likely that the assassination of Gaitán was precisely because he had finally
emerged as the leader of the Liberal party, not because political rivals anticipated the creation of a third party.
   51
      In the 1986 elections, Unión Patriótica obtained 5 seats in the Senate and 9 in the Chamber of Representa-
tives at the national level, and 14 deputies, 351 councilmen and 23 municipal mayors at the local level. By 1988,
the party was wiped out, however. The Amnesty International reported that more than 500 of its members,
including its previous presidential candidate, Pardo Leal, and 4 congressmen, had been assassinated, most likely
with the involvement of members of the Colombian military and government.




                                                        52
family provided presidents in 1945-1946 and 1958-1962 (Alberto Lleras Camargo) and again
in 1966-1970 (Carlos Lleras Restrepo). The Conservative Pastrana family provided Misael
Pastrana between 1970 and 1974 and Andrés Pastrana between 1998 and 2002. The son of
Conservative President Laureano Gómez (1950-1953), Álvaro was the Conservative challenger
in the late 1980s and early 1990s and the father of Liberal President Julio Turbay (1978-1982)
had previously been the most powerful figure in the Liberal party.
      Overall, through a variety of means, including elite domination of politics, electoral fraud,
blocking of the creation of new parties and violence, traditional elites seem to have been able
to have a disproportionate eﬀect in the democratic politics of Central America and Colombia.
We conjecture that this pattern of elite dominance has been an important element in the
continuation of the economic system based on cheap labor and quasi-labor repression in the
countryside of many of these countries.

7.3      Persistence of Elites and Economic Institutions in Africa

The issues we study here are of importance outside of the Americas, and here we illustrate them
with the example of Liberia. Modern Liberia was started in 1820 by the American Colonization
Society (ACS) as a home for freed and repatriated African slaves.52 The ACS bought land
from local chiefs around the site of the modern capital of Monrovia (named after the then
President of the United States James Monroe), and in 1847 Liberia became independent of the
ACS. The year 1877 saw the emergence of the True Whig Party (TWP), which would dominate
politics until the coup of Samuel Doe in 1980. The TWP comprised of the descendents of the
repatriated slaves, the Americo-Liberians, who dominated the party and the country for over a
century. This group set themselves up as an elite over the ‘tribal peoples’ and ran the country
as if it were a colony. By the 1960s Americo-Liberians were about 3-5% of the population.
      Despite the early emergence of the Americo-Liberian elite in Liberia, the political system
has relied on elections since the 19th century, and became fully democratic starting in 1944.
Nevertheless, like their Central American or Southern U.S. counterparts, the Americo-Liberian
elite have been able to dominate democratic politics through a variety of means, including
extreme electoral fraud and violence, and their domination of politics has been a major cause
of the continued economic backwardness of Liberia.
      The first study of the economic backwardness of Liberia was undertaken by a team of U.S.
based economists from Northwestern University hired by USAID in the early 1960s (Clower et
 52
      This discussion draws on the general history of Liberia by Sawyer (1992).




                                                       53
al., 1966). Dalton (1965, p. 581) sums up their findings by concluding that Liberia was ruled
by the elite of the TWP and Americo-Liberians and that

         “...the economic backwardness of Liberia is not attributable to the lack of resources or to
         domination by foreign financial or political interests. The underlying diﬃculty is rather
         that the traditional Americo-Liberian rulers, who fear losing political control to the tribal
         people, have not allowed those changes to take place which are necessary to develop the
         national society and economy. ... Like the Portuguese in Angola or the Afrikaners in South
         Africa, the rulers of Liberia are the descendents of an alien minority of colonial settlers.
         Americo-Liberian families.”


       The TWP used indirect rule adapted from the British to control the hinterland and ma-
nipulate chiefships. As Clower et al. record, Liberia became a two class society and diﬀerent
laws, access to education and the legal system governed Americo-Liberians and tribal peoples.
Dalton (1965, p. 584) points out that “Ironically, it is the ethic of Mississippi that most nearly
characterizes their outlook: to retain power in traditional fashion and keep the natives in their
place.”
       Before 1944, the hinterland had no political representation at all, and even after it did so,
the TWP were able to cling to power through their complete control of the economy, and more
significantly, through intimidation, corruption and coercion.53
       The resulting economic institutions in Liberia certainly approximated the labor repressive
institutions in the model discussed above. In the 1960s tribal peoples were still subject to
forced labor on public works and rubber plantations (1/4 of the labor force in early 1960s)
and the economy was either completely controlled by the TWP or by foreigners. The state
apparatus became a huge patronage machine dedicated to promoting the interests of the TWP
and the Americo-Liberians.
       A key feature of Liberian politics, facilitating the exercise of power by the TWP, was the
kinship networks of the Americo-Liberians (see Fraenkel, 1964). Dalton (p. 589) argues that “to
understand Liberian politics, knowledge of kinship connections is more useful than knowledge
of the Liberian constitution.” Figure 3 shows how higher political oﬃces were monopolized by
the kinship network of President Tubman, who ruled between 1944 and 1971 and was from
one of the established families of the Americo-Liberians.
  53
    Indeed Liberia has the sad reputation as having had the most corrupt election ever held for Charles B.
King’s election in 1927. The Guinness Book of Records (1982) qualified the elections as the most fraudulent ever
reported in world history. Suﬀrage was constitutionally limited to some 15,000 citizens, all Americo-Liberians,
but according to the oﬃcial election results some 240,000 votes were cast for Charles B. King.


                                                      54
         After his defeat in the 1927 presidential elections, Thomas Faulkner accused the President-
elect, Charles D.B. King, of allowing slavery to exist in the Republic and that certain highly
placed government oﬃcials were engaged in the forced shipping of laborers to the Spanish
island of Fernando Po. Faulkner’s accusations spurred a wave of international reactions, and a
Committee of the League of Nations, established to examine the allegations, indeed concluded
that shipment of laborers to Fernando Po and Gabon was associated with slavery because the
method of recruiting carried compulsion with it. Moreover, persons holding oﬃcial positions
were shown to have illegally misused their oﬃce in recruiting labor with the aid of the Liberian
Frontier Force (the national military controlled by the TWP). Not only had Americo-Liberian
government oﬃcials benefited from forced labour, but so had the most major foreign company
in Liberia, Firestone.54 In essence the TWP had oﬀered Harvey Firestone a guaranteed cheap
labor supply through coercion.
         There can be few better historical examples of an elite than the Americo-Liberians and
the TWP. Initially, they were able to restrict de jure power only to themselves, completely
disenfranchising the indigenous Africans. They were also able to dominate in their use of de
facto power because they had the support of the United States and superior weapons. Over
time the political system opened. After 1944 the TWP had to deal with the political inclusion
of peoples in the hinterland. They were nonetheless able to use their de facto power to maintain
the economic institutions they favored.
         Therefore, the domination of politics by the Americo-Liberian elite and their choices of
(highly ineﬃcient) economic institutions to redistribute resources to themselves gives another
example of the successful exercise of de facto power by an elite both under nondemocratic and
democratic political institutions.


8         Conclusions

Almost all theoretical and empirical research in political economy starts with the presumption
that institutions, once in place, persist and shape the political-economic interactions of diﬀerent
groups and agents. Nevertheless, many societies experience frequent changes in their political
institutions, such as the end of the colonial era and the creation of the republics throughout
the 19th and 20th centuries, or multiple switches between dictatorship and democracy during
    54
     Vast rubber plantations were started by Firestone in 1926. Firestone obtained a one million acre concession
for a 99-year period (roughly corresponding to 10% of what was considered arable land in Liberia), was granted
the exclusive rights upon the lands selected, and became–with small, exceptions–exempted of all present and
future taxes.



                                                      55
the 20th century. Certain economic institutions also change, with slavery, forced labor, and the
encomienda coming to an end in Latin America and Caribbean, and waves of nationalization
and privatization of industry in many less developed countries. In the face of this picture of
frequently changing (political and economic) institutions, do institutions really persist?
   This paper has argued that the answer is yes, in the sense that the broad economic in-
stitutions, which are essential for economic outcomes, can persist even when specific political
institutions, or even specific economic institutions, change. In line with this perspective, it has
proposed a simple model of the coexistence of change and persistence in institutions.
   The basic idea is that economic institutions are decided by groups or individuals that pos-
sess more political power. Political power, in turn, consists of de jure power regulated by formal
political institutions and de facto political power, which comes from the ability of various dif-
ferent social groups to solve their collective action problems, lobby or bribe politicians, capture
and control political parties, or use paramilitaries or other means of repression. Changes in
specific political institutions, for example a change from nondemocracy to democracy, aﬀects
the distribution of de jure political power. This, however, may induce cohesive (and small)
groups, such as (landed) elites to increase their investments in de facto political power to oﬀset
their loss of de jure political power.
   To illustrate this mechanism in its starkest form, our baseline model assumed that the
technology of generating de facto political power for the elite is the same in democracy and
nondemocracy, and demonstrated the possibility of invariance, that is, a pattern where the
equilibrium distribution of economic institutions is independent of whether the society is de-
mocratic or not–despite the fact that democracy creates a real shift in the distribution of de
jure power towards the citizens. The reason for this stark result is that the landed elite invest
enough to fully oﬀset their loss of de jure power when society switches from nondemocracy to
democracy.
   The result that investment in the de facto power by the elite entirely oﬀsets changes in
de jure power is special, and the analysis showed how, more generally, the equilibrium takes
the form of a Markov regime-switching process with state dependence. This Markov regime-
switching structure emerges when some of the assumptions of the baseline model are relaxed,
for example, when democracy is allowed to place limits on the exercise of de facto power by
the elite (e.g., on their capture of political parties or use of paramilitaries), or when there are
costs of changing economic institutions in the short run.
   The richest model is presented in Section 5, and allows for the feature that political insti-
tutions are more diﬃcult to change than are economic institutions. Under this assumption,

                                                56
a pattern of “captured democracy” arises, whereby democracy endures, but the elite are able
to have a disproportionate eﬀect on equilibrium economic institutions. In fact, in this model,
paradoxically, the probability of labor repressive economic institutions in agriculture may be
higher in democracy than in nondemocracy. This model is useful for interpreting the historical
patterns discussed in Section 7. These patterns show the coexistence of change and persis-
tence in institutions in the U.S. South, Latin America and Africa, and how traditional elites
may be able to control democratic politics and maintain their favorite economic institutions.
In all the cases we discussed, changes in some important dimensions of political institutions,
which may have been potentially quite costly for the elites, were neutralized by the exercise of
their de facto power, for example, control of the party system or key oﬃces, or local violence.
These examples suggest that the mechanisms highlighted by our model may be important in
understanding how frequent changes in specific political institutions go hand-in-hand with the
persistence of economic systems, with their broad distributional and eﬃciency characteristics
unchanged.
   The mechanism proposed in this paper, where the identity of the elites as well as the
economic systems persist, is only one facet of institutional persistence. Another pattern, which
appears salient in practice, for example, in cases such as Bolivia, Zimbabwe, Kenya and Ghana,
is one in which the identity of the elites changes, but new elites adopt policies in line with
the worst practices of their predecessors. This is reminiscent of Michels’ (1911) Iron Law of
Oligarchy, as well as of the emphasis by sociologists such as Mills (1956), Mosca (1939) and
Pareto (1968) on the persistence and creation of elites. This pattern seems like a challenging
but important area of study. Most ambitiously, future research may strive towards a unified
model that can explain the composition of elites, when existing elites persist, when elites change
but institutions persist, and when institutions truly change. Alternatively, a model isolating
the iron law of oligarchy may be useful in understanding why dysfunctional incentives persist in
the political arena, a direction we are currently pursuing in Acemoglu and Robinson (2006b).




                                               57
9        Appendix: Proofs of Propositions 2 and 3
Proof of Proposition 2: Let us first define
                    ¡                  ¢     ¡                      ¢     ¡                      ¢
                ∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) ≡ V i N | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) − V i D | θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) .

From the recursive formulations in (29) and (30), for all i ∈ E we have the first-order necessary condi-
tions:
                   Ã Ã                                   !! µ                                  ¶
                                    P    j           i          ∆RL        ¡                  ¢
              φf     φ                  θ (N ) + θ                  + β∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D) ≤ 1 and θi ≥ 0,                               (59)
                           j∈E,j6=i                              M
              Ã Ã                                        !! µ                                                 ¶
                          P         j          i                ∆RL        ¡                  ¢
         φf    φ                    θ (D) + θ − η                   + β∆V i θ−i (N ) , θ−i (D)                    ≤ 1 and θi ≥ 0,            (60)
                     j∈E,j6=i                                    M
both holding with complementary slackness.
     The proof proceeds in several steps. First, Assumption 3 implies that θi (N ) = 0 and θi (D) = 0 for
                                                                                                                            0
all i ∈ E cannot be an equilibrium. Therefore there must exist some i0 ∈ E such that θi (N ) > 0 and
                               00
i00 ∈ E such that θi (D) > 0.
     Second, we claim that there must exist some i ∈ E for whom both (59) and (60) hold as equalities.
Suppose not. Then it must be the case that for i0 and i00 defined in the previous paragraph, we have,
respectively, (59) and (60) holding as equalities and (60) and (59) are slack. This implies
                     Ã Ã                           !! µ
                             P                          ∆RL          ³ 0                 ´¶
                                      j         i0                i0    −i      −i0
          1 = φf φ                   θ (N ) + θ             + β∆V     θ (N ) , θ (D)
                           j∈E,j6=i0                     M
                     Ã Ã                              !! µ
                             P                             ∆RL            ³ 0               ´¶
                                      j        i0                      i0   −i       −i0
               > φf φ                θ (D) + θ − η             + β∆V       θ (N ) , θ (D)
                           j∈E,j6=i0                        M
or
     Ã Ã                                      !!              Ã Ã               !!
                 P         j             i0                          P     j
 f     φ                  θ (N ) + θ                = f         φ         θ (N )
              j∈E,j6=i0                                             j∈E
                                                              Ã Ã                     !!            Ã Ã                                  !!
                                                                     P     j                                  P       j         i0
                                                    > f         φ         θ (D) − η            =f    φ               θ (D) + θ − η            .
                                                                    j∈E                                  j∈E,j6=i0

Similarly for i00 ,
  Ã Ã                              !!    Ã Ã        !!
           P         j         i00           P j
 f φ                θ (N ) + θ        = f φ   θ (N )
           j∈E,j6=i00                                               j∈E
                                                              Ã Ã                     !!            Ã Ã                                      !!
                                                                     P     j                                  P        j          i00
                                                    < f         φ         θ (D) − η            =f    φ                θ (D) + θ         −η        ,
                                                                    j∈E                                  j∈E,j6=i00

yielding a contradiction with the previous inequality.
     Third, the fact that there exists some i ∈ E for whom both (59) and (60) hold as equalities implies
that                                          Ã Ã                   !!         Ã Ã                       !!
                                                    P     j                          P     j
                                         f     φ         θ (N )          =f     φ         θ (D) − η           .
                                                   j∈E                              j∈E


                                                                           58
This is clearly only possible if
                                           X                   X
                                       φ         θi (N ) = φ         θi (D) − η,
                                           i∈E                 i∈E

which implies p (D) = p (N ) > 0. The fact that p (D) = p (N ) < 1 again follows from Assumption 2,
completing the proof.
     Finally, for use in the proof of Corollary 2, also note that this argument establishes that for any
i ∈ E for whom (59) or (60) holds as equality, both of these equations must hold as equality. ¥

     Proof of Proposition 3: We will prove this proposition by showing that for any Pareto optimal
distribution of contributions among elite agents, there exists a β̃ ∈ [0, 1), such that this distribution
can be supported as an SPE and involves equilibrium probabilities p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1). The special
case of equal contributions will establish the first part of the proposition, and the fact that as β → 1
this is true for any distribution establishes the second part.
     First suppose that a single individual controls all contributions by elite agents to de facto power.
With the same arguments as above, the problem of this individual can be written recursively as:
                       ½            µ r               ¶               µ c                ¶¾
                                      R L                               R L
         Ṽ (N ) = max −θ + F (φθ)         + β Ṽ (N ) + (1 − F (φθ))        + β Ṽ (D)     ,
                   θ≥0                 M                                 M
                   ½                µ r               ¶                    µ c               ¶¾
                                      R L                                   R L
     Ṽ (D) = max −θ + F (φθ − η)          + β Ṽ (N ) + (1 − F (φθ − η))         + β Ṽ (D)    ,
               θ≥0                     M                                     M
                P
where now θ = i∈E θi is the total contribution by elite agents, and these expressions only diﬀer from
(16) and (19) because the entire cost of contributions and the entire benefit in terms of land rents are
taken into account. Denoting optimal choices in this program by θ∗ (N ) and θ∗ (D), the first-order
conditions are                     µ
                                  ∆RL       ³                 ´¶
                           ∗
                    φf (φθ (N ))         + β Ṽ (N ) − Ṽ (D)    ≤ 1 and θ∗ (N ) ≥ 0
                                    M
                                      µ                        ¶
                                        ∆RL
                   φf (φθ∗ (D) − η) β        + Ṽ (N ) − Ṽ (D) ≤ 1 and θ∗ (D) ≥ 0,
                                         M
holding with complementary slackness. Assumption 3 ensures that θ∗ (N ) and θ∗ (D) have to be positive,
so the solution to this problem involves

                                             φθ∗ (N ) = φθ∗ (D) − η                                   (61)

and thus p (D) = p (N ) > 0. That p (D) = p (N ) < 1 again follows from Assumption 2. It is clear that
an equilibrium satisfying the above conditions would be Pareto optimal from the ex ante viewpoint of
elite agents (for some distribution of the total contributions θ∗ (N ) and θ∗ (D) across the elite agents),
since no elite agent can be made better oﬀ without some other elite agent being made worse oﬀ.
     Next we show that there exists β̃ ∈ [0, 1) such that for β ≥ β̃, any distribution of contributions
θ (N ) and θ∗ (D) across elite agents can be supported as an SPE. To simplify the notation, consider a
 ∗


stationary distribution (though, with more notation, the argument easily generalizes to any time-varying

                                                          59
                  © i∗   ª       ©       ª
distribution):     θ (N ) i∈E and θi∗ (D) i∈E . Consider a candidate SPE with this distribution and the
feature that following a deviation, the equilibrium reverts back to an MPE.55 Recall from Proposition
2 that in any MPE we have τ (π = 0) = 0 and s0 (π = 0) = N , and some contributions denoted by
© ip    ª     ©      ª                       P                             P
 θ (N ) i∈E , θip (D) i∈E such that θp (N ) ≡ i∈E θip (N ) = θp (D) − η/φ ≡ i∈E θip (N ) − η/φ.
Given this punishment structure following a deviation, the best deviation for any agent i is to contribute
nothing. By comparing the above single-agent maximization problem to Corollary 2, we have θ∗ (N ) >
θp (N ) and θ∗ (D) > θp (D). Let ht = ĥt denote the history in which in all past periods, all agents have
        ©       ª     ©       ª
played θi∗ (N ) i∈E , θi∗ (D) i∈E , τ (π = 0) = 0 and s0 (π = 0) = N .
    Now consider the following strategy profile to support the SPE: if ht = ĥt , then the equilibrium
                                ©        ª     ©       ª
specifies that elite agents play θi∗ (N ) i∈E , θi∗ (D) i∈E , τ (π = 0) = 0 and s0 (π = 0) = N . If ht 6= ĥt
(i.e., if there has been a deviation at some date t0 < t from this play), then θi (t, st ) = θip (st ) for all
i ∈ E and all st ∈ {N, D}, τ (π = 0) = 0 and s0 (π = 0) = N .
       With this strategy profile, following a deviation, say starting in nondemocracy, elite agent i will
obtain:
                ⎛                           ⎞                          ⎛     ⎛           ⎞⎞
                         X                      µ                    ¶          X j∗        µ c             ¶
                                                    Rr L                                     R L
Vid (N ) = F ⎝φ                     θj∗ (N )⎠                          ⎝     ⎝
                                                         + β V̂i (N ) + 1 − F φ   θ (N ) ⎠⎠      + β V̂i (D) ,
                                                     M                                        M
                      j∈E,j6=i                                                    j∈E,j6=i
                                                                                                                    (62)
           P                 j∗
where φ       j∈E,j6=i   θ        (N ) is the total contributions to the de facto power after the deviation, and V̂i (N )
and V̂i (D) are the MPE values in the punishment phase following the deviation,
                                       µ r              ¶                     µ c             ¶
                                        R L                                    R L
   V̂i (N ) = −θip (N ) + F (φθp (N ))      + β V̂i (N ) + (1 − F (φθp (N )))      + β V̂i (D) ,                    (63)
                                         M                                      M
and
                                                      µ                    ¶                       µ c             ¶
                 ip                     p                 Rr L                          p           R L
 V̂i (D) = −θ (D) + F (φθ (D) − η)                             + β V̂i (N ) + (1 − F (φθ (D)) − η)      + β V̂i (D) .
                                                           M                                         M
                                                                                                                   (64)
The value of deviation in state s = D, Vid (D) is defined similarly to (62). Since θ∗ (N ) = θ∗ (D)−η/φ >
θp (N ) = θp (D) − η/φ, we have F (φθ∗ (N )) = F (φθ∗ (D) − η) > F (φθp (N )) = F (φθp (D) − η).
       If, on the other hand, this agent follows the SPE strategy of “cooperating”, i.e., contributing θi∗ (N )
when s = N and θi∗ (D) when s = D, he will obtain
                                 µ r              ¶                   µ c           ¶
   c         i∗           ∗       R L        c                ∗        R L      c
 Vi (N ) = −θ (N ) + F (φθ (N ))       + βVi (N ) + (1 − F (φθ (N )))      + βVi (D) . (65)
                                   M                                    M
Similarly,
                                                      µ                   ¶                        µ c            ¶
                                                          Rr L                                      R L
Vic (D) = −θi∗ (D) + F (φθ∗ (D) − η)                           + βVic (N ) + (1 − F (φθ∗ (D)) − η)      + βVic (D) ,
                                                           M                                         M
                                                                                                                 (66)
  55
    Clearly, there may exist other punishment strategies, potentially supporting a larger set of SPEs for any
given discount factor, for example by using minmax punishments for suﬃciently high discount factors (e.g.,
Abreu, 1988). Nevertheless, for our purposes, it is suﬃcient to characterize the Pareto optimal SPEs with the
MPE punishment, since as β → 1, these will coincide with the entire set of Pareto optimal SPEs.


                                                                   60
and also for Vid (D) and V̂i (D). Choose an MPE for the punishment phase such that θi∗ (N )−θi∗ (D) >
θip (N ) − θip (D) for s ∈ {D, N } for all i ∈ E 0 ⊂ E such that E 0 = {i ∈ E : θi∗ (N ) > 0 or θi∗ (D) > 0}.
Such an MPE can always be constructed in view of the fact that θ∗ (N ) = θ∗ (D) − η/φ > θp (N ) =
θp (D) − η/φ. Now each agent would be happy to follow the SPE strategy as long as

                                 Vic (D) ≥ Vid (D) and Vic (N ) ≥ Vid (N ) .                             (67)

These inequalities are naturally satisfied for all i ∈ E\E 0 (since any such agent has no incentive to deviate
because he is making zero contributions along the equilibrium path), so we only need to check them for
i ∈ E 0 . Next combining (65) and (66) and using the fact that, from (61), F (φθ∗ (N )) = F (φθ∗ (D) − η),
we have                                                 µ                          ¶
                                                            ∆RL    £ i∗           ¤
                  Vic (N ) = −θi∗ (N ) + F (φθ∗ (N ))                        i∗
                                                                + β θ (D) − θ (N ) ,                     (68)
                                                             M
and also                                              µ                          ¶
                                ip             p          ∆RL    ¡ ip      ip
                                                                                ¢
                   V̂i (N ) = −θ (N ) + F (φθ (N ))           + β θ (D) − θ (N ) .                       (69)
                                                           M
    By virtue of the fact that F (φθ∗ (N )) = F (φθ∗ (D) − η) > F (φθp (N )) = F (φθp (D) − η) and
θi∗ (D) − θi∗ (N ) > θip (D) − θip (N ), the comparison of (68) and (69) shows that Vic (D) and Vic (N )
increase faster in β than V̂i (N ) and V̂i (D), and by implication, than Vid (D) and Vid (N ). Moreover, the
                                          ©               ª
same observation implies that for any θi∗ (N ) , θi∗ (D) (and associated appropriate punishment MPE,
© ip              ª                              ¡                ¢                 ¡                ¢
  θ (N ) , θip (D) i∈E ), we have that limβ→1 Vic (D) /Vid (D) > 1 and limβ→1 Vic (N ) /Vid (N ) > 1,
thus there exists β̃ i ∈ [0, 1) such that for all β ≥ β̃ i , player i does not wish to deviate from the SPE.
Let β̃ = maxi∈E 0 β̃ i and since E 0 ⊂ E is finite, β̃ ∈ [0, 1), and we have that for any distribution of
             ©                  ª
contributions θi∗ (N ) , θi∗ (D) i∈E and any punishment MPE with θi∗ (N ) > θip (N ) and θi∗ (D) >
θip (D) when s = D for all i ∈ E 0 , there exist some β̃ ∈ [0, 1) such that for all β ≥ β̃ ∈ [0, 1), (67)
is satisfied for all i ∈ E. This establishes that there exists β̄ < 1 such that for β ≥ β̄, the symmetric
Pareto optimal SPE involves p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1), proving the first part of the proposition.
                                                                               ©                ª
   To prove the second part, first note that as β → 1, any combination of θi∗ (N ) , θi∗ (D) i∈E will
satisfy (67) and p (D) = p (N ) ∈ (0, 1), thus we have SPEs that are Pareto optimal with p (D) =
p (N ) ∈ (0, 1). To complete the proof, we only have to show that there cannot exist any Pareto optimal
SPEs that do not have this feature. To obtain a contradiction, suppose that there exists another SPE
with contribution levels θ (N ) and θ (D) diﬀerent from θ∗ (N ) and θ∗ (D). However, as β → 1, θ∗ (N )
                                                            ©       ª        ©       ª
and θ∗ (D) are feasible as shown above, and an SPE with θi∗ (N ) i∈E and θi∗ (D) i∈E that Pareto
dominates θ (N ) and θ (D) can be constructed, showing that no other Pareto optimal SPE can exist as
β → 1. ¥




                                                     61
10     References

   Abreu, Dilip (1988) “On the Theory of Repeated Games with Discounting” Economet-
rica, 56, 383-396.
     Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colo-
nial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review, December, 91, 5, 1369-1401.
     Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of
Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1231-1294.
     Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005a) “The Rise of
Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Growth, American Economic Review, 95,
546-579.
     Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005b) “Institutions
as a Fundamental Cause of Development,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe
Aghion and Steven Durlauf, Amsterdam; North-Holland.
     Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000) “Why did the West Extend the
Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115, 1167-1199.
     Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political Transi-
tions,” American Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
     Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006a) Economic Origins of Dictatorship
and Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
     Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006b) “A Model of the Iron Law of
Oligarchy,” in preparation.
     Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie (1999) Southern paternalism and the rise of the
American welfare state: economics, politics, and institutions in the south, 1865-1965, New
York; Cambridge University Press.
     Alston, Lee J. and Kyle Kauﬀman (2001) “Were Postbellum Agricultural Labor
Markets Competitive?” Explorations in Economic History, 38, 181-194.
     Arthur, W. Brian (1989) “Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns and Lock-In by
Historical Events,” Economic Journal, 99, 106-131.
     Austen-Smith, David (1987) “Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions and Proba-
bilistic Voting,” Public Choice, 54, 123-139.


                                                62
   Baron, David P. (1994) “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,”
American Political Science Review, 88, 33-47.
   Barro, Robert (1997) Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-country Empirical
Study, MIT University Press, Cambridge MA.
   Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992) “Convergence,” Journal of Po-
litical Economy, 100, 223-251.
   Bateman, Fred and Thomas Weiss (1981) A deplorable scarcity: the failure of indus-
trialization in the slave economy, Chapel Hill; University of North Carolina Press.
   Bednar, Jenna and Scott Page (2006) “Culture, Institutional Performance and Path
Dependence” University of Michigan, mimeo.
   Benabou, Roland (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Con-
tract,” American Economic Review, 90, 96-129.
   Benabou, Roland (2005) “Inequality, Technology and the Social Contract” in the Hand-
book of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, Amsterdam; North-
Holland.
   Besley, Timothy, Torsten Persson and Daniel Sturm (2005) “Political Competition
and Economic Performance: Theory and Evidence from the United States,” London School of
Economics, mimeo.
   Billings, Dwight B. (1979) Planters and the making of a "new South": class, politics,
and development in North Carolina, 1865-1900, University of North Carolina Press.
   Bushnell, David (1971) “Voter Participation in the Colombian Election of 1856,” His-
panic American Historical Review, 51, 237-249.
   Bushnell, David (1993) The Making of Modern Colombia: A Nation in Spite of Itself,
Berkeley; University of California Press.
   Chaves, Isaías, Leopoldo Fergusson and James A. Robinson (2005) “Ballot Stuﬀ-
ing: Theory and Evidence from the 1922 Colombian Presidential Election,” Unpublished,
Department of Government, Harvard University.
   Chilcote, Ronald H. (1990) Power and the Ruling Classes in Northeast Brazil, New
York; Cambridge University Press.
   Chong, Dennis (1991) Collective action and the civil rights movement, Chicago; Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
   Christie, Keith H. (1978) “Antioqeño Colonization in Western Colombia: A Reap-
praisal,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 58, 260-283.
   Clower, Robert W., George H. Dalton, Mitchell Harwitz and Alan A. Walters

                                                63
(1966) Growth without development; an economic survey of Liberia, Evanston; Northwestern
University Press.
   Coate, Stephen and Stephen E. Morris (1999) “Policy Persistence,” American Eco-
nomic Review, 89, 1327-1336.
   Coatsworth, John H. (1974) “Railroads, Landholding and Agrarian Protest in the Early
Porfiriato,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 54, 48-71.
   Cobb, James C. (1984) Industrialization and southern society, 1877-1984, Lexington;
University Press of Kentucky.
   Colmenares, Germán (1968) Partidos políticos y clases sociales, Bogotá; Ediciones
Universidad de los Andes.
   Dalton, George H. (1965) “History, Politics and Economic Development in Liberia,”
Journal of Economic History, 25, 569-591.
   David, Paul (1985) “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY” American Economic Asso-
ciation Papers and Proceedings, volume 75, 332-337.
   Delpar, Helen (1981) Red against blue: the Liberal Party in Colombian politics, 1863-
1899, Baton Rouge; University of Alabama Press.
   Dix, Robert H. (1967) Colombia: the political dimensions of change, New Haven; Yale
University Press.
   Dixit, Avinash (1989a) “Entry and Exit Decisions under Uncertainty” Journal of Po-
litical Economy, 97, 620-638.
   Dixit, Avinash (1989a) “Hysteresis, Import Penetration and Exchange-Rate Pass-Through”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 205-228.
   Du Bois, W.E.B. (1903) The Souls of Black Folk, New York; A.C. McClurg & Company.
   Easterlin, Richard A. (1960) “Interregional Diﬀerences in Per Capita Income, Popu-
lation, and Total Income, 1840-1950,” in Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth
Century, Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 24, Princeton University Press, 73-140.
   Esteban, Joan M. and Debraj Ray (2001) “Collective Action and the Group Size
Paradox,” American Political Science Review 95, 663—672.
   Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloﬀ (1997) “Factor Endowments, Insti-
tutions, and Diﬀerential Growth Paths among New World Economies,” in Stephen Haber ed.
How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford University Press, Stanford CA.
   Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman (1974) Time on the cross; the economics
of American Negro slavery, Boston; Little, Brown.



                                             64
   Foner, Eric (1989) Reconstruction: America’s unfinished revolution, 1863-1877, New
York; Perennial Library.
   Fraenkel, Merran (1964) Tribe and Class in Monrovia, London; Oxford University Press.
   Genovese, Eugene D. (1965) The political economy of slavery: studies in the economy
& society of the slave South, New York; Pantheon Books.
   Gibson, William M. (1948) The constitutions of Colombia, Durham; Duke University
Press.
   Goldin, Claudia D. (1976) Urban slavery in the American South, 1820-1860: a quanti-
tative history, Chicago; University of Chicago Press.
   Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1996) “Electoral Competition and
Special Interest Politics,” Review of Economic Studies, 63, 265-286.
   Hagopian, Frances (1996) Traditional Politics and Regime Change in Brazil, New York;
Cambridge University Press.
   Hartlyn, Jonathan (1988) The politics of coalition rule in Colombia, New York; Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Hassler John, Sevi Mora, Kjandetil Storlesseten and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2003)
“Survival of the Welfare State” American Economic Review, 93, 87-112.
   Heinicke, Craig (1994) “African-American Migration and Mechanized Cotton Harvest-
ing, 1950-1960,” Explorations in Economic History, 31, 501-520.
   Huﬀman, Frank J. (1974) Old South, New South: continuity and change in a Georgia
county, 1850-188 0, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Yale University.
   Jack, William and Roger Lagunoﬀ (2006) “Dynamic Enfranchisement,” Department
of Economics, Georgetown University, http://www.georgetown.edu/faculty/lagunoﬀ/franch10.pdf
   Key, V.O. Jr. (1949) Southern Politics: In State and Nation, New York; Vintage Books.
   Klein, Herbert S. (1992) Bolivia: The Evolution of a Multi-Ethnic Society, New York;
Oxford University Press.
   Kline, Harvey F. (1999) State building and conflict resolution in Colombia, 1986-1994,
Tuscaloosa; University of Alabama Press.
   Kousser, J. Morgan (1974) The shaping of Southern politics: suﬀrage restriction and
the establishment of the one-party South, 1880-1910, New Haven; Yale University Press.
   Krugman, Paul (1991) “History versus Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 651-667.
   Lagunoﬀ, Roger (2006) “Dynamic Stability and reform of Political Institutions,” George-
town University, mimeo.

                                              65
   Margo, Robert A. (1990) Race and schooling in the South,1880-1950: an economic
history, Chicago; University of Chicago Press.
   Matsuyama, Kiminori (1991) “Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and Indetermi-
nacy of Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 617-650.
   Mazzuca, Sebastián and James A. Robinson (2004) “Political Conflict and Power-
sharing in the Origins of Modern Colombia,” Unpublished.
   McAdam, Douglas (1983) “Tactical Innovation and the Pace of Insurgency,” American
Sociological Review, 48, 735-754.
   McCreery, David J. (1986) “An Odious Feudalism: Mandamiento Labor and Commer-
cial Agriculture in Guatemala, 1858-1920,” Latin American Perspectives, 13, 99-117.
   Michels, Robert. Political Parties. New York NY; The Free Press.
   McCreery, David J. (1994) Rural Guatemala, 1760-1940, Stanford; Stanford University
Press.
   McGreevey, William P. (1971) An economic history of Colombia 1845-1930, New York;
Cambridge University Press.
   Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1994) “Comparing Equilibria,” American Eco-
nomic Review, 84, 441-459.
   Mills, C. Wright. (1956) The power elite, New York; Oxford University Press.
   Mulligan, Casey, Richard Gil and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004) “Do Democracies
Have Diﬀerent Public Policies than Nondemocracies” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18,
51-74.
   Mulligan, Casey and Kevin Tsui (2005) “Causes and Consequences of Political Com-
petitiveness” University of Chicago, mimeo.
   Mosca, Gaetano (1939) The ruling class, New York; McGraw-Hill.
   North, Douglass C. (1990) Institutions, institutional change and economic performance,
New York; Cambridge University Press.
   North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989) “Constitutions and Commitment:
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England, Journal
of Economic History, 49, 803-832.
   Northrup, David (1995) Indentured labor in the age of imperialism, 1834-1922, New
York; Cambridge University Press.
   Olson, Mancur C. (1965) The Logic of Collective Action; public goods and the theory of
groups, Cambridge; Harvard University Press.
   Page, Scott (2006) “Path Dependence” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 1, 87-115.

                                              66
   Paige, Jeﬀery M. (1997) Coﬀee and power: revolution and the rise of democracy in
Central America, Cambridge; Harvard University Press.
   Palacios, Darío and Ruth Monge Guillergua (2003) Las constituciones del Perú,
1823-1993, Lima; Editorial “FECAT”.
   Pareto, Vilfredo (1968) The rise and fall of the elites, New York; Arno Press.
   Pierson, Paul (2004) Politics in Time: History, Institutions and Social Analysis, Prince-
ton; Princeton University Press.
   Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch (2001) One Kind of Freedom: the economic
consequences of emancipation, 2nd Edition, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Saﬀord, Frank P. (1972) “Social Aspects of Politics in Nineteenth-Century Spanish
America: New Granada, 1825-1850,” Journal of Social History, 5.
   Samuelson, Paul (1947) The Foundations of Economic Analysis, Cambridge, MA; Har-
vard University Press.
   Sawyer, Amos (1992) The emergence of autocracy in Liberia: tragedy and challenge,
San Francisco; ICS Press.
   Schmookler, Jacob (1972) “Time Series of Patents Classified by Industry, United States
1837-1957,” in Zvi Griliches and Leonid Hurwicz eds. Patents, Inventions and Economic
Change: Data and Selected Essays, Cambridge; Harvard University Press.
   Schulman, Bruce J. (1994) From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic
Development and the Transformation of the South, 1938-1980, Durham; Duke University Press.
   Simon, Carl and Lawrence Blume (1994) Mathematics for Economists, W.W. Norton
Co., New York.
   Smith, Peter H. (1979) Labyrinths of Power: Political Recruitment in Twentieth-
Century Mexico, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Solberg, Carl E. (1969) “A Discriminatory Frontier Land Policy: Chile, 1870-1914,”
The Americas, 26, 115-133.
   Stampp, Kenneth M. (1965) The era of reconstruction, 1865-1877, New York; Vintage
Books.
   Steinmo, Sven, Kathleen A. Thelen, and Frank Longstreth eds. (1992) Struc-
turing politics: historical institutionalism in comparative analysis, New York; Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
   Stone, Samuel Z. (1975) La dinastía de los conquistadores: la crisis del poder en la
Costa Rica contemporánea, Costa Rica; Editorial Universitaria Centroamericana.



                                             67
   Stone, Samuel Z. (1990) The heritage of the conquistadors: ruling classes in Central
America from the Conquest to the Sandinistas, Lincoln; University of Nebraska Press.
   Thelen, Kathleen A. (2004) How institutions evolve: the political economy of skills in
Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Ticchi, Davide and Andrea Vindigni (2005) “Endogenous Constitutions,” Princeton
University, mimeo.
   Tinker, Hugh (1974) A new system of slavery; the export of Indian labour overseas,
1830-1920, New York; Oxford University Press.
   Trigo, Ciro Félix (1958) Las constituciones de Bolivia, Madrid; Instituto de Estudios
Políticos.
   Wade, Robert (1988) Village republics: economic conditions for collective action in
South India, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Whatley, Warren C. (1985) “A History of Mechanization in the Cotton South: The
Institutional Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 1191-1215.
   Wilde, Alexander (1978) “Colombia: Conversations amongst Gentlemen,” in The Break-
down of democratic regimes. Latin America, edited by Juan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan, Balti-
more; Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Woodward, C. Vann (1951) Origins of the new South, 1877-1913, Baton Rouge; Louisiana
State University Press.
   Woodward, C. Vann (1955) The Strange Career of Jim Crow, New York; Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
   Wright, Gavin (1978) The political economy of the cotton South: households, markets,
and wealth in the nineteenth century, New York; W.W. Norton & Co..
   Wright, Gavin (1986) Old South, New South, New York; Basic Books.
   Wright, Gavin (1999) “The Civil Rights Revolution as Economic History,” Journal of
Economic History, 59, 267-289.
   Young, H. Peyton (1998) Individual Strategy and Social Structure: an Evolutionary
Theory of Institutions, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Zeitlin, Maurice (1984) The civil wars in Chile, or, The bourgeois revolutions that never
were, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Zeitlin, Maurice and Richard E. Ratcliﬀ (1988) Landlords & capitalists: the domi-
nant class of Chile, Princeton; Princeton University Press.




                                               68
Table 1: The persistence of the landed elite in three “Black Belt” counties of Alabama
                                                                     Real estate holdingsa
                 Name                      County                1870      1860       1850
                 Minge, G.                 Marengo           $ 85,000               30,000
                 Lyon, F.                  Marengo             75,000 115,000       35,000
                 Paulling, William         Marengo             72,000 150,000       29,000
                 Hatch, Alfred             Hale                70,000 120,000       40,000
                 Alexander, J.             Marengo             69,000    38,000     10,000b
                 Whitfield, B.             Marengo             65,000 200,000b 100,000
                 Terrill, J.               Marengo             62,000    93,000
                 Taylor, E.                Marengo             61,000
                 Robertson, R.             Marengo             60,000
                 Dew, Duncan               Greene              52,000 200,000b      41,000
                 Walton, Jhon              Marengo             50,000 250,000       25,000
                                                                               b
                 Collins, Charles          Hale                50,000 201,000       30,000
                 Hays, Charles             Greene              50,000 113,000
                 Brown, Jhon               Sumter              50,000    69,000     13,000
                 Pickering, Richard        Marengo             50,000    42,000     15,000
                 Withers, Mary             Hale                50,000    40,000     75,000b
                 Jones, Madison            Hale                50,000   36,000b     27,000
                 Nelson, A.                Hale                48,000               10,000b
                 Taylor, J.                Hale                48,000
                 Pickens, Wm.              Hale                45,000 210,000b      51,000
                 Reese, Henry              Marengo             45,000    52,000     24,000
                 Walker, R.                Hale                42,000    55,000
                 Smaw, W.                  Greene              42,000    32,000
                 Blanks, E.                Marengo             41,000
                 Walker, Morns             Marengo             41,000
                 Number of planters                                 25           18            16
                 Percent present in 1870                                       72%           64%
                a
                 Rounded off to the nearest thousand; as reported in the U.S. Census of Population,
                manuscript schedules. To convert to constant gold prices, see p. 14, note 13.
                b
                 Wealth of father or husband

                         Source: Weiner (1978, Table 2, p. 12)
Figure 1: Central American Presidents Related to the Conquistador Cristóbal de Alfaro
             PRESIDENTS IN ALFARO FAMILY TREE                                   Guatemala
                                                                   1    Laugerud García, Kjell Eugenio
                                                                                 Salvador
                                                                   3    Barrios Espinoza, Gerardo
                                                          1        2    Guzmán Ugalde, Joaquín
                                      2   3                                      Honduras
                                               4                   4    Bonilla Vázquez, Policarpo
                                                          5
                                                                                   Panamá
                                          6          7             5    Porras, Belisario
                                               8               9                  Nicaragua
                                                         10         6   Carazo Aranda, Evaristo
                                                    12        11    7   Sacasa Sacasa, Juan Bautista
                                                                    8   Sacasa Sarria, Roberto
                                     13 14 15                      12   Solórzano Gutiérrez, Carlos
                                                         16        11   Somoza Debayle, Anastasio
                                               17                   9   Somoza Debayle, Luis
                                                                   10   Somoza García, Anastasio
                                               18                                Costa Rica
                                                    19             21   Acosta García, Julio
                                          20                       23   Alfaro Zamora, José María
          ALFARO                                                   28   Aguilar Barquero, Francisco
                                                    21             37   Aguilar Chacón, Manuel
                                                    22             50   Arias Sánchez, Oscar
                                     23                            39   Calderón Guardia, Rafael Angel
                                               24                  30   Carazo Odio, Rodrigo
                                                                   41   Carranza Ramírez, Bruno
                                                         25        42   Carrillo Colina, Braulio
                                26                  27             44   Castro Madriz, José María
                                                                   36   Cortés Castro, León
                                               28                  49   Echandi Jiménez, Mario
                                                         29        27   Esquivel Ibarra, Ascención
                                                              30   31   Esquivel, Sáenz, Aniceto
                                                                   43   Fernández Chacón, Manuel
                                               31                  47   Fernández Oreamuno, Próspero
                                          32                       26   Gallegos Alvarado, José Rafael
                                                              33   19   González Flores, Alfredo
                                                    34             20   González Víquez,Cleto
                                               35                  17   Guardia Gutiérrez, Tomás
                                                                   32   Herrera Zeledón, Vicente
                                               36                  15   Jiménez Oreamuno, Ricardo
                                     37                            14   Jiménez Zamora, Jesús
                                38                  39             33   Monge Alvarez, Luis Alberto
                                                                   48   Montealegre Fernández, José M.
                                          40                       38   Mora Fernández, Juan
                                     41                            18   Mora Porras, Juan Rafael
                                                                   25   Oduber Quirós, Daniel
                                     42                            13   Oreamuno Bonilla, Francisco
                                     44 45 46                      16   Orlich Bolmarcich, Francisco J.
                                43                                 35   Picado Michalski, Teodoro
                                     47                            40   Rodríguez Zeledón, José
                                     48                            24   Soto Alfaro, Bernardo
                                               49                  29   Tinoco Granados, Federico
                                                    50             34   Trejos Fernández, José J.
                                                                   22   Ulate Blanco, Otilio
                                                                   45   Yglesias Llorente, Demetrio
                                                                   46   YglesiasCastro, Rafael


                        Source: Stone (1990, Appendix 1, p. 153)
Figure 2: Central American Presidents Related to the Conquistador Juan Vázquez de Coronado
                 PRESIDENTS IN VAZQUEZ FAMILY TREE

                                                  1

                                              2                                          Nicaragua
                                    3    4                                  5   Carazo Aranda, Evaristo
                                                                            3   de la Cerda Lacayo, Cayetano
                                              5                             4   de la Cerda Taborga, Manuel A.
                                                  6                         2   Lacayo Sacasa, Benjamín
                                                                            1   Martínez Lacayo, Roberto
                                                  8                         8   Sacasa Sacasa, Juan Bautista
                                              7                             7   Sacasa Sarria, Roberto
                                                            9               6   Solórzano Gutiérrez, Carlos
                                                       10                  11   Somoza Debayle, Anastasio
                                                            11             10   Somoza Debayle, Luis
                                        12                                  9   Somoza García, Anastasio
                                                                                         Costa Rica
                                   13                                      35   Acosta García, Julio
                                                                 14        14   Arias Sánchez, Oscar
                                                                           18   Carazo Odio, Rodrigo
           VAZQUEZ                      15 16                              27   Castro Madriz, José María
                                                       17                  34   Echandi Jiménez, Mario
                                                       18                  12   Esquivel, Sáenz, Aniceto
                                                                           26   Fernández Chacón, Manuel
                                        19                                 30   Fernández Oreamuno, Próspero
                                                                           13   Gallegos Alvarado, José Rafael
                                        20                                 25   González Víquez,Cleto
                                                                           15   Jiménez Zamora, Jesús
                                             21                       22   16   Jiménez Oreamuno, Ricardo
                                                                           21   Lizano Gutiérrez, Joaquín
                                                                      23   19   Montealegre Fernández, José M.
                                                                           20   Mora Porras, Juan Rafael
                                             25             24             22   Oduber Quirós, Daniel
                                                                           32   Oreamuno Bonilla, Francisco
                                             27 28 29                      23   Orlich Bolmarcich, Francisco J.
                                        26                                 24   Quirós Segura, Juan Bautista
                                             30 31                         31   Soto Alfaro, Bernardo
                                        32                                 17   Tinoco Granados, Federico
                                                                           33   Trejos Fernández, José J.
                                                  33                       28   Yglesias Llorente, Demetrio
                                                                           29   YglesiasCastro, Rafael
                                                  34

                                                  35


                             Source: Stone (1990, Appendix 2, p. 168)
Figure 3: Social Relations and Political appointees of President Tubman in 1960
        Commissioner of                                                    Inspector          b        Ambassador
        Communications                                                     of Counties                 to UN
                                                 c                                   c             c                     b
                         b                                                                                          w
                         Secretary               c                        PRESIDENT                         Ambassador
                                                              w
                         of State                                         OF LIBERIA                        to UK
                             b               c            c
        Director
                         w
        of Budget                                                     b                                         f

                                                     Ambassador
                         Director,                   to USA                                                             President,
                         Nat. Pub.                   w                                                                  Gen. Conf.
                         Health Sv.                                                                                     of Labor
                                                      b                                                                   w
                             b
        Ambassador                       Ambassador                            SECRETARY
                         w
        to Italy                         to Germany                            OF TREASURY

                                             b                    b                          b
        Commissioner                                                                     w   Senator
        of Immigration                                                                       G.C.M;Co.                           f
                                     w
                                                                           b
             b       Ambassador                       Director,                                             b
                     of Guinea                         Bur. Of                   b
                                                      Nat. Res.
                                                                                                        w
                                                                                     b
         Ambsassador                     s            Undersec.                                         VICE-PRESIDENT
                                 w               w
         to UAR                                        of State                                            OF LIBERIA
                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                             b

                     Pres., Bank                 b                         Secretary               b            Senator,
                                                                      w
                     of Liberia                                            of Commerce                          Monts. Co.

        Ke y: b = br othe r ; f = fa the r ; c = cous in; s = s is te r ; w = wife

                             Source: Clower et al. (1966, Chart 1, p. 13)
