                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE, PROGRAM TAKE-UP,
                                AND CHILD HEALTH

                                              Anna Aizer

                                        Working Paper 12105
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12105


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2006




I am extremely grateful to Janet Currie. I also thank Karen Conway, Pedro Dal Bó, Angie Fertig, Jeff
Grogger, Joe Hotz, Guido Imbens, Jeff Kling, and Chris Paxson as well as seminar participants at UCLA,
UCI, Princeton and Brown Universities and the NBER Children’s meeting. Jim Klein and Kennalee Gable
of the California Department of Health Services generously provided the data. Financial support from the
Social Science Research Council, Program in Applied Economics and the California Program on Access to
Care is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Anna Aizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Health Insurance, Program Take-Up, and Child Health
Anna Aizer
NBER Working Paper No. 12105
March 2006
JEL No. I12, I18, I38, J13

                                           ABSTRACT

Of the ten million uninsured children in 1996, nearly half were eligible for Medicaid, the public
health insurance program for poor families, but not enrolled. In response, policy efforts to improve
coverage have shifted to increasing Medicaid take-up among those already eligible rather than
expanding eligibility. However, little is known about the reasons poor families fail to use public
programs or the consequences of failing to enroll. The latter is of particular relevance to Medicaid
given that children are typically enrolled when they become sufficiently sick as to require
hospitalization. Using new data on Medicaid outreach, enrollment and child hospitalizations in
California, I find that information and administrative costs are important barriers to program
enrollment, with the latter particularly true for Hispanic and Asian families. In addition, enrolling
children in Medicaid before they get sick promotes the use of preventative care, reduces the need for
hospitalization and improves health.


Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
aizer@brown.edu
In 1996, ten million US children were without health insurance and nearly half a million children

were hospitalized for conditions that could have been avoided had they had access to timely

preventative care [Fronstin, 1998; Graves, 1998]. Such facts have often been used to support

efforts to expand eligibility for public health insurance. However, nearly half of the ten million

children without insurance were already eligible for Medicaid, the public health insurance

program for poor families, but not enrolled [Selden, Banthin, and Cohen, 1998]. And evidence

presented by Card and Shore-Sheppard [2005] suggests that recent Medicaid eligibility

expansions have had a very limited impact on health insurance coverage precisely because of low

take-up, not crowd-out. As a result, recent debate over improving health insurance coverage has

shifted away from eligibility expansions to increasing enrollment or take-up among those already

eligible but not enrolled.

         However, little is known about the reasons nearly half of poor families fail to use public

programs that involve no out-of-pocket costs. In a review of the existing literature on program

take-up, Remler, Rachlin and Glied [2001] conclude that of the factors determining program

(including Medicaid) participation “what little evidence about their effects exists is primarily

qualitative and self-reported, based on focus groups and reports of officials. Their quantitative

magnitude is entirely unknown.”

         Yet the policy debate over Medicaid take-up also raises the question of whether early

enrollment in Medicaid leads to gains in efficiency or health. Unlike the food stamp or cash

welfare programs for which lack of program participation results in lack of any benefit, poor

children who are eligible for Medicaid but who fail to enroll will be cared for (by law) should

they become ill and require hospitalization. Not only will they be cared for, but their care will be

covered by Medicaid since eligible uninsured children are nearly always enrolled in Medicaid

when they present at the hospital.1 Thus, the potential benefit of early enrollment lies in its


1
  In California very few children are discharged from the hospital with no source of insurance listed. This
is likely due to the fact that most hospitals in California (and elsewhere) have workers on-site to aid with


                                                      2
promotion of the efficient use of health care resources by increasing financial access to

ambulatory preventative care prior to hospitalization, resulting in fewer hospitalizations, better

health and lower costs. However, estimation of the impact of Medicaid enrollment on health

care utilization and child health is hindered by the endogeneity of the enrollment decision:

children who are less healthy and thus in greater need of medical care and hospitalization are

more likely to enroll.

        Thus the purpose of this research is two-fold: 1) to better understand the causes of low

take-up in public programs by studying the case of Medicaid, and 2) to determine whether greater

Medicaid take-up improves access to primary preventative care and reduces the need for

hospitalization. To answer these questions, I create a unique dataset for the state of California that

combines information on the timing and placement of outreach efforts to increase Medicaid take-

up with administrative data on Medicaid enrollment and hospitalization for the period 1996-2000

at a very fine level of detail (the zipcode and month). The California outreach campaign was

launched in mid 1998 and consists of advertising a toll free hotline number and providing

community-based application assistance that is often bilingual. Identification follows from the

exogenous variation in both the placement and timing of the outreach, using geographic fixed

effects to account for any potential selection in the placement of outreach.

        I find the largest effects of outreach on those with the highest costs of enrolling: Hispanic

and Asian children who have greater language and immigration concerns than other families.

Proximity to an additional bilingual application assistant increases new monthly Medicaid

enrollment among Hispanics by seven to nine percent and among Asian children by 27 to 36

percent. Advertising has a smaller impact on new enrollment than application assistance and its

impact is slightly delayed. English language advertisements increase new Medicaid enrollment

among all children in the following month by 4.7 percent and Spanish language advertisement



Medicaid enrollment.


                                                  3
increases new enrollment among Hispanic children the following month by an additional 2.5

percent. These results have important implications not only for improving Medicaid coverage

among poor children, but also for increasing take-up in other programs such as food stamps and

the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC).

        In the second part of the paper, I use instrumental variable techniques to estimate the

impact of early Medicaid take-up on access to primary care and avoidable hospitalizations. In the

first stage I estimate the impact of outreach on Medicaid enrollment. In the second stage I

estimate the impact of (predicted) Medicaid enrollment on avoidable hospitalizations. I define

hospitalizations as avoidable if they are for “diagnoses for which timely and effective ambulatory

care can help to reduce the risks of hospitalization by either preventing the onset of an illness or

condition, or controlling an acute episodic disease or condition.”[ Billings and

Teichholz,1990]. If families respond to local outreach efforts and enroll their children in

Medicaid before they become sick, this should improve their access to regular ambulatory care

and the number of avoidable hospitalizations should decline. I find that increased take-up leads

to lower hospitalization rates for avoidable conditions but not others. IV results suggest that

increasing the number of children with Medicaid by ten percent results in a two to three percent

decline in avoidable hospitalizations among children.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: section I surveys the existing literature on

outreach and Medicaid take-up and avoidable hospitalizations, section II provides background on

California’s outreach program, section III presents implications of a model of Medicaid

enrollment in the face of fixed enrollment costs, section IV describes the data, empirical strategy

and results of the analysis of the effect of outreach on enrollment, section V presents the results of

the analysis of the impact of increases in enrollment on avoidable hospitalizations, and section VI

concludes.

                                        I.       Existing Literature




                                                  4
A. Medicaid Take-Up

         Though Medicaid has no out of pocket costs, many poor families still fail to enroll:

nearly half of all uninsured children in California in 1998 were eligible for Medicaid but not

enrolled. The three main reasons for low take-up, as hypothesized in the literature, are 1) lack of

information (information costs), 2) administrative hassle associated with an application that

requires considerable paper-work, verification of income and visits with caseworkers (process

costs), and 3) and stigma associated with public programs (outcome costs) [Craig, 1999].

         What empirical work on Medicaid take-up exists consists largely of focus groups and

case-studies, the results of which may not be generalizeable to the population of uninsured

children. 2 Three qualitative studies of Medicaid take-up in California suggest that process and

information costs are the main concerns for this population, particularly for immigrant

populations who face language barriers and may have documentation concerns.3



B. Avoidable Child Hospitalizations

         Eighteen to 28 percent of all child hospitalizations are avoidable or ambulatory care

sensitive [McConnochie et al, 1997]. There is strong evidence that high rate of avoidable

hospitalizations do reflect inadequate ambulatory care [Parchman and Culler, 1994; Shi et al

(1999); Gill and Mainos (1998); Gadmoski, 1998; Epstein, 2001].4



2
  Focus groups on Medicaid enrollment in California revealed that confusion over eligibility, language
barriers, fears about immigration and an onerous enrollment process were considered important barriers by
eligibles [Perry, Stark and Valdez 1998; Perry 2001]. Other research concludes that the enrollment
process (long applications and waiting periods) represents a greater barrier to enrollment than concerns
related to eligibility, coverage, benefits, costs, physician availability and documentation requirements
[Medi-Cal Policy Institute, 2000].
3
  Immigration concerns consist of fears of deportation among those in the US without proper
documentation and for those with documentation, fears of being considered a “public charge” which could
lead to deportation.
4
  For example, Parchman and Culler [1994] find that areas with more general practice physicians have
lower rates of avoidable hospitalizations, controlling for other environmental characteristics that might
affect hospitalization rates. Shi et al [1999] find that those children without a primary care provider were
nearly ten times more likely to be hospitalized for an ACS condition than those with a primary care
provider.


                                                     5
         Linking avoidable hospitalizations to insurance coverage, however, has proven more

difficult because of unobserved characteristics correlated with both the insurance decision and

medical care utilization. If underlying factors, such as initial health status, care-seeking behavior,

or poverty, are associated with Medicaid enrollment and with avoidable hospitalizations, then

Medicaid enrollment is endogenous, complicating estimation of its impact on hospitalizations.

Work by Kaestner, Joyce and Racine [1999] and Dafny and Gruber [2005] represent the two best

efforts to control for these factors in estimates of the impact of Medicaid eligibility expansions on

child hospitalization. The authors identify the effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility to

previously ineligible children by using variation across states over time (as the Medicaid

expansions were implemented at different times in different states.)5 Kaestner, Joyce and Racine

[1999] find mixed evidence regarding the impact of Medicaid eligibility expansions on avoidable

hospitalizations, concluding that there is “at best weak support for the hypothesis that Medicaid

improves the health of low income children.” Dafny and Gruber [2005] find that expanding

Medicaid eligibility increases the total number of hospitalizations, but that the increase was

mitigated by a much smaller (and statistically insignificant) increase in avoidable hospitalizations.

         The question raised and answered in this paper, however, differs from both these two

papers which can explain the different results. In this paper I estimate the impact not of

expanding eligibility to additional children, but of increasing program take-up among children

already eligible. Those made eligible for Medicaid through program expansions gain access to

both inpatient and ambulatory care which may have opposing effects on avoidable

hospitalizations: the former may raise all hospitalizations (including avoidable ones), while the

latter may reduce them. A priori, it is not clear which dominates, though the evidence on

eligibility expansions presented by Kaestner, Joyce and Racine [1999] and Dafny, Gruber [2005]

suggests that the increase in access to inpatient care is at least as great as the increase in access to


5
 Their method relies on the inclusion of state and time fixed effects to control for unobservables correlated
with Medicaid coverage and hospitalization rates. They also exploit some within state*year variation as


                                                     6
ambulatory preventative care. In contrast, the impact on hospitalization of an outreach campaign

that targets those who already have access to inpatient care but stand to gain access to ambulatory

care is unambiguously negative. This can explain why, unlike previous work on eligibility

expansions, I find that increasing take-up reduces avoidable hospitalizations.6 A second

difference between this work and that of previous work is that I use considerably more detailed

data (outreach, enrollment and hospitalization at the zipcode level versus state level), enabling me

to control for many factors, observed and unobserved, that vary at a local level and may affect

both Medicaid enrollment and child health. In addition, I use a novel instrument to identify the

impact of Medicaid enrollment on child hospitalizations.



                  II.      Background on Medicaid and Outreach in California

A. Medicaid Eligibility

    Children in California qualify for Medicaid through multiple channels. The most common

channel (67 percent of all Medicaid covered children in 1996) is through the cash welfare

program – AFDC/TANF. All children on welfare are automatically eligible for Medicaid and

thus face zero costs of enrollment in Medicaid. The next most common means of Medicaid

enrollment among children are through the Medicaid poverty expansion and medically needy

programs, and, more recently, the federal section 1931(b) program. The outreach programs

developed by the state target families eligible through all non-welfare mechanisms.7




the Medicaid expansions included children of some ages, and not others.
6
  One could argue that if eligible children do not know they are eligible, then an outreach campaign would
have the same effect as an eligibility expansion in terms of increasing access to inpatient care as well. If
that were the case, then an outreach campaign might increase hospitalizations, contrary to these findings.
7
  In California, the poverty expansions extend Medicaid eligibility to infants up to 200% of the federal
poverty level (FPL), children under 6 up to 133%, children 6-15 up to 100% and children ages 15 and
older up to 82% of the FPL. California’s medically needy program is a relatively generous program,
providing coverage to families with income roughly one third higher than current AFDC/TANF levels.
The 1931(b) program (implemented in January 1998) stipulates that all families with income below 100
percent FPL are eligible for Medicaid. For most children (except those age 15 and older) 1931(b) did not



                                                     7
B. Trends in Child Medicaid Enrollment

    Child Medicaid enrollment in California has been declining since 1995 [California Medical

Assistance Program, Annual Statistical Report, 2000]. The driving force behind the decline in

Medicaid enrollment has been drastically falling welfare rolls in California that have been

partially offset by a rise in children enrolled through other non welfare-related channels

beginning in mid 1998, coincident with the implementation of the state’s outreach program in

June of that year (Figure I). This suggests that the rise in non welfare-related Medicaid

enrollment does not simply reflect a transfer of enrollment from welfare-related enrollment as

welfare caseloads decline, but is likely linked to outreach launched in mid 1998. For Hispanic

children, the increase in enrollment beginning in 1998 was particularly large, resulting in a net

increase in total Hispanic Medicaid enrollment between 1998 and 2000 (Figure II).



C. California’s Uninsured and the Medicaid Outreach Campaign

        A 1999 study of the uninsured in California estimated that of the 1.8 million uninsured

children in the state, nearly 800,000 were eligible for Medicaid and among those eligible, 60

percent were Hispanic.8 Low rates of take-up among the Hispanic population are consistent with

their facing greater costs of enrolling due to language barriers and/or immigration concerns.

        California’s outreach campaign was launched in June, 1998 coincident with the

launching of the state’s SCHIP program, entitled Healthy Families, which expanded coverage to

children in families with income above Medicaid eligibility thresholds but below 250 percent of

the federal poverty level through a separate, non-Medicaid program. The outreach campaign

targets both the 800,000 uninsured children eligible for Medicaid but not enrolled and an

additional 325,000 newly eligible for Healthy Families. The outreach campaign is comprised of

two main components discussed in turn below.


represent an eligibility expansion.
8
  This study was conducted by the UCLA Center for Health Policy and based on the 1998 March CPS.


                                                 8
Community Based Application Assistants (CBOs)

         Community based application assistants (CBOs) are non-profit community organizations

that are trained by the state in the completion of Medicaid applications. This component of the

outreach campaign is designed to lower the process or application costs of enrollment and the

state budgeted $6.7 million for CBOs in the first year. 9 CBOs do not represent new

organizations placed in the community for the purpose of conducting outreach and enrollment,

but are pre-existing organizations that are trained and authorized by the state to assist their clients

in the completion of Medicaid applications. 10 For all applications received and approved by the

state, a $50 fee is granted to the application assistant, providing a financial incentive to enroll

children.11 Nearly half of the 1,100 CBOs providing assistance in the first year of the program

were health care providers and clinics (hospitals are not eligible), 20 percent were community

service organizations and nine percent were schools. Half of the CBOs have bilingual staff.

According to information provided by a subset of the CBOs, CBOs primarily serve one

ethnic/racial group.

         Over time, access to CBOs has increased. In 1998, 28 percent of all zipcodes had a

participating CBO (Appendix Table 1A). CBOs in the most disadvantaged areas (lower per

capita income, fewer high school graduates and fewer white families) appear to have been the

first to participate (Appendix Table 1B). Over time, as CBO participation increased, the percent

of zipcodes with a CBO increased to 39 by 1999 and 46 by 2000, with the newest CBOs located

in less disadvantaged areas. By March of 1999, ten months after the campaign was launched, half

of all Medicaid applications received by the state were completed with the assistance of a


9
  In the first year, $2.1 million was allocated for the payment of the $50 fee, $1.9 for training and $2.7 for
support.
10
   CBOs become certified as application assistants by the state prior to their submitting any applications,
thereby mitigating the possibility that the estimated impact of CBOs on enrollment is demand-driven.
11
   Kopczuk and Pop-Eleches (2005) find evidence that providing financial incentives to tax preparers
increases participation in the EITC program.


                                                       9
community based organization and over $1 million in application assistance fees had been paid to

CBOs.

        Figure III presents trends in non welfare-related Medicaid enrollment among Hispanics

that gain access to one, two to four, and five or more CBOs over this period. Differences in

initial levels between these groups exist, but the time trends in enrollment prior to the launching

of the campaign appear the same across all areas. However, beginning in June 1998, the

differences in non welfare-related Medicaid enrollment among these groups increased

proportionately with the number of CBOs located in those areas. Hispanics living in areas that

gain access to greater numbers of CBOs exhibited a greater increase in enrollment relative to

Hispanics that gained access to fewer numbers of CBOs. The non random placement of CBOs

suggests possible selection on location which I address in Section IV.



The State Advertising Campaign

        The state advertising campaign consists of English and Spanish television advertisements

that run in 48 of the state’s 58 counties. The advertising campaign was launched in June, 1998

and in the first 30 months of the program, television advertisements were aired in at least one

county in all but seven months. All campaign materials consistently promote the toll-free number

which is staffed Monday – Friday 8am to 8pm by a team of operators proficient in ten languages

who respond to requests for applications, assist with questions about the application, and provide

referrals to CBOs.

        The campaign cost $7 million in the first year. The state largely considers the state-wide

media campaign a success, based on the fact that calls to the toll-free hotline double in the weeks

during which commercials have aired (from roughly 800calls/day to 1900 calls/day), and that 30

percent of callers identified advertising as their primary source of information about Medicaid.

However, the state does not know what proportion of calls result in application and enrollment.




                                                 10
                          III.     Medicaid Enrollment and Selection

There are two main implications of a simple economic model of enrollment in Medicaid which

lowers the cost of purchasing medical care but includes fixed costs of participation. First, if the

fixed costs of participation decrease (through, for example, an outreach campaign), families will

be more likely to participate. For those for whom the cost decrease is greater as a result of

outreach (Hispanic and Asian families with language barriers and immigration concerns), the

probability of enrollment will likewise be greater. Second, given the likelihood of negative

correlation between underlying (and unobserved) health and enrollment (those sickest are most

likely to enroll), OLS regression of hospitalization on Medicaid coverage will result in upward

biased estimates of the impact of Medicaid coverage on hospitalization. However, as the costs of

enrollment decrease with outreach, the average health of those enrolling will increase. Thus

instrumenting for Medicaid coverage using outreach should reduce or eliminate this selection

bias.



                   IV.      The Effect of Outreach on Medicaid Enrollment

A. CBOs

    Data and Empirical Strategy

        To assess the impact of lowering process costs on new Medicaid enrollment, I link data

on CBO placement with data on new Medicaid enrollment by zipcode, race, and month for

February 1996 to December 2000 among all children age 0 to 15. Administrative data on

Medicaid enrollment for all children in California includes information on the child’s age,

race/ethnicity, zipcode of residence, type or mechanism of Medicaid eligibility (welfare-related,

SSI, 1931(b), etc.) and month of enrollment. I define enrollment as new if the individual had not

been enrolled in Medicaid in the past month, thereby excluding those children who have




                                                 11
transitioned off welfare onto other Medicaid coverage. I also exclude all children eligible

through foster care and supplemental security income (SSI) as Medicaid coverage is automatic for

these populations. The data are collapsed to zipcode-year-month-race cells. If there were no zero

cells, this would yield a sample size of 480,000.12 However, due to some zero cells (zipcodes

with no low-income children of a given race), the final data set consists of 390,379 cells.

Weights are generated by calculating the number of children in each zipcode in families with

income below 200% FPL from the 2000 Census. Sample means (calculated for each zipcode and

month and weighted) are provided in Appendix Table 2. In a (low income population weighted)

average zipcode-race-month cell, there are 67 new monthly Medicaid enrollees, most of whom

enroll through non welfare-related programs.13 Among Hispanic children, there are on average,

140 new Medicaid enrollees per zipcode per month.

           CBO availability or access is defined as the number of CBOs in one’s zipcode as of the

first month of enrollment. Because Medicaid coverage begins on the date of application, this is

equivalent to access to CBOs as of the date of application. To isolate the effect of outreach on

take-up among those already eligible but not enrolled separate from eligibility expansions, I

include only those children whose eligibility did not expand over this period. Thus children made

newly eligible through the SCHIP program Healthy Families and children age 15-19 who

witnessed a small increase in eligibility over this period through the 1931(b) program (from 82 to

100 percent of the FPL) were excluded.

           To identify the impact of CBOs on Medicaid enrollment, I employ multiple strategies to

account for possible selection in their placement or timing that may be based on demand for these

services. First, zipcode, year and month fixed effects are included to control for the fact that

areas with more intense outreach efforts may have higher numbers of low-income children, and

general trends in enrollment over this time period, respectively. Also included are other


12
     1600 zipcodes*5 races*5 years*12 months.
13
     The unweighted means of monthly new enrollment are 9.4, 6.5 and 2.9 for total, non-welfare and welfare


                                                     12
covariates that control for changes in the business cycle and in the underlying demographic

composition of the state that may affect the demand for health insurance. The basic equation has

the following form:

(1a)     Mrzmy= β0 + β1ENGCBOzmy + β2SPCBO zmy + β3ASNCBO zmy + β4HISP*SPCBO rzmy

                  + β5ASIAN*ASNCBOrzmy + β6RACEr + β7BIRTHSrzmy

                  +β8UNEMPcy +β9 INCcy + β10MONTHm +β11Yeary + β12ZIPCODEz+vrzmy


Mrzmy is new Medicaid enrollment for race r in zipcode z in month m and year y. ENGCBOzmy is

the number of community based application assistants without bilingual staff in the zipcode in the

month of enrollment, SPCBOzmy is the number of CBOs with Spanish-speaking staff. Spanish-

speaking CBOs are interacted with a dummy for Hispanic (HISPr*SPCBOzmy in the above

equation), while Asian speaking CBOs (ASNCBO zmy) are interacted with a dummy for Asian,

(ASIANr*ASNCBO zmy). There are numerous Asian groups with different languages in

California (Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, etc.). Grouping them together is justified

because Asians from different countries tend to be highly geographically segregated in California

and as such, the CBOs with Asian bilingual staff tend to serve one group primarily (this is also

confirmed by self-reports of populations served provide by a subset of the CBOs). In addition I

include race (Black, Hispanic, Asian and other race) indicators, controls for county

unemployment rates (UNEMPcy) and per capita personal income (INCcy) as well as counts of the

number of births to women with less than a college degree to control for changes in the

population of low income families (BIRTHSzrmy). All analyses are weighted by the size

(population) of the cell as defined previously and the standard errors are adjusted for serial

correlation within zipcode (clustered at the zipcode).

         In additional specifications, I include further controls (zipcode*year fixed effects) to

account for the possibility of selective timing and placement of CBOs that may bias the results.


related enrollment.

                                                 13
include. This limits the identifying variation to changes in access to CBOs that occur within a

relatively short period, thereby minimizing potential unobserved underlying differences between

those areas that quickly gained access to a CBO and those with delayed access. The model is still

identified since zipcodes gained access to CBOs throughout each year. To control for the

possibility that Hispanic and Asian families residing in areas that gain access to bilingual CBOs

may differ from those who do not, I interact Hispanic and Asian children with an indicator for

whether they ever gained access to a CBO: Hisp*EverSPCBO and Asian*EverASNCBO.

Finally, I include zipcode*year*month fixed effects to control for zipcode-specific changes over

time in enrollment patterns. These fixed effects subsume the English only CBOs and the main

effects of the bilingual CBOs.



           Results: The Impact of CBOs on New Medicaid Enrollment

           In Table 1 are estimates of the impact of CBOs on new non-welfare Medicaid enrollment

(columns 1-4). The first column contains zipcode, month and year fixed effects (equation 1a). As

is evident from the table, the greatest effects are those found for bilingual CBOs on Hispanic and

Asian enrollment (Spanish language CBO*Hispanic and Asian language CBO*Asian). The

estimates suggest that an additional Spanish language CBO increases total new monthly Medicaid

enrollment for Hispanic children by nine percent, while an additional Asian language CBO

increases enrollment by 27 percent among Asian children.14 Interestingly, the main effects of

bilingual CBOs are negative and significant, though small, for Spanish and Asian language CBOs

(-2.815 and -0.352). This suggests the possibility of selection effects in the timing and/or

location of outreach efforts with outreach placed in those areas with declining enrollment.

Columns two through four of Table 1 contain estimates from regressions that include increasingly

restrictive controls. Column two includes zipcode*year and month fixed effects and column three



14
     Calculated as follows for Hispanic children: (12.76-2.82)/109=0.09.


                                                      14
includes zipcode*month*year fixed effects. Finally, the last column contains, in addition to

zipcode*month*year fixed effects the additional variables - ever gain access to a Spanish

CBO*Hispanic and ever gain access to an Asian CBO*Asian. These fixed effects control for the

possibility that Hispanics and Asians in zipcodes that gain access to a CBO differ significantly

from those who do not. When these additional controls are included, the coefficient on the

interaction term for Hispanics declines while the interaction term for Asians increases slightly.

Estimates based on the most restrictive regressions suggest that proximity to a bilingual CBO

increases new enrollment by seven percent among Hispanics and 36 percent among Asians. In

column 5, I present estimates of the impact of CBOs on welfare-related enrollment including the

same set of controls as in column 4. As expected, the impact is significantly smaller in size, but

there is still a small positive effect. It is possible that CBOs, as social service providers trained in

the completion of Medicaid applications may also assist their clients in the completion of welfare

applications. This could explain the small positive impact on Medicaid enrollment through

welfare.

           In Table 2 are estimates of the impact of CBOs on the natural log of new non-welfare

related enrollment. In a natural log specification, the fixed effects will have the same

proportional impact on each cell. For these regressions, I limit the sample to large cell sizes

(more than 250 low income children) that have no zero observations in the first three columns and

in the last colum I simply add one to every outcome to avoid dropping any cells (and thus any

bias that might arise from selection on certain cells). For Asian and Hispanic children, gaining

access to a bilingual CBO increases enrollment by roughly 14 and 12 percent, respectively, based

on the most restrictive regression estimates.

           I also explore whether the impact of CBOs varies by the type of CBO and by age of the

child. CBOs that are health care providers have a greater incentive to enroll children – in

addition to the $50 fee, the medical care they provide these children will now be reimbursed by




                                                  15
the state. In Table 3 I present estimates of the impact of CBOs that are health care providers on

enrollment. As expected, providers appear to have considerably larger effects on enrollment than

the average CBO – with new enrollment roughly double that of the average CBO. In Table 4, I

present estimates of the impact of CBOs by age of the child: infant, preschool age and 6-15. The

effects appear smallest for infants, perhaps because many infant are typically enrolled in

Medicaid by the hospital at time of birth and the regressions include controls for the number of

births to women with less than college. The largest effects appear for the oldest children – those

age 6-15, perhaps because younger children are required to visit the doctor periodically for

immunizations, providing an incentive for enrollment that is absent for older children.

           Finally, in order to explore the possibility that the effect of CBOs is non- linear in nature

and whether there may be diminishing returns, I present estimates of the impact of the first CBO,

second CBO, etc. on new non welfare-related enrollment in Table 5. In the first column, I present

estimates for new (non-welfare) monthly enrollment and in the second column, the dependent

variable is the log of new monthly enrollment. These regressions include the most restrictive sets

of controls. The results suggest that the impact is roughly linear for Spanish CBOs, but slightly

concave for Asian CBOs.

           In regressions not presented here, I aggregate the data to a broader level (a minor civil

division which is a city or town) to account for the fact that individuals located near (but not in)

zipcodes with a CBO also have access to application assistance.15 The results of this extension

suggest that having access to a CBO within one’s city or town increases enrollment one tenth as

much as having one in one’s zipcode.

       Between 1997 and 2000, enrollment in non-welfare related Medicaid increased 23 percent for

Hispanics and 110 percent for Asians. Calculations based on results presented here suggest that

outreach was responsible for 80 and 69 percent, respectively, of these increases in enrollment.



15
     There are 58 counties in California, 1600 zipcodes and 422 minor civil divisions.


                                                       16
        Spillover from Eligibility Expansions

        Some spillover from SCHIP to Medicaid may have occurred from families who applied

to SCHIP only to learn that they were eligible for Medicaid. However, the identification strategy

employed is based on within state variation only. Any SCHIP spillover effects that affect the

entire state equally will be subsumed in the time fixed effects (year and month). If, however,

outreach was greater in areas that witnessed bigger increases in eligibility and thus increased

demand for Medicaid overage, this would confound the effect of outreach. Measuring changes in

eligibility at the zipcode level over a short period time is difficult because of data limitations.

However, I can examine whether CBOs are located in areas with greater declines in welfare-

related Medicaid coverage that may affect the underlying demand for non welfare-related

Medicaid coverage. I find that bilingual CBOs are placed in poor areas that are characterized by

higher initial levels of welfare use (among all groups, not just Hispanics), but the rates of decline

appear similar for those in areas without CBOs. In addition, I also examine trends in the number

of births to women with a high school degree ore less (a significant predictor of poverty and a

proxy for the number of low income families in an area) by race, zipcode and month. I find no

evidence that CBOs locate in areas with increased growth in the number of poor families (see

Figure IV).



B. ADVERTISEMENTS

    Data and Empirical Strategy


        To assess the influence of advertisements on new Medicaid enrollment, data on the

timing of advertisements was linked to monthly Medicaid enrollment. The following equation

was estimated:




                                                  17
(1b)       Mrzmy= β0 + β1ENGADVTzmy + β2SPADVTzmy + β3HISP*SPADVT rzmy +

                    β4RACEr + β5MONTHm + β6YEAR*ZIPCODEzy+ β7BIRTHSrzmy+εrzmy



Mrzmy is new non welfare related Medicaid enrollment of race r in zipcode z in month m and year

y. ENGADVTzmy is a dummy variable equal to one if there is any English-language television

advertising in the month of enrollment, SPADVTzmy is a dummy equal to one if there is any

bilingual (English and Spanish language) television advertising in the month of enrollment. The

analysis is conducted at the level of the zipcode to allow more detailed controls and the standard

errors are adjusted to account for the fact that advertising is determined at the level of the media

market which is larger than a zipcode (eg, clustered by media market). 16 Observations from 10

mostly rural counties in which advertisements were never aired are excluded from the dataset

because they are so different. The final dataset consists of 336,334 observations. To ascertain

whether advertising has an immediate effect on enrollment, or whether the effect is lagged, I also

estimate the impact of television advertisements in the month before enrollment. Finally, as a

check, I also estimate the impact of advertising in the month after enrollment – for which we

expect no significant effect.



           Results: the Impact of Advertising on New Medicaid Enrollment

           The first column of Table 6 contains estimates of the impact of advertising (in English

and Spanish) in the current month on new non welfare Medicaid enrollment. There does not

appear to be any significant effect of advertising in the month of enrollment. In column two are

estimates of the impact of advertising in the month before enrollment. Advertising in the month

before enrollment does appear to have a small but significant impact on enrollment. In the month

after English advertisements have aired, new monthly enrollment in Medicaid increases by nearly


16
     There are 12 media markets (DMAs) in California: Bakersfield, Chico, El Centro, Eureka, Fresno, Los



                                                     18
4 percent. The main effect of Spanish language advertisements is negative (-0.883) but

imprecisely estimated. The effect of Spanish language advertisements on Hispanics, however, is

positive and significant (1.828) but small, leading to just an additional one percent increase in non

welfare related Medicaid enrollment among Hispanic children. In column (4) are estimates of

past, current and future advertising on Medicaid enrollment. Neither current nor future

advertisements appear to have any significant effect on Medicaid enrollment. The only significant

effects are those for past English advertisements and the interaction of past Spanish language

advertisements with Hispanic. English advertising in the previous month increases new monthly

Medicaid enrollment by 4.7 percent and Spanish language advertisements increase enrollment

among Hispanic children by an additional 2.5 percent. Thus, advertising appears to have a

delayed impact on Medicaid enrollment.



        V.      The effect of Outreach and Enrollment on Avoidable Hospitalizations

In this section I examine whether early enrollment in Medicaid improves access to primary

preventative care. To do so, I estimate the impact of Medicaid enrollment on avoidable or

ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations instrumenting for Medicaid with outreach efforts.

Recall that hospital admissions are defined as avoidable or ambulatory care sensitive (ACS) if

they are for “diagnoses for which timely and effective ambulatory care can help to reduce the

risks of hospitalization be either preventing the onset of an illness or condition, controlling an

acute episodic disease or condition” [Billings and Tiecholz, 1990].17 Thus, if early enrollment in

Medicaid increases access to primary preventative care, we should see a decline in avoidable or

ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations in the following months.



   A. Data and Empirical Strategy


Angeles, Monterey, Palm Springs, Sacramento, San Francisco, Santa Barbara and San Diego.



                                                 19
Data on all child hospitalizations in the state of California for the period 1996-2000 were

combined with data on Medicaid enrollment and outreach. The hospitalization data includes age,

race, zipcode of residence, year and quarter of admission. Data on Medicaid enrollment for a

given race in a given zipcode at the beginning of each quarter (January, April, July and October)

are linked to admissions for that race and zipcode occurring in that quarter (eg, Medicaid

enrollment as of the first of January are linked to all admissions in January, February and March

of that year). The equation estimated has the following form:



(2 )    Hrzqy= β1Medicaidrzqy + β3Racer + β4Quarterq + β5AdultAdmrzqy + β6AFDC/TANFrzqy

                 + β7Zipcode*yearzy + β8 Hisp*EverSPCBOrz + β9Asian*EverASNCBOrz + εrzq


Hrzqy is the number of avoidable (ACS) child hospitalizations in a given race, zipcode, quarter and

year defined two ways: 1) over children with Medicaid as the listed source of payment, and 2)

over all children, to avoid any sample selection. Medicaid in the above equation represents the

stock of Medicaid enrollment for a given race and zipcode as of the first day of the quarter. Other

controls include adult admissions for ACS hospitalizations (AdultAdm) to control for underlying

trends in diseases or propensity to hospitalize that may vary over time or across groups. Ideally, I

would include changes in income by race and zipcode over this period as the relationship between

income and health is well-established, but such data are not available. Instead, I include welfare

caseloads (AFDC/TANF), a proxy for changing income which also enables one to isolate the

impact of outreach on Medicaid enrollment through non-welfare related channels (however, the

inclusion of welfare caseloads does not alter the results.) To control for the fact Hispanic and

Asian children residing in zipcodes that gain access to a CBO may differ in ways unobserved to

the researcher that might affect both enrollment and propensity to hospitalize, the interaction



17
  Ambulatory care sensitive conditions include asthma, bronchitis, bacterial pneumonia, dehydration,
cellulites and ear infections.


                                                   20
terms Hisp*EverSPCBO and Asian*EverASNCBO are also included, as they were in previous

regressions of the impact of CBOs on new enrollment. Finally, zipcode*year fixed effects are

also included subsuming all annual county level employment and income measures.

Zipcode*year*quarter fixed effects are included in the last set of regressions, representing the

most restrictive controls for all variables, observed and unobserved, that vary from year to year

within zipcode.

     As noted previously, because children in need of hospitalization are more likely to enroll in

Medicaid we would expect OLS estimates to be biased upward. To overcome this bias, I use

outreach efforts as instruments for the stock of Medicaid enrollment in the first stage.

Specifically outreach is defined as the number of CBOs available in one’s zipcode as of the start

of the quarter.18 Outreach is likely to affect the stock of Medicaid enrollment by increasing both

the number of new enrollees and the probability of re-enrollment, given the high rates of turnover

in Medicaid.

     In the first stage I estimate the impact of provider CBOs, non-provider CBOs and all CBOs

on the stock of Medicaid enrollment and present the results in columns 1, 2 and 3, respectively of

Appendix Table 3. The decision to stratify by CBO type is based on the fact that previous results

suggest that provider CBOs have a greater impact on enrollment as well as the fact that IV results

with respect to avoidable hospitalizations may vary with CBO type. How they vary, however, is

unclear. One the one hand, we might expect access to primary care to improve more if enrollment

is through a provider – resulting in a bigger decline in avoidable hospitalizations. On the other

hand, it might be the case that those who enroll though a provider are more likely to be in worse

health and thus more likely to be hospitalized – resulting in a smaller decline in avoidable

hospitalizations.


18
  Advertisements are not used because of the relatively small impact on enrollment. In addition, using
advertisements at the start of the quarter as an instrument is problematic given that the stock of Medicaid
enrollment is affected by advertisements in both current and past months. Presence of CBOs in current and
past months is correlated, but advertisements are not.


                                                    21
     Consistent with previous findings with respect to new enrollment, provider CBOs have a

greater impact on the stock of Medicaid enrollment (Appendix Table 3). The results from the

first stage suggest that access to one Spanish speaking CBO clinic increases Medicaid enrollment

among Hispanic children by 11 percent while access to any Spanish speaking CBO (not

necessarily a clinic) increases enrollment by seven percent.19 The impact of access to one Asian

language CBO increases Medicaid enrollment by 20 percent among Asians. The main effect of

Spanish language CBOs is negative and significant, suggesting possible omitted variable

bias/endogeneity regarding the placement and/or timing of CBO placement. In columns 4, 5 and 6

I present estimates of the first stage regression in which zipcode*year*quarter fixed effects are

included (these fixed effects will control for omitted variables that vary within zipcode over time

and subsume the main effects of English-only, Spanish and Asian language CBOs). When the

most restrictive controls are included, the estimated coefficients on the interaction terms remain

unchanged.



     B. Results

     OLS and IV regression estimates of the impact of Medicaid enrollment on ACS

hospitalizations are presented in Table 7. The first three columns display results from a

regression of the impact of Medicaid enrollment on all child ACS hospitalizations. The first

contains OLS results, the second results from an IV regression in which only clinic/provider

CBOs (IV-Clinic) are used as instruments in the first stage and the third column contains results

from an IV regressions in which all CBOs are used as instruments in the first stage (IV-All). The

OLS results suggest that a 10 percent increase in Medicaid enrollment leads to a 1.6 percent

decline in ACS hospitalizations. The instrumented results suggest that such an increase leads to a

2.9 percent reduction in hospitalizations if only clinics are used as instruments and a 1.8 percent


19
  Average (non Welfare) Medicaid enrollment among Hispanic children is 2094. Increasing access to 1
Spanish-speaking CBO will increase enrollment by 222 (339-117), roughly 11 percent.


                                                 22
reduction when all CBOs are used as instruments. This suggests that access to a provider CBO is

more effective in increasing access to ambulatory care. The results for Medicaid ACS

hospitalizations (columns 4-6) are very similar. Though the point estimates are smaller, the

effects (in percent terms) are slightly larger: a 10 percent increase in Medicaid enrollment leads to

between a 2.3 and 3.4 percent decrease in Medicaid ACS hospitalizations, with larger effects for

clinic CBOs. In columns 7-9 are OLS and IV estimates of the impact of Medicaid enrollment on

marker conditions – hospitalizations which should not be affected by access to primary care such

as congenital heart defect, appendicitis and some forms of cancer. Medicaid enrollment has no

significant impact on hospitalization for markers in either OLS or IV regressions. Finally, in

columns 10-12 are estimates of regressions in which zipcode*year*quarter fixed effects are

included (the first stage results are in columns 4-6 of Appendix Table 3). The estimated

coefficients are very similar: a 10 percent increase in Medicaid enrollment leads to between a 1.8

and 2.8 percent decline in ACS hospitalizations.

    It is possible that in addition to affecting the probability of admission, early enrollment might

also affect one’s treatment once hospitalized. To explore this possibility, I estimate the impact of

early enrollment on the length of hospitalization and present the results in the second panel of

Table 7. Columns 1 through 3 show the OLS and IV results for the impact of early enrollment on

average length of stay for all child hospitalizations, columns 4 through 6 show similar results for

Medicaid hospitalizations. There seems to be only weak evidence that early enrollment in

Medicaid reduces length of stay in the hospital. OLS estimates suggest that a ten percent increase

in Medicaid enrollment reduces average length of stay by 0.5 percent while the IV-Clinic results

are more than twice as large, but imprecisely estimated. These small effects may be due to the

fact that increases in Medicaid take-up are likely to reduce hospitalizations among the least sick,

and thus those who continue to be hospitalized after increased Medicaid take-up will be, on

average, sicker and more likely to need more hospital care, thus resulting in longer hospital stays.




                                                 23
                                          VI.     Conclusions

    The empirical results presented here represent some of the first to shed light on the causes and

consequences of low take-up rates in public programs. Using a unique data set with local area

detail I am able to exploit exogenous variation in factors influencing take-up in the Medicaid

program to identify the reasons why families may fail to take-up benefits that involve no out of

pocket costs. Costs of finding information about programs as well as costs associated with

completing applications appear significant and language barriers and immigration concerns

increase theses costs for Hispanic and Asian children. Furthermore, my findings suggest that

increased enrollment as a result of outreach improves access to primary care as evidenced by a

reduction in ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations.

        An outreach program that increases Medicaid program take-up and limits avoidable

hospitalizations has the potential to reduce state expenditures substantially. Between 1997 and

2000 enrollment in non-welfare related Medicaid increased roughly 27 percent and 55 percent of

the increase was due to outreach (in other words, outreach was responsible for a 15 percent

increase in Medicaid enrollment, concentrated in the Hispanic and Asian communities).

Considering only the charges associated with ACS hospitalizations ($284 million in California in

1996), a 15 percent increase in Medicaid enrollment would lead to a 2.7 percent decline in ACS

hospitalizations for a savings of $8 million annually. This is six million dollars less than the costs

of the campaign in the first year and excludes the (relatively small) additional costs associated

with an increase in primary preventative care. This calculation, however, does not incorporate

any of the potential savings associated with reduced emergency room visits, the increased labor

supply of parents or the benefits to children in terms of improved health and less pain and

suffering as a result of avoiding days in the hospital. Considering these savings, the benefits of

the outreach program may exceed its costs.




                                                 24
25
                                           References

Billings, John and Nina Teicholz (1990). “Uninsured Patients in District of Columbia Hospitals,”
Health Affairs, 9, 158-165.

Billings, John, Zeitel, Lisa, Lukomnik, Joanne, Carey Timothy, Black, Arthur and Laurie
Newman (1993). “Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Hospital Use in New York City,” Health
Affairs, 12, 162-173.

Bindman, Andrew, Grumbach, Kevin, Ormond, Dennis, Komaromy, Miriam, Vranizan, Karen,
Lurie, Nicole, Billings, John and Anita Stewart (1995). “Preventable Hospitalizations and Access
to Care,” Journal of the American Medicaid Association, 274, 305-311.

Brown, Richard and Ninze, Ponce (1999). “The State of Health Insurance in California, 1998.”
UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.

Card, David and Lara Shore-Sheppard (2002). “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify
the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low Income Children.” NBER Working Paper
#9058.

Craig, Peter (1991). “Costs and Benefits: A Review of Research on Take-up of Income-Related
Benefits,” Journal of Social Policy, 20, 537-565.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996), "Health Insurance Eligibility and Child Health: Lessons
from Recent Expansions of the Medicaid Program", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 431-466.

Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber (2005). “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
Access and Efficiency Effects,” Journal of Public Economics, 89, 109-129.

Epstein, Andrew (2001). “The Role of Public Clinics in Preventable Hospitalizations Among
Vulnerable Populations,” Health Services Research, 36, 405-410.

Fronstin, Paul (1998). “Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured:
Analyses of the March 1998 Current Population Survey.” Washington D.C: Employee Benefits
Research Institute Issue Brief.

Gadmoski, Anne, Jenkins, Paul, and Melissa Nichols (1998). “Impact of a Medicaid Primary Care
Provider and Preventive Care on Pediatric Hospitalization,” Pediatrics, 101, 1-10.

Gill, James and Arch Mainous, “The Role of Provider Continuity in Preventing Hospitalizations,”
Archives of Family Medicine, 7, 352-357.

Goodman, David, Stukel, Therese, and Chiang-hua Chang (1998). “Trends in Pediatric Asthma
Hospitalization Rates: Regional and Socioeconomic Differences,” Pediatrics, 101, 208-213.

Graves EJ, Kozak LJ. Detailed diagnoses and procedures. National Hospital Discharge Survey,
1996. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 13(138). 1998.

Gruber, Jonathan (1997). “Medicaid and Uninsured Women and Children,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 11, 199-208.



                                                26
Gruber, Jonathan (1999). “Medicaid,” NBER Working Paper # 7829.

Hanratty, Maria (1996). “Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health,” American
Economic Review, 86, 276-284.

Kaestner, Robert, Joyce Theodore and Andrew Racine (1999). “Does Publicly Provided Health
Insurance Improve the Health of Low-Income Children in the US?” NBER Working Paper
#6887.

Kaestner, Robert, Joyce Theodore and Andrew Racine (2001). “Medicaid Eligibility and the
Incidence of Ambulatory Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for Children.” Social Science and
Medicine, 52,305-13.

Kasper, Judith (1986). “Health Status and Utilization: Differences by Medicaid Coverage and
Income,” Health Care Financing Review, 7,1-17.

MediCal Policy Institute [2002]. “Using Market Research to Improve Enrollment of Families
Eligible for Medi-Cal and Healthy Families.”

McConnochie, Kenneth, Roghmann, Klaus, and Grgeory Liptak (1997). “Socioeconomic
Variation in Discretionary and Mandatory Hospitalization of Infants: An Ecological Analysis,”
Pediatrics, 99, 774-784.

Parchman, Michael and Steven Culler (1994). “Primary Care Physicians and Avoidable
Hospitalizations,” Journal of Family Practice, 39, 123-128.

Parker, Jennifer and Kenneth Schoendorf (2000). “Variation in Hospital Discharges for
Ambulatory Care-Sensitive Conditions among Children,” Pediatrics, 106, 942-948.

Perry, Micahel (2001). “Medicaid and Healthy Families: Focus Groups with California Parents to
Evaluation Medicaid and Healthy Families Programs,” Kaiser Family Foundation.

Perry, Michael, Stark, Evan and Burgiaga Valdez (1998). “Barriers to Medicaid Enrollment and
Ideas for Improving Enrollment: Findings from Eight Focus Groups in California with Parents of
Potentially Eligible Children,” Kaiser Family Foundation #1436.

Remler, Dahlia, Rachlin, Jason and Sherry Glied (2001). “What Can the Take-Up of Other
Programs Teach Us About How To Improve Take-Up of Health Insurance Programs?” NBER
Working Paper #8185.

Ricketts, Thomas, Randolph, Randy, Howard Hilda Ann, Pathman, Donald and Timothy Carey
(2001). “Hospitalization Rates as Indicators of Access to Primary Care,” Health and Place, 7, 27-
38.

Selden, Thomas, Banthin, JM and JW Cohen (1998). “Medicaid’s Problem Children: Eligible but
not Enrolled,” Health Affairs, 17,192-200.




                                               27
Shi, Leiyu, Samuels, Michael, Pease, Mary, Baily, Walter and Elizabeth Corley (1999). “Patient
Characteristics Associated with Hospitalizations for Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions in
South Carolina,” Southern Medicaid Journal, 92, 989-998.

Short, Pamela and D. Lefkowitz (1992). “Encouraging Preventive Services for Low-Income
Children: The Effect of Expanding Medicaid,” Medical care, XXX, 76-80.

Stuber, Jennifer, Malloy, Kathleen, Rosenbaum, Sara and Karen Jones (2000). “Beyond Stigma:
What Barriers Actually Affect the Decisions of Low-Income Families to Enroll in Medicaid?”
Center for Health Services Research and Policy, George Washington University working paper.

Weissman, Joel, Gastonis, Constantine, and Arnold Epstein (1992). “Rates of Avoidable
Hospitalization by Insurance Status in Massachusetts and Maryland,” Journal of the American
Medicaid Association, 268, 2388-2394.

Kopczuk, Wojciech and Cristian Pop-Eleches (2005). “Electronic Filing, Tax Preparers, and
Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit.” Columbia University mimeo.




                                              28
                                         Figure I
                           Total Medicaid Enrollment Over Time

3000000


2500000


2000000
                                                                              Total
1500000                                                                       Non-welfare
                                                                              Welfare
1000000


500000


     0
          date   199608 199703 199710 199805 199812 199907 200002 200009




                                              Figure II
                                 Total Hispanic Medicaid Enrollment

1400000

1200000

1000000

 800000                                                                               total
                                                                                      Welfare-related
 600000                                                                               Non Welfare

 400000

 200000

      0
      199602 199608 199702 199708 199802 199808 199902 199908 200002 200008
                                         Figure III
                Monthly Hispanic Non-Welfare Medicaid Enrollment by Bilingual
                                      CBO availability

7000


6000


5000


4000                                                                                    NO CBOs
                                                                                        1 CBO
                                                                                        2-4 CBOs
3000                                                                                    5+ CBOs


2000


1000


   0
       199601       199611       199709       199807       199905      200003




                                               Figure IV
                  Monthly Births to Hispanic Women <=HS by Bilingual CBO Availability

  60

  50

  40
                                                                                        No CBO
                                                                                        1 CBO
  30
                                                                                        2-4CBOs
                                                                                        5+CBOs
  20

  10

   0
19 02

19 05

19 08

19 11

19 03

19 06

19 09

19 12

19 04

19 07

19 10

19 02

19 05

19 08

20 11

20 03

20 06

20 09

         2
      .1
      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .

      .
   96

   96

   96

   96

   97

   97

   97

   97

   98

   98

   98

   99

   99

   99

   99

   00

   00

   00

   00
19
                          Table 1: Impact of CBOS on New Monthly Medicaid Enrollment

                                                            Non Welfare Related             Welfare Related
Blingual (Spanish) CBO*Hispanic                  12.763       12.72      12.7      7.517         1.24
                                                 [1.379]     [1.388]   [1.558]    [1.379]       [0.308]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO *Asian                      1.882       1.895      1.858     1.931         0.556
                                                 [0.372]     [0.375]   [0.419]    [0.387]       [0.128]
Bilingual (Spanish) CBO                          -2.815      -2.821
                                                 [0.291]     [0.292]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO                            -0.352      -0.394
                                                 [0.079]     [0.086]
English only CBO                                  0.027      -0.074
                                                 [0.059]     [0.067]
Black                                            -4.705      -4.761     -4.774    -4.214        -1.601
                                                 [0.177]     [0.181]   [0.204]    [0.199]       [0.231]
Hispanic                                          12.34      12.467    12.517      2.79         -1.414
                                                 [0.831]     [0.846]   [0.955]    [0.659]       [0.185]
Asian                                            -5.895      -5.979     -5.985    -4.967        -4.039
                                                 [0.198]     [0.202]   [0.228]    [0.283]       [0.186]
Other race                                       -4.442      -4.493     -4.504    -4.199        -3.903
                                                 [0.156]     [0.158]   [0.179]    [0.176]       [0.161]
Asian*ever gain access to CBO                                                     -1.103        -1.127
                                                                                  [1.078]       [0.489]
Hispanic*ever gain access to CBO                                                  28.708         6.965
                                                                                  [2.286]       [0.624]
Observations                                      390379    390549     390549     390549        390549
R-squared                                           0.4      0.41       0.42       0.47          0.45
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets

Zipcode fixed effects                              yes
year fixed effects                                 yes
month fixed effects                                yes
zipcode*year and month fixed effects                          yes
zipcode*year*month fixed effects                                         yes       yes           yes
        Table 2: Impact of CBOs on Ln(New Non Welfare Medicaid Enrollment)


                                                (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)
Blingual (Spanish) CBO*Hispanic                0.19       0.116     0.116     0.152
                                             [0.017]     [0.020]   [0.015]   [0.022]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO *Asian                   0.18       0.137     0.138     0.173
                                             [0.027]     [0.030]   [0.023]   [0.027]
Bilingual (Spanish) CBO                       -0.05       0.022               0.066
                                             [0.009]     [0.024]             [0.015]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO                         -0.04      -0.092              -0.067
                                             [0.008]     [0.021]             [0.017]
(sum) engexist                               -0.018       0.049                0.04
                                             [0.013]     [0.067]             [0.042]
Black                                        -0.712      -0.697    -0.696    -0.873
                                             [0.053]     [0.069]   [0.053]   [0.026]
Hispanic                                      1.103       0.642     0.61      0.038
                                             [0.052]     [0.101]   [0.076]   [0.036]
Asian                                        -0.958      -1.135    -1.125    -1.058
                                             [0.055]     [0.083]   [0.063]   [0.026]
Other race                                   -1.442      -1.415    -1.413    -0.863
                                             [0.043]     [0.058]   [0.043]   [0.022]
Asian*ever gain access to CBO                             0.417     0.409     0.284
                                                         [0.126]   [0.096]   [0.067]
Hispanic*ever gain access to CBO                          0.749     0.784     1.254
                                                         [0.118]   [0.089]   [0.068]
Observations                                128317      128317     128317    390549
R-squared                                      0.67        0.75     0.68       0.67
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets

zipcode*year & month fixed effects             yes        yes                 yes
zipcode*year*month fixed effects                                    yes
           Table 3: Impact of Health Provider CBOs on Monthly new Medicaid Enrollment

                                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
Blingual (Spanish) CBO*Hispanic               23.656     23.598      23.57     11.517
                                              [2.462]    [2.480]    [2.783]    [2.125]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO *Asian                   3.375      3.403      3.324      4.06
                                              [0.918]    [0.926]    [1.021]    [1.006]
Bilingual (Spanish) CBO                        -5.12     -5.213
                                              [0.539]    [0.577]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO                         -0.508     -0.634
                                              [0.230]    [0.169]
English Only CBO                              -0.546     -0.023
                                              [0.607]    [0.285]
Black                                         -4.779     -4.836     -4.848    -4.487
                                              [0.177]    [0.180]    [0.204]   [0.203]
Hispanic                                      13.651     13.782     13.834     7.713
                                              [0.868]    [0.883]    [0.997]   [0.781]
Asian                                         -5.925     -6.014     -6.019    -5.366
                                              [0.202]    [0.207]    [0.233]   [0.253]
Other race                                    -4.486     -4.539     -4.551    -4.359
                                              [0.156]    [0.159]    [0.179]   [0.179]
Asian*ever gain access to CBO                                                  -1.77
                                                                              [1.711]
Hispanic*ever gain access to CBO                                              39.113
                                                                              [3.955]
Observations                                   390379     390549   390549     390549
R-squared                                        0.41      0.41     0.42        0.49
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets

Zipcode fixed effects                           yes
year fixed effects                              yes
month fixed effects                             yes
zipcode*year and month fixed effects                       yes
zipcode*year*month fixed effects                                     yes        yes
                      Table 4:Impact of CBOs on New Non Welfare Medicaid Enrollment by Age

                                                  Infant    Age 1-5    Age 6-18     Infant    Age 1-5    Age 6-18
Blingual (Spanish) CBO*Hispanic                  -0.682       3.761       4.796    -0.658      3.769       4.801
                                                 [0.381]     [0.696]     [0.824]   [0.434]    [0.788]     [0.929]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO *Asian                      0.775       1.538       1.813     0.765      1.505       1.761
                                                 [0.186]     [0.287]     [0.377]   [0.208]    [0.334]     [0.430]
Bilingual (Spanish) CBO                          -0.061      -2.383      -2.591
                                                 [0.371]     [0.606]     [0.531]
Blinigual (Asian) CBO                             0.219       0.039      -0.385
                                                 [0.333]     [0.296]     [0.207]
English only CBO                                 -0.243       0.334       0.231
                                                 [0.242]     [0.246]     [0.224]
Black                                            -6.473      -6.617      -6.728     -6.463     -6.598      -6.71
                                                 [1.013]     [1.092]     [1.087]    [1.162]    [1.236]    [1.226]
Hispanic                                            5.8       7.564       8.382      5.872      7.632       8.43
                                                 [2.005]     [2.398]     [2.776]    [2.314]    [2.706]    [3.121]
Asian                                            -4.147      -5.028      -6.878     -4.162     -5.022     -6.881
                                                 [0.476]     [0.592]     [0.755]    [0.548]    [0.669]    [0.849]
Other race                                      -12.244     -13.445     -14.879    -12.303    -13.421    -14.846
                                                 [1.226]     [1.324]     [1.247]    [1.414]    [1.501]    [1.408]
Asian*ever gain access to CBO                    -2.211       -1.58      -0.531     -2.198     -1.562     -0.488
                                                 [1.283]     [1.351]     [1.548]    [1.472]    [1.521]    [1.738]
Hispanic*ever gain access to CBO                 15.921       14.01      13.845     15.856     13.948     13.818
                                                 [2.905]     [3.176]     [3.469]    [3.343]    [3.581]    [3.898]
Observations                                    279706      318235      329025     279706     318235     329025
R-squared                                           0.7        0.73        0.71      0.73       0.77        0.76
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets
Zipcode*year and month fixed effects included
Table 5: Non-linear Impact of CBOs on New Non Welfare Enrollment: Levels and Logs

                                                new enrollment   Ln(new enrollment)
1 Spanish CBO*Hispanic                               11.422            0.343
                                                     [2.017]          [0.072]
2 Spanish CBO*Hispanic                                 30.4            0.794
                                                     [3.599]          [0.083]
3 Spanish CBO*Hispanic                               39.488            0.891
                                                     [5.514]          [0.126]
4 Spanish CBO*Hispanic                               62.627            1.052
                                                     [9.179]          [0.136]
5 Spanish CBO*Hispanic                               86.259            1.444
                                                    [14.207]          [0.155]
1 Asian Language CBO*Asian                            2.227            0.271
                                                     [1.118]          [0.114]
2 Asian Language CBO*Asian                            5.656             0.61
                                                     [1.886]          [0.136]
3 Asian Language CBO*Asian                            5.114            0.686
                                                     [3.115]          [0.168]
4 Asian Language CBO*Asian                            5.851            0.973
                                                     [5.580]          [0.269]
5 Asian Language CBO*Asian                            16.47            1.525
                                                     [4.821]          [0.207]
Black                                                -4.746           -0.496
                                                     [0.201]          [0.060]
Hispanic                                             12.277            0.574
                                                     [0.902]          [0.054]
Asian                                                -5.999           -1.194
                                                     [0.235]          [0.059]
Other race                                           -4.497           -1.611
                                                     [0.178]          [0.045]
Asian*ever gain access to CBO                           -1             0.441
                                                     [0.099]          [0.102]
Hispanic*ever gain access to CBO                     33.434            1.129
                                                     [2.477]          [0.093]
Observations                                        390549            172406
R-squared                                              0.42             0.78
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets
Regressions include zipcode*year*month fixed effects
                               Table 6: Impact of Advertising on New Monthly Medicaid Enrollment


                                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)
English Language Advertisements                                  1.764                                                0.808
                                                                [1.303]                                              [0.901]
Spanish Language Advertisements                                 -0.677                                               -0.609
                                                                [0.572]                                              [0.600]
Spanish Language Advertisements*Hispanic                        -2.689                                               -3.786
                                                                [2.909]                                              [3.418]
Lag English Language Advertisements                                               2.609                               3.175
                                                                                 [1.182]                             [1.183]
Lag Spanish Language Advertisements                                              -0.833                              -1.508
                                                                                 [0.981]                             [1.414]
Lag Spanish Language Advertisements*Hispanic                                      1.828                               3.475
                                                                                 [0.661]                             [1.512]
Lead English Language Advertisements                                                               0.518              0.104
                                                                                                  [0.334]            [0.249]
Lead Spanish Language Advertisements                                                              -0.332             -0.765
                                                                                                  [1.268]            [0.823]
Lead Spanish Language Advertisements*Hispanic                                                     -1.065             -0.568
                                                                                                  [1.701]            [0.551]
Black                                                           42.068           42.074           42.072              42.07
                                                                [6.856]          [6.853]          [6.855]            [6.855]
White                                                           33.872            33.86           33.871             33.868
                                                                [7.820]          [7.812]          [7.821]            [7.818]
Hispanic                                                        57.247           56.039            56.82             56.776
                                                                [9.018]          [8.313]          [8.768]            [8.876]
Asian                                                           40.455           40.462           40.461             40.458
                                                                [8.299]          [8.296]          [8.301]            [8.298]
Observations                                                    336334           336334           336334             336334
R-squared                                                         0.87             0.87             0.87               0.87
Robust standard errors in brackets (clustered at the DMA level)
All regressions include zipcode*year and month dummies
Column (1) presents estimates of the impact of advertising in the current month on enrollment,
Column (2) presents estimate of the impact of advertising in the previous month on enrollment
Column (3) presents estimate of the impact of advertising in the next month on enrollment
Column (4) presents estimates of the impact of advertising in the current, previous and future month on enrollment
                                                                Table 7: Impact of Medicaid Enrollment on Child Hospitalizations and Length of Stay (LOS)

                                                               All ACS Admissions                     Medicaid ACS Admissions                   All Marker Admissions                All ACS Admissions
                                                          OLS        IV-Clinic    IV-All             OLS      IV-Clinic   IV-All             OLS       IV-Clinic     IV-All     OLS        IV-Clinic    IV-All
Medicaid Enrollment                                     -0.0017      -0.0031    -0.0019            -0.0014     -0.0024  -0.0016            -0.0001     -0.0003         0      -0.0014      -0.0029    -0.0019
                                                        [0.0008]     [0.0014]  [0.0011]            [0.0006]   [0.0010]  [0.0008]           [0.0001]    [0.0002]   [0.0002]    [0.0009]     [0.0015]  [0.0001]
Hispanic                                                -0.0896       0.6899    -0.0124            -0.2738      0.3129  -0.1177             0.0941      0.2084      0.0545    -0.1775       0.7002       0.08
                                                        [0.7191]     [1.0811]  [0.9318]            [0.5609]   [0.8534]  [0.7319]           [0.0440]    [0.1038]   [0.0981]    [0.8278]     [1.1885]  [0.1376]
White                                                   -0.7564      -0.2558    -0.7068            -1.4979     -1.1211  -1.3977             0.0468      0.1145      0.0199    -0.8092       -0.234    -0.6405
                                                        [0.7069]     [0.8714]  [0.7838]            [0.5599]   [0.6910]  [0.6257]           [0.0328]    [0.0481]   [0.0473]    [0.8572]     [1.0169]  [0.1046]
Asian                                                    0.2669       0.8309     0.3228             0.0822      0.5067   0.1951             0.0076      0.0913     -0.0214     0.2603       0.8921     0.4456
                                                        [0.6505]     [0.8736]  [0.7515]            [0.5578]   [0.7239]  [0.6321]           [0.0304]    [0.0609]   [0.0516]    [0.7263]     [0.9543]  [0.1457]
Black                                                    1.5717        1.892     1.6034             0.8638      1.1048   0.9279             0.0149      0.0588     -0.0016     1.6785       2.0398     1.7845
                                                        [0.8977]     [1.0093]  [0.9701]            [0.7617]   [0.8565]  [0.8300]           [0.0484]    [0.0427]   [0.0360]    [1.0186]     [1.1254]  [0.1256]
Adult Hospitalizations for Same Conditions               0.0908       0.0884     0.0906             0.0515      0.0497    0.051             0.0062       0.006      0.0065     0.0929       0.0898      0.092
                                                        [0.0101]     [0.0100]  [0.0098]            [0.0083]   [0.0083]  [0.0082]           [0.0013]    [0.0011]   [0.0013]    [0.0123]     [0.0121]  [0.0013]
Welfare caseload                                         0.0023       0.0028     0.0023             0.0016      0.0019   0.0017            -0.0001         0       -0.0001     0.0021       0.0026     0.0022
                                                        [0.0005]     [0.0006]  [0.0005]            [0.0005]   [0.0006]  [0.0005]           [0.0000]    [0.0001]   [0.0001]    [0.0005]     [0.0006]  [0.0001]
Ever Gain Access to Spanish CBO*Hispanic                -1.6461      -1.8306    -1.6644            -1.4873     -1.6261  -1.5242            -0.0035     -0.0294      0.0048    -1.5649      -1.7747    -1.6264
                                                        [0.5642]     [0.5319]  [0.5477]            [0.4990]   [0.4720]  [0.4886]           [0.0281]    [0.0403]   [0.0416]    [0.6155]     [0.5889]  [0.1783]
Ever Gain Access to Asian CBO*Asian                      0.7882       0.8995     0.7992             0.7508      0.8346   0.7731             0.0674      0.0854      0.0615     0.7932       0.9153      0.829
                                                        [0.6001]     [0.6441]  [0.6263]            [0.5099]   [0.5551]  [0.5404]           [0.0467]    [0.0444]   [0.0424]    [0.6670]     [0.7104]  [0.1163]
Observations                                            121806        121806    121806             121806      121806   121806             121806       121806     121806     121806        121806    121806
R-squared                                                 0.71          0.71       0.71              0.68        0.68      0.68              0.63         0.64        0.63      0.81         0.81        0.81
Robust standard errors in brackets
Zipcode*year and quarter fixed effects                    yes           yes         yes              yes          yes        yes             yes            yes      yes
zipcode*year*quarter fixed effects                                                                                                                                              yes         yes         yes




                                                              Average LOS - All                        Average LOS - Medicaid                     Average LOS - All               Average LOS - Medicaid
                                                         OLS      IV-Clinic     IV-All               OLS      IV-Clinic    IV-All            OLS      IV-Clinic     IV-All      OLS      IV-Clinic    IV-All
Medicaid Enrollment                                    -0.0002    -0.0005     -0.0001              -0.0002    -0.0005    -0.0001           -0.0002    -0.0002     0.0001      -0.0002    -0.0003        0
                                                       [0.0001]   [0.0004]   [0.0004]              [0.0001]   [0.0003]   [0.0004]          [0.0001]   [0.0004]   [0.0002]     [0.0001]   [0.0004]   [0.0004]
Observations                                            78844      78844        78844               60480      60480      60480             78844      78844        78844      60480      60480      60480
R-squared                                                0.28       0.28         0.28                0.14       0.14        0.14             0.73       0.73         0.73        0.4        0.4        0.4
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets

zipcode*year & quarter                                    yes           yes         yes              yes          yes        yes
zipcode*year*quarter                                                                                                                         yes            yes      yes        yes         yes         yes

IVC refers to IV regressions in which CBOs that are health providers/clinics are used as instruments in the first stage
IVA refers to IV regressions in which all CBOs are used as instruments in the first stage
                                                 Appendix Table 1A - Changes Over Time in Access to CBOs

                                                               1998                                 1999                              2000
                                                      number          percent              number           percent          number           percent
Zipcodes with Any CBO                                   471             28                   662              39               776              46
Zipcodes with 1 CBO                                     283             17                   317              19               311              19
Zipcodes with 2-4 CBOs                                  171             10                   282              17               342              20
Zipcodes with 5+ CBOs                                   17               1                   63                4               123               7

Zipcodes with Any CBO w/
Spanish Speaking Staff                                  402             24                   537              32              620               37

Zipcodes with Any CBO w/
Asian Speaking Staff                                    126             8                    175              10              219               13




                                   Appendix Table 1B: Changing Characteristics of Zipcodes with Access to at Least One CBO

                                                              1998                                  1999                              2000
Median Household Income                                       33190                                 33467                             34448
Share Urban                                                   0.711                                 0.734                             0.734
Share with less than a HS degree                              0.294                                 0.279                             0.268
Share Asian                                                   0.077                                  0.08                             0.082
Share Black                                                   0.053                                 0.054                             0.053
Share Hispanic                                                0.345                                  0.33                             0.319
Share White                                                   0.331                                 0.352                             0.371
                                    Appendix Table 2: Sample Means

                                                             All     Hispanic   Asian
New Monthly Medicaid Enrollment
New Medicaid Enrollment                                       67       140         9
                                                            [100]     [117]      [10]
New Non Welfare Related Medicaid Enrollment                   50       109         6
                                                             [79]      [93]       [6]
New Welfare Related Medicaid Enrollment                       17        31         3
                                                             [25]      [29]       [6]
Stock of Medicaid Enrollment
Total Medicaid Enrollment                                    2182      4222       749
                                                            [3014]    [3566]    [1000]
Medicaid Enrollment per 1000 poor children                    619       767       684
                                                             [634]     [596]     [541]
Non Welfare Medicaid Enrollment                               977      2094       125
                                                            [1541]    [1870]     [156]
Non-Welfare Medicaid Enrollment per 1000 poor children        236       387       137
                                                             [269]     [322]     [104]
Hospitalizations
ACS hospitalizations                                         10.1      14.8       2.9
                                                            [14.2]    [18.4]     [3.6]
Medicaid ACS hospitalizations                                 6.8      10.5       1.5
                                                            [11.1]    [14.5]     [2.6]
Medicaid ACS hospitalizations per 1000 poor children         1.91       1.7       1.5
                                                             [3.8]     [3.5]     [3.9]
Medicaid ACS hospitalizations per 1000 Medicaid               10        2.3       4.3
                                                             [27]      [2.9]     [30]
Marker Hospitalizations                                      0.86      1.04     0.197
                                                            [1.45]    [1.41]    [.542]
CBOs (post June 1998)
Bilingual (Spanish Language) CBOs                            2.1        2.5       1.6
                                                            [2.4]      [2.6]     [2.2]
English Only CBOs                                           0.18       0.16      0.22
                                                            [.53]      [.46]     [.54]
Bilingual (Asian Language) CBOs                             0.55       0.58       1.3
                                                            [1.5]     [1.52]     [2.7]
Controls
Unemployment rate                                            0.06      0.07       0.05
                                                             [.04]     [.04]      [.04]
Per capita income                                           28912     28618      32835
                                                            [7944]    [7296]    [10798]
Number of births to mothers <=HS                               21        44         4
                                                              [31]      [36]       [5]
Standard deviations below in brackets
                                     Appendix Table 3: First Stage Results Impact of CBOs on Stock of Medicaid Enrollment


                                                      Clinic        Non-Clinic        All CBOS                Clinic           Non-Clinic        All CBOS
Spanish CBO*Hispanic                               338.7216          218.0621         227.8877              339.3906           218.2878          228.3508
                                                   [63.4910]         [46.2778]        [41.7251]             [70.5585]          [51.2507]         [46.3912]
Asian Language CBO*Asian                           119.3813           36.2796          72.6484              120.5376            37.9184            74.134
                                                   [36.1899]         [21.4317]        [21.8236]             [40.5100]          [23.9937]         [24.4975]
Spanish CBO                                       -116.5638          -58.4979          -72.3654
                                                   [30.1472]         [13.5270]        [16.0239]
Asian Language CBO                                   -18.45           -7.1678           -8.6444
                                                   [14.4564]         [21.6785]        [10.9130]
English Only CBO                                      -2.03           -9.9475           -6.3122
                                                   [15.0806]          [8.6849]         [7.2724]
Observations                                        121806             121806           121806               121806             121806            121806
R-squared                                             0.94              0.93              0.94                 0.94               0.93             0.94
Robust standard errors (clustered on zipcode) in brackets
All regressions include race indicators, controls for adult admissions, welfare caseloads and Ever Spanish*Hispanic and Ever Asian*Asian

F test instruments                          F(5,1429) = 8.5   F(5,1429) = 2.2   F(5,1429) = 4.5       F(2,1429) = 11.64    F(2,1429) = 9.71   F(2,1429) = 12.13
p-value                                         0.0000            0.0495            0.0002                 0.0000               0.0001             0.0000

zipcode*year & quarter                            yes               yes               yes
zipcode*year*quarter                                                                                         yes                  yes               yes
