NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECONCILING THE RETURN PREDICTABILITY EVIDENCE
Martin Lettau
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 12109
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12109
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

Lettau: Department of Finance, Stern School of Business, New York University, 44 W. 4th Street, New York,
NY 10012; mlettau@stern.nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-0378; http://www.stern.nyu.edu/ mlettau. Van
Nieuwerburgh: Department of Finance, Stern School of Business, New York University, 44 W. 4th Street,
New York, NY 10012; svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu; Tel: (212) 998-0673; http://www.stern.nyu.edu/ svnieuwe.
We thank an anonymous referee, the editor, Yakov Amihud, John Campbell, Kenneth French, Sydney
Ludvigson, Eli Ofek, Matthew Richardson, Ivo Welch, Robert Whitelaw and the seminar participants at NYU
and McGill University for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Martin Lettau and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Reconciling the Return Predictability Evidence
Martin Lettau and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 12109
March 2006
JEL No. G1, G12, G11, C53
ABSTRACT
Evidence of stock return predictability by financial ratios is still controversial, as documented by
inconsistent results for in-sample and out-of-sample regressions and by substantial parameter
instability. This paper shows that these seemingly incompatible results can be reconciled if the
assumption of a fixed steady-state mean of the economy is relaxed. We find strong empirical
evidence in support of shifts in the steady-state and propose simple methods to adjust financial ratios
for such shifts. The forecasting relationship of adjusted price ratios and future returns is statistically
significant and stable over time. We also show that shifts in the steady-state are responsible for the
parameter instability and poor out-of-sample performance of unadjusted price ratios that are found
in the data. Our conclusions hold for a variety of financial ratios and are robust to changes in the
econometric technique used to estimate shifts in the steady-state.
Martin Lettau
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44. W. 4th St., Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
Department of Finance
44. W. 4th St., Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

The question of whether stock returns are predictable has received an enormous amount of
attention. This is not surprising because the existence of return predictability is not only
of interest to practitioners but also has important implications for financial models of risk
and return. One branch of the literature asserts that expected returns contain a time-varying
component that implies predictability of future returns. Due to its persistence, the predictive
component is stronger over longer horizons than over short horizons. Classic predictive variables
are financial ratios, such as the dividend-price ratio, the earnings-price ratio, and the book-tomarket ratio (Rozeff (1984), Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane
(1991), Goetzman and Jorion (1993), Hodrick (1992), Lewellen (2004), and others), but other
variables have also been found to be powerful predictors of long-horizon returns (e.g., Lettau
and Ludvigson (2001), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005a), Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi
(2004), Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2004)). Moreover, these studies conclude that growth
rates of fundamentals, such as dividends or earnings, are much less forecastable than returns,
suggesting that most of the variation of financial ratios is due to variations in expected returns.
These conclusions are controversial because the forecasting relationship of financial ratios
and future stock returns exhibits a number of disconcerting features. First, correct inference is
problematic because financial ratios are extremely persistent; in fact, standard tests leave the
possibility of unit roots open. Nelson and Kim (1993), Stambaugh (1999), Ang and Bekaert
(2001), Ferson, Sarkissian, and Simin (2003), and Valkanov (2003) conclude that the statistical
evidence of forecastability is weaker once tests are adjusted for high persistence. Second, financial ratios have poor out-of-sample forecasting power, as shown in Bossaerts and Hillion (1999)
and Goyal and Welch (2003, 2004), but see Campbell and Thompson (2005) for a different
interpretations of the out-of-sample evidence. Third, and related to the poor out-of-sample evidence, the forecasting relationship of returns and financial ratios exhibits significant instability
over time. For example, in rolling 30-year regressions of annual log CRSP value-weighted returns
on lagged log dividend-price ratios, the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression coefficient varies
between zero and 0.5 and the associated R2 ranges from close to zero to 30% depending on
the subsample. Not surprisingly, the hypothesis of a constant regression coefficient is routinely
rejected (Viceira (1996), Paye and Timmermann (2003)).
In addition to concerns that return forecastability might be spurious, the benchmark model
of time-varying expected returns faces additional challenges. The extreme persistence of price
ratios implies that expected returns have to be extremely persistent as well. But if shocks to
expected returns have a half-life of many years or even decades, as implied by the high persistence
of financial ratios, they are unlikely to be linked to many plausible economic risk factors, such
as those linked to business cycles. Instead, researchers have to identify slow-moving factors that
2

are primary determinants of equity risk. In addition, the extraordinary valuation ratios in the
late 1990s represent a significant challenge for the benchmark model. Given the historical record
of returns, fundamentals, and prices, it is exceedingly unlikely that persistent stationary shocks
to expected returns are capable of explaining price multiples like those seen in 1999 or 2000.
How can models with time-varying expected returns be reconciled with these serious challenges? In this paper, we propose an explanation for the puzzling empirical patterns; namely,
the possibility that changes in the steady-state mean of financial ratios are caused, for example,
by changes of the steady-state growth rate of economic fundamentals and/or expected return of
equity. Why might we expect the steady-state to change over time? Some possibilities include
permanent technological innovations that change the long-term growth rate of the economy or
improved risk sharing, changes in stock market participation, changes in the tax code, or lower
macroeconomic volatility that decrease the long-term expected return of equity.
Changes in the steady-state have dramatic effects on the relationship of returns and price
ratios because they cause the mean of the price ratios to change permanently. In particular,
predictability regressions are affected because price ratio regressors would be non-stationary.
However, as we show below, deviations of the price ratios from their steady-state values are
stationary. Thus, the appropriate return forecasting specifications do not include non-stationary
price ratios themselves but only stationary deviations from steady-states. Our empirical results
conclude that such “adjusted price ratios have favorable properties compared to unadjusted
price ratios. For example, in the full sample forecasting relationships of returns with lagged
adjusted price ratios are much more stable over time than with unadjusted price ratios. In real
time, however, the changes in the steady-state are not only difficult to detect but also estimated
with significant uncertainty, making the return forecastability hard to exploit. Out-of-sample
tests performed in real time reflect this difficulty. While adjusted price ratios have superior outof-sample forecasting power relative to their unadjusted counterparts, they do not outperform
the simple random walk model.
These results show that seemingly incompatible views of the forecasting relationship of stock
returns and price ratios can be reconciled if the assumption of a fixed steady-state of price
ratios is relaxed. In this sense, the branch of the literature that finds supportive evidence for
return predictability and the branch that emphasizes the instability and poor out-of-sample
forecastability are both correct. We find that returns are indeed forecastable, but low-frequency
shifts in the mean of the price ratios cause the forecasting relationship to be unstable and
reduce the out-of-sample forecasting power if financial ratios are not adjusted for the presence
of permanent shifts in its mean.
Several papers have explored the impact of structural breaks on return predictability. For
example, Viceira (1996) and Paye and Timmermann (2003) reported evidence in favor of breaks
3

in the OLS coefficient in the forecasting regression of returns on the lagged dividend-price ratio.
Our focus is instead on shifts in the mean of financial ratios, which in turn render the forecasting
relationship unstable if such shifts are not taken into account. In other words, in contrast to
Viceira (1996) and Paye and Timmermann (2003), we focus on the behavior of the mean of
price ratios instead of the behavior of the slope coefficient. Pastor and Stambaugh (2001) use
a Bayesian framework to estimate breaks in the equity premium. They found several shifts in
the equity premium since 1834 and identified the sharpest drop in the 1990s, which is consistent
with the timing of the shift in price ratios identified in this paper.
Our paper is also related to the recent literature on inference in forecasting regressions with
persistent regressors (see e.g., Amihud and Hurwich (2004), Ang and Bekaert (2001), Campbell
and Yogo (2002), Lewellen (2004), Torous, Volkanov, and Yan (2004), and Eliasz (2005)). In
these papers, asymptotic distributions for OLS regressions are derived under the assumption
that the forecasting variable is a close-to unit, yet stationary, root process. In contrast, we
allow for the presence of a small but econometrically important non-stationary component in
forecasting variables.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we establish that the standard
dividend-price ratio does not significantly forecast stock returns or dividend growth. In contrast,
we find much stronger evidence for return predictability in various subsamples. The slope
coefficient in the return equation is much smaller in the full sample than in any of the constituent
subsamples, which confirms the instability of the forecasting relationship over time. In sections
3 and 4, we show how changes in the steady-state affect the dividend-price ratio and other
price ratios. For the log dividend-price ratio, we find evidence for either one break in the early
1990s or two breaks around 1954 and 1994. Other valuation ratios such as the earnings-price
ratio and the book-to-market value ratio exhibit similar breaks. We show that filtering out this
non-stationary component yields adjusted price ratios that have strong and stable in-sample
return predictability. In Section 5 we study out-of-sample predictability. We use a recursive
Perron procedure that estimates both the break dates and the means of the regimes in realtime. We show that using the break-adjusted dividend-price series produces superior one-step
ahead return forecasts compared to using the unadjusted dividend-price series, but does slightly
worse than the naive random walk model. Using a Hamilton (1989) regime-switching model,
we show that if the investor did not have to estimate regime means in real time, but only the
regime switching dates, her out-of-sample forecast would improve substantially, and beat the
random walk. The Hamilton procedure leads to slightly later break dates but predictability
results that are virtually as good as those when the (ex-post) break dates were known and used.
In sum, the hardest part of real-time out-of-sample prediction in the presence of regimes is the
estimation uncertainty about the mean of the new regime. In Section 6 we consider a vector
4

error correction model that includes the return and dividend growth predictability equations and
imposes a joint present value restriction on the slope parameters from both equations. We find
that this restriction is satisfied when we use the adjusted dividend-price ratio as an independent
variable, but not when we use the unadjusted series. Finally, in Section 7, we find that our
simple model serves as a plausible data generating process. It is able to replicate both the
findings of no predictability when the unadjusted dividend-price ratio is used and the findings
of in-sample and out-of-sample predictability when the adjusted series is used.

2

Instability of Forecasting Relationships

In this section we document the instability of the forecasting relationship between returns, dividend growth, and the lagged dividend-price ratio. The forecasting relationship of returns and
other financial ratios (such as the earnings-price ratio and the book-to-market ratio) and alternative measures of dividends (such as accounting for repurchases or considering only dividendpaying firms) are similar and will be presented later. The data are based on annual CRSP
value-weighted returns from 1927 to 2004 and are described in Appendix A. The top panel of
Figure 1 shows the estimation results for the forecasting regression of demeaned returns on the
demeaned lagged dividend-price ratio using 30-year rolling windows:
r
,
rt+1 − r = κr (dpt − dp) + τt+1

(1)

where rt denotes the log return, dpt denotes the log dividend-price ratio dt − pt , and r̄ and dp
denote the sample means of returns and the log dividend-price ratio in each of the subsamples,
respectively. The top panel plots the slope coefficient κr along with two standard error bands.
The instability of the forecasting relationship is strikingly illustrated by the variation of the
return predictability coefficient over time. The estimates of κr are around 0.5 in the subsamples
ending in the late 1950s and in the samples ending in the early 1980s to the mid 1990s. In
contrast, κr is much smaller for the samples ending in the mid 1960s and is close to zero and
statistically insignificant in samples ending in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Similarly, the R2
of the forecasting regression displays instability with values ranging from 34% in 1982 to 0% at
the end of the 1990s (not shown). This evidence has led some researchers to conclude that the
dividend-price ratio does not forecast stock returns, or at least not robustly so. Not surprisingly,
the hypothesis of a constant regression coefficient is routinely rejected.
We also estimate a predictability regression for demeaned dividend growth rates:
d
,
∆dt+1 − d = κd (dpt − dp) + τt+1

5

(2)

where dt denotes log dividends and d denotes the sample mean of dividend growth. Dividend
growth rates are even less forecastable than returns. For most of the sample, the point estimate
is not statistically significantly different from zero, and the regression R2 never exceeds 16%
(not shown). Interestingly, the dividend-price ratio at the end of the 1990s seems to forecast
neither stock returns nor dividend growth. This is a conundrum from the perspective of any
present value model (see Section 3.1), as also pointed out by Cochrane (2006).
[Figure 1 about here.]
The left two columns of Table 1, denoted “No Break, report the coefficients κr and κd from
equations (1) and (2) and their asymptotic standard errors for the entire 1927-2004 sample, as
well as for various subsamples. The first row shows that the dividend-price ratio marginally
predicts stock returns (first column); the coefficient is significant at the 5% level if asymptotic
standard errors are used for inference. However, small sample standard errors computed from
a bootstrap simulation suggest that the coefficient κr is not statistically different from zero for
the entire sample.1 The dividend-price ratio does not forecast dividend growth at conventional
significance levels (third column). Thus, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the dividend-price
ratio forecasts neither dividend growth nor returns.
Rows 2 and 3 report the results for two non-overlapping samples that span the entire period:
1927-1991 and 1992-2004. We will justify this particular choice of subsamples in Section 3. The
estimates of κr display a remarkable pattern across subsamples: In both subsamples κr is much
larger than its estimate in the whole sample. In fact, the estimates are almost identical in the
two subsamples: .2353 in the 1927-1991 subsample compared to .2351 in the later 1992-2004
subsample. Yet, when we join the two subsamples, the point estimate drops to .094. In addition,
κr is strongly statistically significant in both subsamples but only marginally significant in the
whole sample. Confirming the instability of κr estimates, row 4 reports the results of a Chow
test, which rejects the null hypothesis of no structural break in 1991 at the 4% level. Finally,
the dividend growth forecasting relationship displays less instability, and the coefficient remains
insignificant in both subsamples.
1

Asymptotic standard errors may be a poor indicator of the estimation uncertainty in small samples, and the
p-values for the null of no predictability may be inaccurate. The asymptotic corrections advocated by Hansen and
Hodrick (1980) have poor small sample properties. Ang and Bekaert (2001) find that use of those standard errors
leads to over-rejection of the no-predictability null. The bootstrap exercise imposes the null of no predictability
and asks how likely it is to observe the estimated κr coefficients reported in the first column of Table 1. We
find that the small sample p-value for κr is 6.8% compared to an asymptotic p-value of 4.1%. We also conduct
a second bootstrap exercise to find the small-sample bias in the return coefficient. Consistent with Stambaugh
(1999), we find an upward bias. If the true value is .094, the bootstrap exercise estimates a coefficient of .115.
Detailed results are available upon request. The empirical size of tests based asymptotic and bootstrapped
standard errors tend to be larger than their nominal size if the regressor is highly persistent (e.g. Amihud,
Hurvich, and Wang (2005). Alternative tests with better size properties weaken the evidence for forecastability
with the dividend price ratio further.

6

The pattern of κr is not unique to the specific subsamples chosen. We obtain very similar
results when we use three non-overlapping subsamples: 1927-1954, 1955-1994, and 1995-2004
(bottom half of Table 1). Again, we find that the return predictability coefficient κr is estimated
to be much higher in each of the three subsamples than in the entire subsample. In row 5, the
predictability coefficient is .09, whereas it is .51, .38, and .53 in rows 6, 7, and 8 respectively.
Moreover, it is statistically significant in each subsample. Row 9 shows that we strongly reject
the joint null hypothesis of parameter stability in 1954 and 1994. For dividend growth, the
evidence is more mixed. We fail to reject the same null hypothesis of no breaks in 1954 and
1994, but the κd coefficient is marginally statistically different from zero in rows 7 and 8.
Finally, the last two columns repeat the analysis using returns in excess of a 90-day Treasury
bill rate instead of gross returns. The exact same findings hold for excess returns. In the rest of
the analysis, we proceed with gross returns only.
[Table 1 about here.]
We conclude that the forecasting relationship between returns and the dividend-price ratio
is unstable over time. Coefficient estimates of κr are almost identical in non-overlapping subsamples, but the point estimate for the whole sample is much lower than it is in each of the
subsamples. Next, we investigate what might explain this intriguing pattern of the regression
coefficients that links returns to past dividend-price ratios.

3

Steady-State Shifts and Forecasting

The macroeconomics literature has recently turned to models with persistent changes in fundamentals to explain the dramatic change in valuation ratios in the bull market of the 1990s. Most
such models imply a persistent decline in expected returns or an increase in the steady-state
growth rate of the economy. Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2004) argued that a persistent
decline in the volatility of aggregate consumption growth leads to a decline in the equity premium. Another class of models argues for persistent improvements in the degree of risk-sharing
among households or regions, either due to developments in the market for unsecured debt or the
market for housing-collateralized debt (Krueger and Perri (2005) and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005b)). In the model of Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005c), the improvement in
risk sharing implies a persistent decline in the equity premium. McGrattan and Prescott (2005)
argued that persistent changes in the tax code can explain the persistent decline in the equity
premium. Lastly, models of limited stock market participation argue that the gradual entry
of new participants has persistently depressed equity premia (Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Calvet,
Gonzalez-Eiras, and Sadini (2003), and Guvenen (2003)). Other models argue that there was
7

a persistent increase in the long-run growth rate of the economy in the 1990s (Quadrini and
Jermann (2003) and Jovanovic and Rousseau (2003)). The first set of models lower the longrun required return of equity (r), the last set of models raise the long-term growth rate of the
economy (d). A intuition based on the Gordon growth model implies that either effect lowers
the steady-state level of the dividend-price ratio dp. In this section, we augment the CampbellShiller framework for such changes in dp, we estimate these shifts in the data, and explore their
implications for return predictability.

3.1

Changes in the Mean of Price Ratios

The standard specification of stock returns and forecasting variables assumes that all processes
are stationary around a constant mean. For example, Stambaugh (1986, 1999), Mankiw and
Shapiro (1986), Nelson and Kim (1993), and Lewellen (1999) considered the following model:
r
rt+1 = r̄ + κr yt + τt+1

yt = ȳ + vt .

(3)
(4)

The mean of the forecasting variable yt , ȳ, is constant and the stochastic component vt is
assumed to be stationary, often specified as an AR(1) process. Means of financial ratios are
determined by properties of the steady-state of the economy. For example, the mean of the
log dividend-price ratio dp is a function of the growth rate d of log dividends and expected log
return r in steady-state:
dp = log(exp(r) − exp(d)) − d,
(5)
whereas the stochastic component depends on expected future deviations of returns and dividend
growth from their steady-state values (Campbell and Shiller (1988)):
dpt = dp + Et

∞
X
j=1



ρj−1 (rt+j − r) − (∆dt+j − d) ,

(6)

where ρ = (1 + exp(dp))−1 is a constant. Similar equations can be derived for other financial
ratios (e.g., Vuolteenaho (2000)). Berk, Green, and Naik (1999) show how stock returns and
book-to-market ratios are related in a general equilibrium model.
A crucial assumption is that the steady-state of the economy is constant over time: The
average long-run growth rate of the economy as well as the average long-run return of equity
are fixed and not allowed to change. However, if either the steady-state growth rate or expected
return were to change, the effects on financial ratios and their stochastic relationships with
returns would be profound. Even relatively small changes in long-run growth and/or expected
8

return have large effects on the mean of the dividend-price ratio, as can be seen from (5). The
effects of steady-state shifts on other valuation ratios, such as the earnings-price ratio and the
book-to-market ratio, are similar. In this paper, we entertain the possibility that the steady
change of the U.S. economy has indeed changed since 1926, and we study the effect of these
changes on the forecasting relationship of returns and price ratios.
A steady-state is characterized by long-run growth and expected return. Any short-term
deviation from steady-state is expected to be only temporary and the economy is expected to
return to its steady-state eventually. Thus, steady-state growth and expected return must be
constant in expectations, but the steady-state might shift unexpectedly. Correspondingly, we
assume that Et rt+j = rt , Et dt+j = dt , Et dpt+j = dpt .2
The log linear framework introduced above illustrates the effect of time-varying steady-states,
though none of our results depend on the accuracy of the approximation. Just as in the case with
constant steady-state, the log dividend-price ratio is the sum of the steady-state dividend-price
ratio and the discounted sum of expected returns minus expected dividend growth in excess of
steady-state growth and returns 3 :
dpt = dpt + Et

∞
X
j=1



(rt+j − rt ) − (∆dt+j − dt ) ,
ρj−1
t

(7)

where ρt = (1 + exp(dpt ))−1 . The important difference of (7) compared to (6) is that the
mean of the log dividend-price ratio is no longer constant. In fact, it not only varies over time
but it is non-stationary. If, for example, the steady-state growth rate increases permanently,
the steady-state dividend-price ratio decreases and the current log dividend-price ratio declines
permanently. While the log dividend-price ratio contains a non-stationary component it is
important to note that deviations of dpt from steady-states are stationary as long as deviations
of dividend growth and returns from their respective steady-states are stationary, an assumption
we maintain throughout the paper.4 In other words, the dividend-price ratio dpt itself contains
2

Although the log dividend-price ratio is a nonlinear function of steady-state returns and growth, we assume
that the steady-state log dividend-price ratio is also (approximately) a martingale: Et dpt+j = dpt . This assumption is justified for the specific processes for steady-state returns and growth that we will consider below.
Appendix C spells out a simple asset pricing model where the price-dividend ratio in levels follows a (bounded)
martingale. It shows that dp and d are approximate (bounded) martingales.
3
Appendix B presents a detailed derivation. Under our assumption, the log approximation in a model with
time-varying steady-states is as accurate as the approximation for the corresponding model with constant steadystate. In fact, the ex-ante expressions of the approximate log dividend-price ratio (6) and (7) are exactly the
same. Only their ex-post values are different in periods when the steady-state shifts.
4
Of course, in a finite sample it is impossible to conclusively distinguish a truly permanent change from
an extremely persistent one. Thus, our insistence of non-stationarity might seem misguided. However, the
important insight is that the dividend-price ratio is not only a function of (less) persistent changes in expected
growth rates and expected returns that could potentially have cyclical sources but is also affected by either
extremely persistent or permanent structural changes in the economy. This distinction turns out be very useful,

9

a non-stationary component dpt but the appropriately demeaned dividend-price ratio dpt − dpt
is stationary. The implications for forecasting regressions with the dividend-price ratio are
immediate. First, in the presence of steady-state shifts, a non-stationary dividend-price ratio
is not a well-defined predictor and this non-stationarity could be the cause for the empirical
patterns described in the previous section. Second, the dividend-price ratio must be adjusted
to remove the non-stationary component dpt to render a stationary process.
While we emphasized the effect of steady-state shifts on the dividend-price ratio, the intuition
carries through to other financial ratios. Changes in the steady-state have similar effects on the
earnings-price ratio and the book-to-market ratio. However, other permanent changes in the
economy, such as changes in payout policies, could affect different ratios differently. In the
following section, we provide evidence that steady-state shifts have occurred in our sample and
propose simple methods to adjust financial ratios for such shifts.

3.2

steady-state Shifts in the Dividend-Price Ratio

Has the steady-state relationship of growth rates and expected returns shifted since the beginning
of our sample in 1926? If so, have these shifts affected the stochastic relationship between returns
and price ratios? In this section we use econometric techniques that exploit the entire sample to
detect changes in the steady-state. In section 5, we study how investors in real-time might have
assessed the possibility of shifts in the steady-states without the benefit of knowing the whole
sample. In both cases, there is strong empirical evidence in favor of changes in the steady-state
and we find that such changes have dramatic effects on the forecasting relationship of returns
and price ratios. We suggest a simple adjustment to the dividend-price ratio and revisit the
forecasting equations from Section 2. We first study shifts in the dividend-price ratios in detail
and consider alternative ratios in section 4.
Our econometric specification is directly motivated by the framework that allows for changes
in the steady-state laid out in the previous section. Equation (7) implies that the log dividendprice ratio is the sum of a non-stationary component and a stationary component. In this
section, we model the non-stationary component as a constant that is subject to rare structural
breaks as in Perron (1989).
The full line in each of the panels of Figure 2 shows the log dividend-price ratio from 1927
to 2004. Visually, the series displays evidence of non-stationarity. Especially the bull market of
the 1990s seems hard to reconcile with a stationary model. The dividend-price ratio has risen
as we will show in the remainder of the paper. In this sense our assumption of true non-stationarity can be
regarded to include “extremely persistent but stationary.” In a finite sample, the conclusions will be the same in
either setting. The distinction of “permanent” versus “extremely persistent” is important, however, for structural
asset pricing models because permanent shocks might have much larger impact on prices than very persistent
ones.

10

since, but at the end of our sample in 2004, prices would have to fall an additional 46% for the
dividend-price ratio to return to its historical mean. A first explanation we entertain is that
the bull market of the 1990s represents a sequence of extreme realizations from a stationary
distribution.
[Figure 2 about here.]
The solid line in Figure 3 shows the smoothed empirical distribution of the log dividendprice ratio dpt . This distribution has a fat left tail, mainly due to the observations in the last 15
years. To investigate whether this is a typical plot from a stationary distribution, we conduct
two exercises. Following Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Stambaugh (1999), Campbell
and Yogo (2002), Ang and Bekaert (2001), and many others we estimate an AR(1) process
for the log dividend-price ratio. First, in a bootstrap exercise, we draw from the empirical
distribution with replacement. The smoothed bootstrap distribution is the dash-dotted line
in the figure. Second, we compute the density of dpt using Monte Carlo simulations from an
estimated AR(1) model with normal innovation. This density is plotted as the dashed line. The
graph shows that neither the bootstrap nor the Monte Carlo can replicate the fat left tail that
we observe in the data. Interestingly, the stationary model also cannot generate the right tail
of the empirical distribution. In summary, it is unlikely that the dpt data sample from 1927 to
2004 was generated by a stationary distribution.
[Figure 3 about here.]
An alternative explanation is that the long-run mean of the log dividend-price ratio is subject
to structural breaks. To investigate this possibility, we test the null hypothesis of no break
against the alternative hypotheses of one or two breaks with unknown break dates. Table 2
reports sup-F test statistics suggested by Perron (1989). The null hypothesis of no break is
strongly rejected (the p-value is less than 1%) in favor of a break in 1991 or two breaks in
1954 and 1994. While the evidence against no breaks is very strong, the question whether the
dividend-price ratio is subject to one or two breaks does not have a clear answer. The sup-F
test of the null of a single break against the alternative of two breaks is rejected at the 10% level
but not at the 5% level. The null of two breaks against the alternative of three breaks is not
rejected (not shown). Alternatively, one can use an information criterion to select the number
of breaks. Both the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and the modified Schwartz criterion
proposed by Liu, Wu, and Zidek (1997) (LWZ) favor two breaks. In summary, the data seem to
strongly favor one or two breaks, rather than zero or three, but the relative evidence for one or
two breaks is not as strong and only slightly in favor of two breaks.
[Table 2 about here.]
11

The table also reports the estimated change in the log dividend-price ratio before and after
the break. In the one-break case, the change in dp is -.86, whereas in the two-break case, the
first change in 1954 is -.37 and the second change is -.78. The two plots in the left column
of Figure 2 overlay the long-run mean dp on the raw dp series. For now, we are agnostic as
to whether the break(s) is (are) due to a change in the long-run mean of dividend growth or
expected returns, or a combination of the two. We return to this question later. It is worth
emphasizing, however, that the date(s) of the shift in the dividend-price ratio is (are) consistent
with the breaks in the equity premium identified by Pastor and Stambaugh (2001).
This result motivates us to construct two adjusted dividend-price series, one for the onebreak case and one for the two-break case. For each, we simply subtract the mean in the
relative subsample(s). In the one-break case with break date τ , the adjusted ratio is defined as
f
dpt =

(

dpt − dp1
dpt − dp2

for t = 1, ..., τ
for t = τ + 1, ..., T ,

(8)

where dp1 is the sample mean for 1927-1991 and dp2 is the sample mean for 1992-2004. The
adjusted dp ratio in the two-break case is defined analogously. The right column of Figure 2
illustrates this procedure graphically.
The bottom half of Table 2 compares the autocorrelation properties of the unadjusted and
adjusted dp series. As is well known, the raw dp series is very persistent. The first and second
order autocorrelations are .91 and .81. The null hypothesis of a unit root cannot be rejected,
according to an Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test (third column). In contrast, the two
adjusted f
dp series are much less persistent; the first order autocorrelation drops to .77 and .61,
respectively. The null of a unit root in the adjusted series is rejected at the 4% and 1% levels.
Interestingly, the volatility of the adjusted series is only half as large as for the adjusted series
(last column). This substantially alleviates the burden on standard asset pricing models to
match the volatility of the price-dividend ratio, once the non-stationary nature of the mean dp
ratio has been taken into account.

3.3

Forecasting with the Adjusted Dividend-Price Ratio

We now revisit the return and dividend growth predictability equations (1) and (2), but use
the adjusted dividend-price ratios instead of the raw series as predictor variable. The second
and fourth columns of Table 1 show the estimation results of the return and dividend growth
predictability regressions using f
dp, respectively. Rows 1-4 are for the one-break case; rows 5-9
are for the two-break case. Starting with the one-break case, because the adjusted dividendprice ratio is the same as the raw series with each subsample, the results in rows 2 and 3
12

are unchanged. But now in row 1, we find that the adjusted dividend-price ratio significantly
predicts stock returns. The coefficient for the entire sample is .235, which is almost identical
to the estimates in the two subsamples. Thus the low point estimate for κr in the first column
was due to averaging across regimes. Not taking the non-stationarity of the dp ratio into
account severely biases the point estimate for κr downwards. Furthermore, row 4 shows that
the evidence for a break in the forecasting relationship between returns and the dividend-price
ratio has disappeared. The null hypothesis of parameter stability can no longer be rejected
when using f
dp. The full sample regression R2 is 10%, more than twice the value of the first
column. The results for dividend growth predictability remain largely unchanged. This is not
surprising given that we did not detect much instability in the relationship between ∆dt+1 and
dpt to begin with.
The rolling window estimates confirm this result.5 The middle panel of Figure 1 shows that
the coefficient κr is much more stable in the one-break case than in the no-break case (top panel).
In particular, its value in the 1990s hovers around .3, compared to 0 without the adjustment.
Likewise, the regression R2 is also more stable and does not drop off in the 1990s. The same
exercise shows that the dividend growth relationship is stable and that κd never moves far from
zero (not shown). The evidence for dividend growth predictability is weak at best.6
The bottom panel of Table 1 uses f
dp, adjusted for breaks in 1954 and 1994. The full sample

estimate for κr is now .455 (row 5) and highly significant.7 The full sample regression R2 is
22%. In contrast, dividend growth is not predictable. The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows that
e adjusted for two breaks. The point
the rolling estimates for κr are very stable when we use dp
estimate hovers around .4 and the return regression R2 goes up as high as 40%. Moreover, the
Chow test in row 9 finds no evidence for instability in either forecasting equation.
We conclude that taking changes in the long-run mean of the dividend-price ratio into account is crucial for forecasts of stock returns. Forecasting with the unadjusted dividend-price
ratio series results in coefficient instability in the forecasting regression and unreliable inference
(insignificance in small samples, and results depending on the subsample). These disconcerting
properties are due to a non-stationary component that shifts the mean of the dividend-price
ratio. In Section 3.1 we extended the model to allow for such non-stationarity in dp. In this
5

In the rolling window estimation we assume that the break in dp is caused by a break in mean expected
returns r̄. The alternative assumption that the break is in the long-run growth rate of the economy ḡ gives
identical results.
6
The lack of predictive power of the dividend-price ratio for dividend growth does not imply that dividend
growth is not forecastable because any correlated movement in expected returns and expected dividend growth
cancels in d − p, as shown in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005).
7
A bootstrap analysis confirms that the small sample p-value (asymptotic p-value) is 1.11% (0.00%) in the
one-break case and 0.00% (0.00%) in the two-break case. A second bootstrap exercise shows that the small
sample bias in the coefficients is small relative to their magnitude. In the one-break case, the bias is .019 (we
estimate .254 when the true coefficient is .235). In the two-break case, the bias is .013 (we estimate .468 when
the true value is .455). Detailed results are available upon request.

13

section we examined a simple form of non-stationarity, a structural break. Appropriately adjusting the dividend-price ratio for the structural break strengthens the evidence for return
predictability, but not dividend growth predictability. The predictability coefficient is stable
over time and least squares coefficient estimates are highly significant. Finally, the in-sample
return predictability evidence stands up to the usual problem of persistent regressor bias (Nelson
and Kim (1993), Stambaugh (1999), Ang and Bekaert (2001) and Valkanov (2003)) because the
adjusted dividend-price ratio is much less persistent.

4

Other Financial Ratios

While the dividend-price ratio has been the classic prediction variable at least in the academic
literature, it is useful to investigate to what extent our results are robust to a different measure of
payouts. Lamont (1998) finds that the log earnings-price ratio ep forecasts returns. We find very
much the same patterns for the earnings-price ratio as for the dividend-price ratio. The earnings
data start in 1946 and are described in Appendix A. The book-to-market ratio is computed from
the same earnings and dividend data using the clean-surplus method (Vuolteenaho (2000)).
[Table 3 about here.]
Table 3 shows that the null hypothesis of no structural break in the ep ratio is strongly
rejected in favor of one or two breaks (first row). The Perron test estimates a 1990 break date
in the one-break case and 1953 and 1994 break dates in the two-break case. These line up
almost perfectly with the dp break dates in Table 2. One other often used valuation ratio, the
log book-to-market ratio (bm) also displays strong evidence of two breaks with similar break
dates in 1953 and 1990 (row 2). Clearly, there is evidence for a permanent or strongly persistent
component in all valuation ratios.
Some researchers have argued that there were persistent changes in firms’ payout policies in the 1990s and have argued to adjust dividend-price ratios for repurchases (Fama and
French (2001), Grullon and Michaely (2002), and Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts
(2004)). First, we find no evidence for a break in the payout ratio de = d − e at the 10% level
(row 3 of Table 2). This is consistent with the view that both dp and ep contain structural
breaks. Second, even if there was a break in the de ratio and we took the point estimate for
de in the subsamples, we would find that more than three-fourths of the change in the mean
dividend-price ratio comes from a change in the mean earnings-price ratio and less than onefourth from a change in de (dp = ep+de). In particular, for our S&P 500 sample from 1946-2004
with a 1991 break date, we find a change in dp of -.81, a change in ep of -.63, and a change in
de of -.18.
14

To further investigate the role of repurchases and the role of a changing composition in CRSP,
we consider two additional valuation ratios. First, we consider the CRSP universe without
NASDAQ stocks. Arguably, removing NASDAQ stocks goes a long way towards eliminating
new economy and non-dividend paying companies that became more prevalent in the 1990s.8
We compute the dividend-price ratio, dpnas , and the dividend growth for this group. This time
series has properties very similar to those of the series with the NASDAQ. The Perron tests in
row 5 of Table 3 show a break of -75% in 1992, close to the -86% change in the full sample series
in 1991. For the two-break case, the break dates and magnitudes are also very similar: 1954
and 1995 and -35% and -70%.
Second, we use the Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2004) repurchase yield
data, available from 1971 onwards, and construct a corrected dividend-price ratio and dividend
growth rate series. We label this repurchase-adjusted dividend price series dprep .9 The case
favored by the data is a three-break case with break dates in 1957, 1973, and 1990 (see last row
of Table 3). We show below that these two adjustments do not materially affect our predictability
results with the standard dividend-price ratio presented earlier. This leads us to conclude that
structural changes in payout policies and/or the composition of firms in the 1990s can only
explain a small part of the change in the dividend-price ratio.
We first turn to the forecasting regressions with the earnings-price ratio. When we use the
earnings-price ratio as a return predictor, we obtain similar results to what we reported for
the dividend-price ratio in Table 1. The first row of Table 4 shows that when the unadjusted
earnings-price ratio is the independent variable, the slope coefficient is .119. Just as in the
dividend-price ratio regressions, this coefficient displays parameter instability among subsamples: The full sample point estimate is lower than the estimates in all subsamples, and the Chow
test of no break has a p-value of only .15 (not shown). The next two columns show that this bias
is due to averaging over subsamples. Once we use the adjusted ep
e ratio, the instability disappears and the full sample point estimate increases to .215 in both the one-break and two-break
case. These coefficients are twice the size of the ones obtained with the unadjusted ep ratio and
are measured precisely. The regression R2 almost doubles. The slope coefficient is very similar
to the one we found in the first panel of Table 1: κr = .235. One difference from the results
8

Fama and French (2001) document that the fraction of non-financial, non-utility firms that paid dividends
declined by almost 45% between 1978 and 1999. However, most of that decline is attributable to new firms and
to small firms. They write: “The characteristics of dividend payers (large profitable firms) do not change much
after 1978.” We take this group to be the value-weighted CRSP index without NASDAQ stocks. This series
starts to deviate from the full sample series in 1973. We verified that the dividend growth rate of this set of firms
did not change in the 1990s. Average dividend growth from 1927-1991 was 5.45%. Average dividend growth
from 1992-2004 was 5.46%.
9
We note that this is just one possible adjustment. The correct adjustment depends on the investor under
consideration. Here, an investor’s cash flows are adjusted for aggregate repurchases, but not for seasoned equity
offerings nor initial public offerings.

15

in Table 1 is that the adjusted earnings-price ratio also significantly forecasts earnings growth,
with a negative sign (not shown).
[Table 4 about here.]
For the unadjusted lagged log book-to-market ratio bm = b−m, we find that the predictability coefficient κr is only marginally significant. The point estimate is .07, lower than the point
estimates in the subsamples 1927-1952 (.26), 1953-1990 (.44), and 1991-2004 (.72), all of which
are strongly significant. Again, this downward bias is due to averaging over the break(s). The
f series as regressor
full sample point estimate increases to .255 with the one-break adjusted bm
f series. The regression R2 increases from 3% in the
and to .308 with the two-break adjusted bm
first column to 19% in the third column.
The return predictability findings for dpnas and dprep are also similar to the benchmark dp
results. First, using dpnas without break adjustment, we find a point estimate for κr of .11. This
point estimate is lower than in either subsample (.24 for 1927-1992 and .30 in 1993-2004). Once
we use the break-adjusted series, the point estimate more than doubles to .250. Just as for the
standard dp ratio, the downward bias comes from averaging over the break. The break-adjusted
point estimate is close to the .235 we found for the sample that includes the NASDAQ. We
obtain further increases in the point estimate and the R2 in the two-break case. Second, using
dprep , the full sample return predictability coefficient is .19, higher than the .09 for the standard
dp series, but again lower than in either subsample (.25 in 1927-1990 and .53 in 1991-2004).
Clearly, adjusting for repurchases improves the forecasting power of the dp ratio. However,
adjusting for the breaks is important and further strengthens the case for predictability. In the
preferred case of three breaks, the predictability coefficient is .58, three times its unadjusted
value. The regression R2 is also three times higher.
We conclude that the other financial ratios indicate a predictability pattern similar to that
of the dividend-price ratio. Without an adjustment for the change in their long-run mean
and the relationship between one-year ahead returns and the financial ratios is unstable over
time. However, once we filter out the non-stationary component, we find a stable forecasting
relationship and a large predictability coefficient. The fact that the results are so similar for
earnings and dividend data suggests that an explanation that exclusively rests on changing
payout policies misses the most important structural changes in the economy: changes in longrun growth rate or long-run expected returns.

5

Out-Of-Sample Predictability

The in-sample predictability results presented so far used a break adjustment constructed from
the entire data sample. In this section we investigate how an investor who forms an adjusted
16

dividend-price ratio in real time fares in predicting out-of-sample returns. We compare the outof-sample forecasting properties of the adjusted dividend-price ratio to the unadjusted series
and the random walk model. We find that a real time dividend-price ratio adjustment yields
uniformly smaller prediction errors compared to the unadjusted series and slightly larger forecast
errors than the random walk model.
Why does the real time prediction errors fail to beat the random walk model? In real time
an investor faces two challenges. First, she has to estimate the timing of a break. Second, if she
detects a new break, she has to estimate the new mean after the break occurred. If the new break
occurred towards the end of the sample that the investor has access to, the new mean can only
be estimated using a small number of observations and is subject to significant uncertainty. To
investigate which issue is responsible for the deterioration of the out of sample forecasting power,
we consider two additional exercises. In the first exercise, the investor predicts out-of-sample
using the ex-post adjusted dividend-price ratio series from section 3.1. In this case, we endow the
investor with information about the break dates and estimated means from the entire sample,
thus this case is not a pure out-of-sample test. However, it sets an informative benchmark for the
analysis of the pure out-of-sample forecasts. In a second exercise, we consider a regime-switching
model where the investor estimates the break dates (regime switching probabilities) in real time,
but not the regime means. Again, this case is not a pure out-of-sample forecast since we endow
the investor with information about the means that stems from the entire sample. Yet, it allows
us to study the relative difficulty of estimating the break dates versus estimating the means
relative to the pure out-of-sample forecasts and the ex-post adjusted dividend price ratio.
The conclusions from these two exercises are that (i) the estimation of the break dates in
real time is not crucial and the resulting prediction errors are smaller than for the random walk
model, and (ii) that the estimation of the magnitude of the break in the mean dividend-price
ratio entails substantial uncertainty, and is ultimately responsible for the failure of the real
time out-of-sample predictions to beat the random walk. These findings can explain the lack of
out-of-sample predictability documented by Goyal and Welch (2004).

5.1

Real-Time Dividend Price Adjustments

Before showing the estimation results, we confirm our earlier conclusion (based on ex-post data,
see Figure 3) that it is extremely unlikely that the dividend-price ratio sample is drawn from
a stationary distribution, based on real-time data only. Figure 4 shows a recursive (i.e., realtime) estimation of the empirical distribution of the log dividend-price ratio. In each year, the
investor estimates an AR(1) model for dp, using data up to the current year. She then bootstraps
from the available sample to compute the empirical distribution of the log dividend-price ratio.
Each year she recomputes the 2.5, 5, 95, and 97.5 percentiles of the bootstrapped distribution
17

(dashed and dotted lines in the figure). The figure also plots the realized dividend-price ratio, in
deviation from its recursive sample mean (full line). By 1958, the investor is quite confident that
the realized dividend-price ratio is far below the mean; it hits the 2.5 percentile of the empirical
distribution. Likewise, in 1994, the observed dividend-price ratio falls in the 2.5% tail of the
distribution. Between 1995 and 1999, the investor is almost certain that the observed dividendprice ratio has not been drawn from a stationary distribution. Interestingly, these ‘crossing’
dates are almost identical to the break dates estimated in the previous sections. This shows
that the permanent changes in the dividend-price ratio that were identified by the ex-post break
tests do not rely on having the benefit of the entire sample through 2004. Even an investor in
real-time would have concluded that extreme observations of dividend-price ratios are unlikely
to be generated by a stationary process with constant parameters.
[Figure 4 about here.]
Next we construct a real-time adjustment of the dividend-price ratio that can be used in outof-sample forecasting tests. In each year T 0 ≤ T , the investor estimates the Perron structural
break test using data available up to year T 0 using one of the three tests: the sequential sup-F
test with a 10% critical value, the BIC criterion, and the LWZ criterion. Given the break dates
and corresponding means, the real-time adjustment of the dividend-price ratio is analogous to
the adjustment using the entire sample in (8), with the exception that only data up to date T 0
P
instead of T are used in the estimation. Denote this corrected ratio c
dpt,T 0 , t = 1, ..., T 0 . The
out-of-sample return forecast for period T 0 + 1 is then computed from a regression of returns
P
P
dpt,T 0 .
rt+1 on c
dpt,T 0 for t = 1, ..., T 0 − 1 and the currently observed adjusted dividend-price ratio c
To gauge the relative difficulties of estimating the timing of a break versus the estimation
of the means, we also a “pseudo real-time adjustment based on a Hamilton (1989) regimeswitching model in real-time. The dividend-price ratio is assumed to follow an AR(1) with a
different mean in either two regimes (one-break case) or three regimes (two-break case). While
the probability of being currently in a given regime is estimated in real time, the means in the
different regimes are estimated using the entire sample.
The top panel of Figure 5 shows the real-time estimate of the probability that the dividendprice ratio is drawn from the low regime, when two regimes are considered. Starting in 1990, the
investor puts non-zero probability on a shift to the low d − p regime. By 1995, she is more than
50% certain that the shift occurred. The dp estimates for the two regimes coincide with our
ex-post estimates because they use the entire data sample. When she considers three regimes
instead, the investor increases the probability of a switch from the high to the middle dp regime
in 1954. By 1960 she is more than 50% certain that the first shift occurred (see middle panel of
Figure 5). In 1990, she starts to attribute probability mass to the low-p regime, and by 1996, she
is more than 50% confident that the economy left the middle-dp regime for the low-dp regime.
18

H
The Hamilton-adjusted dividend price ratio c
dpt is constructed by subtracting the average of
the means of each regime weighted by the time-t probability of each regime from dpt .

[Figure 5 about here.]

5.2

Out-Of-Sample Forecast Errors

We follow the approach taken by Goyal and Welch (2003) and predict one-year ahead returns
with the lagged price-dividend ratio. The first forecasting regression uses 20 years of data, so
that the first forecasted return is the one in 1946. For all future years we use expanding windows
and compare three different forecasters. The first is the current sample mean return implied by
the “naive random walk model. The second is the standard unadjusted dividend-price ratio
dp. The third is the break-adjusted dividend-price ratio. To explain the results, we use several
alternatives for the break-adjusted series.
Panel 1 of Table 5 reports the mean absolute forecast error and the root mean-squared
forecasting error. Comparing the second to the first row, we confirm the result of Goyal and
Welch (2003): The random walk model has superior out-of-sample properties compared to the
standard dividend-price ratio specification. The latter’s prediction errors are almost 1% per
year higher.
[Table 5 about here.]
P

The third through fifth rows report the real-time adjusted dividend-price ratio c
dp obtained
from the Perron procedure. For all three criteria for dating the breaks, sup-F , BIC and LWZ, the
prediction errors of the adjusted series are lower than those obtained from suing the unadjusted
series (row 2) but the out-of-sample prediction errors are larger than for the random walk model.
The sequential sup-F test has the lowest mean absolute error (MAE) while the BIC criterion
delivers the lowest root mean squared error (RMSE).
It is instructive to contrast these results with those from the Hamilton adjusted series and
the ex-post adjusted series. Rows six and seven in Panel 1 of Table 5 show that the use of the
ex-post adjusted dividend-price ratios f
dp substantially reduces the forecasting error. The MAE
and RMSE of the dividend-price ratio adjusted for a single break in 1991 are lower than those
for the random walk model. The out-of-sample forecasting power of the dividend-price ratio
adjusted for two breaks in 1954 and 1994 is dramatically improved compared to the unadjusted
ratio and to the random walk model. The RMSE and MAE are reduced by 12-15% compared to
the random walk model. The out-of-sample prediction errors with the Hamilton adjusted series
H
c
dp are only slightly higher than those with the ex-post break adjustment. Row nine (eight)
H
shows that the RMSE using c
dp in the three-regime (two-regime) case is 15.09% (15.90%), lower
19

than the random walk model (16.05%) and the model with the unadjusted dp ratio (16.85%).
The same is true for the MAE. So, using the Hamilton break-adjusted dividend-price ratio to
predict returns also leads to substantially lower errors than the random walk model.
Where does the discrepancy between the Hamilton and the Perron procedures come from?
In the Hamilton adjustment, the investor estimates the probability of each regime in real time
but has access to the entire time series to estimate the mean dp ratio in the different regimes.10
In the Perron procedure, the investor not only estimates the break dates in real-time, but also
the long-run mean in the current regime. Clearly, estimating that new long-run mean based on
a few data points incurs a lot of measurement error. For example, if the Perron investor in 2001
P
detects a break in 1995, she only has six data points to estimate the new dp . The difficulty in
estimating this mean is what accounts for the increase in prediction error between the Hamilton
and the Perron procedures.
In sum, we reconcile strong in-sample predictability with the findings of lack of out-of-sample
predictability. We show that difficulties in estimating the size of the break are responsible for
the lack of out-of-sample predictability.

6

Long-Horizon Predictability

An important component of the empirical work on return predictability uses long-horizon regressions. In this section we provide a framework for analyzing long-horizon predictability. We
use the ex-post dividend-price ratio as the predictor and derive theoretical restrictions that link
return and dividend growth to lagged dividend-price ratios at different horizons. Rather than
estimating regressions for various horizons separately, the advantage of this approach is that
fewer parameters have to be estimated. Moreover, the restrictions impose that the estimates
across horizons are consistent with each other.
Recall the return and dividend growth predictability equations (1) and (2)
r
dpt + τt+1
r̃t+1 = κr f
d
,
dpt + τt+1
∆d˜t+1 = κd f

(9)
(10)

where variables with a tilde are appropriately demeaned and stationary. Subtracting (10) from
(9) and using the log-linear approximation for log returns r̃t+1 = f
dpt − ρf
dpt+1 + ∆d˜t+1 yields the
10

A satisfactory resolution that avoids any look-ahead bias in the Hamilton model would be to conduct a full
Bayesian analysis in which the investor estimates the number of regimes, the regime switching dates, and their
associated long-run means based on real-time available data and prior information. Pettenuzzo and Timmermann
(2004) have worked out such an estimation in the context of an asset allocation problem.

20

implied AR(1) process for the dividend-price ratio in (11):
dp
f
dpt+1 = φf
dpt + τt+1
, where

1 − ρφ = κr − κd

(11)
(12)

dp
r
d
. The model imposes a non-linear present
− τt+1
where the innovations are linked by ρτt+1
= τt+1
value restriction (12) on the predictability coefficients κr and κd . Because ρ < 1 and stationarity
implies |φ| < 1, κr − κd must be positive. This is another way of saying that either returns
(κr 6= 0) or dividend growth (κd 6= 0) have to be forecastable (or both). Most researchers work
with equations (9) and (11); we work with (9) and (10) instead because long-horizon restrictions
are more easily derived in this case. Iterating forward on equations (9) and (10), we obtain the
(annualized) H-period dividend growth and return forecasting equations
H
1 X
r
r̃t+j = κr (H) f
dpt + τt,t+H
H j=1

(13)

H
1 X ˜
d
,
∆dt+j = κd (H) f
dpt + τt,t+H
H j=1

(14)

where


1 1 − φH
κd (H) = κd
H
1−φ


1 1 − φH
.
κr (H) = κr
H
1−φ

(15)
(16)

Let N be the number of horizons H > 1. Then the joint system of one-year ahead and H-year
ahead predictability regressions for returns and dividend growth contains 2 + 2N equations but
only two free parameters (κd , κr ). The parameter φ is implied by the present value constraint
(12). The typical approach in the literature is to estimate univariate long-horizon return predictability equations without imposing these restrictions. Instead, we estimate the entire system
of long-horizon return and dividend growth regressions jointly. This estimation procedure not
only takes the high correlation of return regression coefficients at different horizons, pointed
out by Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2005), explicitly into account. It also takes the
present value relationship (12) explicitly into account.
The estimation routine we describe below finds parameters to match the entire ‘term structure’ of univariate predictability coefficients. Figure 6 illustrates this procedure for H =
{1, 3, 5, 7, 10}. The top panel plots the univariate predictability coefficients obtained from
standard OLS regressions of H-year ahead returns and dividend growth on the unadjusted
21

dividend-price ratio dp, as well the predictability coefficients (κd (H), κr (H)) implied by the
joint estimation of the system of equations. To match the pattern of the ten OLS predictability
coefficients, the optimization routine chooses a value for κr above the value from the one-year
ahead univariate regression.
[Figure 6 about here.]
We start by estimating the one-period ahead equations for returns and dividend growth (910). These are the same equations we estimated in Section 3.3, but the additional restriction
provides two new insights. First, the estimation delivers a value for the autocorrelation coefficient
of the dividend-price ratio φ because we impose the present value constraint (12). Second, we
use the break adjusted series f
dp from Section 3 in the estimation.

Because return and dividend growth series were demeaned by their sample averages, the
previous sections implicitly assumed a break in dp without associated break in r or d. The
model tells us that a break in dp must be associated with a break in either r or d, or both. First,
we assume that d is constant and focus on changes in the expected returns, consistent with the
evidence on breaks in the equity premium in Pastor and Stambaugh (2001). The change in r̄
implied by the the change in dp can be inferred from r̄t = (1 + d) exp(dpt ) + d. The top panel
of Table 6 shows how large the change in r is (row 2) corresponding to the change in the mean
dividend-price ratio in the data (row 1). The left panel is for the one-break case, the right panel
for the two-break case. The observed change in dpt implies a decline in mean expected returns
of 2.6% in 1991 or a dual decline of 1.7% in 1954 and 2% in 1994, assuming long-run dividend
growth did not change. Alternatively, it can stem from an increase in long-run dividend growth
of 2.5% in 1991 or a dual increase of 1.6% in 1954 and 2% in 1994, when mean expected returns
are held constant. In the results reported below, we choose to correct rt , but this choice turns
out to be unimportant for the point estimates.11 The second panel reports the change in the
mean earnings-price ratio in the various subsamples, as well as the implied change in the longrun mean return or long-run mean dividend growth rate. Appendix A describes how the latter
two are computed. We find that the change in the mean return of -2.47% that accounts for the
change in the earnings-price ratio ep (bottom panel) is very similar to the -2.60% change that
accounted for the change in the dividend-price ratio dp (top panel). The same is true when the
long-run growth rate does all the adjustment.
[Table 6 about here.]
11

The reason is that returns and dividend growth are very volatile, compared to the change in their mean
implied by the change in dp. For the same reason, the results reported below are virtually identical if we assume
that the break takes place in d instead. This validates the results in Section 3.3.

22

Panel A of Table 7 reports the estimation of the one-year ahead system. Row 1 uses the
unadjusted dp series, whereas rows 2 and 3 use the adjusted series f
dp for the one-break and
two-break case respectively. The GMM estimation uses the OLS normal conditions to estimate
κd and κr . Therefore, the point estimates are identical to the ones reported in Table 1. Three
differences are worth pointing out. First, the adjustment in r̄ delivers slightly lower standard
errors for κr in rows 2 and 3. Second, as foreshadowed by Table 2, the point estimates for φ are
substantially lower when we use the adjusted dividend-price ratio: .81 and .69 in rows 2 and 3
compared to .95 in row 1. Third, the first number in the last column reports the violation of
the present value constraint (12) by the univariate (OLS) coefficient estimates κd,ols and κr,ols ,
expressed in the same units as κd and κr . Row 1 shows that using the unadjusted dp ratio leads
to violations of the present value constraint. They are half the size of the estimated κr . Yet,
when we use the adjusted dp ratio, constraint (12) is satisfied.
[Table 7 about here.]
Next, we estimate the one-period ahead equations for returns and dividend growth (9-10)
jointly with the long-horizon regressions (13-14). We select a small number (N = 2) of longhorizon moments, corresponding to H = {1, 3, 5}. The joint system of one-year, three-year, and
five-year ahead predictability regressions for returns and dividend growth contains 2 + 2N = 6
equations and 2N = 4 restrictions. Panel B of Table 7 reports the results.
The point estimates for (κd , κd ) are similar to those obtained from the one-year ahead system in panel A. Row 4, which uses the unadjusted dp ratio, fails to find evidence for return
predictability or dividend growth predictability at the 5% level. The point estimate falls from
.094 in panel A to .068 in panel B. Using long-horizon information makes the case for return predictability weaker when the unadjusted dp series is used. Furthermore, the estimate for φ = .99
and its standard error indicate that we cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in the
dividend-price ratio.12
Results using adjusted series reported in rows 5 and 6 are quite different. Once we use the
adjusted ratio f
dp, we find strong evidence for return predictability. The point estimates remain
large: .210 in the one-break case and .409 in the two-break case. Moreover, the asymptotic
standard errors on κr are reduced. The reason is that we use restrictions of the term structure
of predictability coefficients that cannot be uncovered by estimating the long-horizon moments
in isolation; imposing these constraints improves the inference on κr and κd . Put differently, the
univariate OLS long-horizon coefficients violate the present value constraint. The first number
in the last column reports the average violation across the three constraints (the RMSE); it is
19% in row 1. This violation is lower in rows 5 and 6. The second number in the last column
12

The standard error of φ is implied by the estimates for κd and κr through (12) and computed using the delta
method.

23

reports the average moment violation (RMSE) and measures the degree to which the imposed
restrictions are satisfied. In row 5, the average moment violation is only 8.5%, less than half as
big as in row 4.
The middle and bottom panels of Figure 6 graphically illustrate the long-horizon estimation
results with the adjusted dividend-price ratio for the larger {1, 3, 5, 7, 10}-year system. First,
the one-period coefficients are very similar to the ones we reported for the {1, 3, 5}-year system.
Second, the two panels show that when the adjusted dividend-price ratio is used, the pattern
of GMM long-horizon regression slopes generated by our model lines up almost perfectly with
the univariate OLS regression slopes. Put differently, the normal conditions for the long-horizon
moments are satisfied at the model-implied long-horizon predictability coefficients. This contrasts with the first panel, which is for the unadjusted dp ratio. There, the OLS coefficients are
quite different from the GMM estimates. The correction supports both our specification and
our main argument.
The results for the {1, 3, 5}-year and {1, 3, 5, 10}-year systems are representative of the results
we found for different numbers of long-horizon moments and choices of horizons. Imposing longhorizon information confirms the results of the earlier sections: Returns are predictable by the
dividend-price ratio, once its non-stationary component is removed.

7

Monte Carlo Simulations

In this section, we provide further evidence that the model in (9-11) captures the moments of
the data well. We use a Monte Carlo exercise to show (i) that this model replicates the failures
that are found in the in-sample and out-of-sample predictability literature using the unadjusted
dp ratio, (ii) that it matches the moments once the dividend-price ratio is properly adjusted for
and after taking into account small sample inference issues.
For the Monte Carlo exercise, we specify a structural model for the joint behavior of expected
returns, expected dividend growth, and dividend growth innovations. In Appendix D, we derive
the regression residuals τ = (τ d , τ r , τ dp ) as functions of the structural innovations and show
how to identify the structural parameters from the parameters of the vector error correction
model (VECM) in equations (9-11). We back out the structural parameters from the previously
reported estimates of the VECM parameters and simulate the structural model generating 10,000
time series for returns, dividend growth and the dividend-price ratio of length T = 78, the same
length as the data. We then run univariate predictability equations on the model-generated
data and compare the parameter estimates to the true predictability coefficients and to the
data. The Monte Carlo exercise also serves as a way to investigate the small sample properties
of the regression coefficients. Appendix E describes the algorithm in detail.
24

We start by studying the properties of univariate return predictability regressions. The first
row of Table 8 reports the ‘true’ predictability coefficients for the one-year, three-year, and
five-year horizon equations, as well as the theoretical regression R2 .13 In the top panel, the true
parameters come from an estimation of the VECM that assumes a break in dp in 1991; in the
bottom panel we specify two breaks in 1954 and 1994.
The second and fourth rows report the same coefficients and R2 estimated on simulated data.
Row 2 uses the unadjusted dp ratio, and row 4 the adjusted f
dp to predict returns. The second row
shows that the model with the unadjusted dp ratio fails to detect the return predictability that
is present in the data. The simulation-based estimate of κr and the regression R2 are too small.
The regression R2 does not increase enough with the horizon. The one-year ahead coefficient
is not significant when we use the small-sample standard error (fourth column). Moreover,
this failure of the model matches the failure in the data. Row 3 shows the results of the same
univariate regressions in the data using the unadjusted dp ratio. The slope coefficients, standard
errors, and R2 line up closely with the results from the Monte Carlo simulation without break
adjustment.
In row 4, we adjust each Monte Carlo series for a break in 1991 (top panel) or two breaks in
1954 and 1994 (bottom panel). The predictability coefficients at all horizons now line up closely
with their true values. The model with adjusted dp ratio recovers the true predictability pattern
of row 1. Moreover, the predictability coefficients, their standard errors, and the regression
R2 from the model in row 4 match the ones from regressions of observed returns on observed
adjusted dividend-price ratios (row 5). Results for dividend growth regressions are not reported
but the simulations recover the lack of predictability in the true κd coefficients implied by the
VECM.
[Table 8 about here.]
Comparing row 4 to row 1, we notice that there is some small sample bias. In line with
the findings of Stambaugh (1999), the estimate for κr is upward biased. In the first panel, the
true value of the slope coefficient in the one-year ahead return regression is 222 versus .264 in
simulation, a bias of .042. At the five-year horizon, the upward bias is only .016. Likewise, the
R2 of the regression is slightly upward biased in the simulation: 10.5% versus 8.9% at one-year
horizon and 28% versus 25% at the five-year horizon. In the two-break case reported in the
second panel, the bias is smaller. The one-year ahead coefficient estimate is .483 versus the
true value of .456. The upward bias disappears at the five-year horizon. Overall, the bias is
small relative to the magnitude of the coefficients, and therefore does not affect our conclusions.
Finally, the small sample standard errors, averaged across Monte Carlo simulations of the same
13

As Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997) point out, there is no closed form solution for the long-horizon R2 .
We approximate it by simulating the structural model for 100,000 periods.

25

length of the data, are very similar to the asymptotic standard errors from the data (middle
columns).
Panels 2 and 3 of Table 5 report the out-of-sample prediction errors from a second Monte
Carlo exercise. We simulate the structural model under the null hypothesis that the data
generating process has one break in 1991 (panel 2) or has two breaks in 1954 and 1994 (panel
3). We compare the same three out-of-sample forecasting exercises as in the data (panel 1).
In addition, we look at the forecast errors when we only correct for the second break and not
the first one. The ‘true’ parameters in panels 2 and 3 are the same and were obtained from
the VECM parameters estimated under the assumption of two breaks in 1954 and 1994 for
the period 1947-2004, the same forecasting period as in panel 1. The details are shown in
Appendix E. The Monte Carlo exercise regenerates the pattern we found in the data. When the
unadjusted dividend-price ratio is used as a forecasting variable, the out-of-sample prediction
errors are large and close to the random walk errors. On the other hand, when we implement
the one-break or two-break adjustment in the model, the simulated data generate substantially
lower prediction errors, mimicking the improvement in the data.
The simple model (9-11) replicates the patterns of univariate one-year ahead and long-horizon
regression results in-sample as well as one-year ahead out-of-sample prediction errors found in
the data. In particular, it regenerates (i) the failures of using the unadjusted dp ratio as a
dp ratio.
predictor, and (ii) the successes of using the adjusted f

8

Conclusion

The macroeconomics literature has recently turned to models with persistent changes in fundamentals to explain the dramatic change in valuation ratios in the bull market of the 1990s.
Most such models imply a persistent decline in expected returns or a persistent increase in the
dividend growth rate. In this paper we argue that either of such changes leads to a persistent
decline in the mean of financial ratios. Such changes in the mean of valuation ratios have important effects on estimation and inference of return forecasting regressions. We consider various
econometric techniques to detect shifts in the mean of price ratios and suggest a simple procedure to extract their stationary component. The adjusted price ratios robustly forecast returns
in sample. At the same time, we show that shifts in the steady-state expected returns and
growth rate of fundamentals are responsible for the instability of the return forecasting relation.
Out-of-sample return predictions based on the adjusted price ratios improve relative to those
based on the unadjusted ratios. However, the estimation uncertainty about the magnitude of
the break, and not the break date, is ultimately what prevents a real time investor to profit.

26

References
Amihud, Y., C. M. Hurvich, and Y. Wang (2005): “Hypothesis Testing in Predictive Regressions,”
Unpublished paper.
Amihud, Y., and C. M. Hurwich (2004): “Predictive Regressions: A Reduced-Bias Estimation
Method,” Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39, 813–841.
Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2001): “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” NBER Working
Paper No. 8207.
Berk, J. B., R. C. Green, and V. Naik (1999): “Optimal Investment, Growth Options and Security
Returns,” Journal of Finance, 54, 1153–1607.
Bossaerts, P., and P. Hillion (1999): “Implementing Statistical Criteria to Select Return Forecasting Models: What Do We Learn?,” Review of Financial Studies, 12, 405–428.
Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. Roberts (2004): “On the Importance
of Measuring Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing,” NBER Working Paper No.
10651.
Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson, and R. F. Whitelaw (2005): “The Myth of Long-Horizon Predictability,” New York University Working Paper.
Calvet, L., M. Gonzalez-Eiras, and P. Sadini (2003): “Financial Innovation, Market Participation and Asset Prices,” NBER Working Paper No. 9840.
Campbell, J. Y. (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal, 101,
157–179.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future
Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195–227.
Campbell, J. Y., and S. Thompson (2005): “Predicting the Equity Premium Out of Sample: Can
Anything Beat the Historical Average?,” NBER Working Paper No. 11468.
Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo (2002): “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Cochrane, J. H. (1991): “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of Financial
Studies, 5(2), 243–280.
(2006): “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability,” Unpublished
paper, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.

Eliasz, P. (2005): “Optimal Median Unbiased Estimation of Coefficients on Highly Persistent Regressors,” Unpublished paper, Department of Economcis, Princeton University.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.
(2001): “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or Lower Propensity to
Pay,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60(1), 3–43.
Ferson, W. E., S. Sarkissian, and T. T. Simin (2003): “Spurious regressions in financial economics?,” Journal of Finance, 58(4), 1393–1413.
Goetzman, W. N., and P. Jorion (1993): “Testing the Predictive Power of Dividend Yields,”
Journal of Finance, 48, 663–679.
Goyal, A., and I. Welch (2003): “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,” Management Science, 49(5), 639–654.
(2004): “A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of the Equity Premium Prediction,” Working Paper Brown University.
Grullon, G., and R. Michaely (2002): “Dividends, Share Repurchases, and the Substitution
Hypothesis,” Journal of Finance, 57(4), 1649–1684.
Guvenen, M. F. (2003): “A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pricing: Habit Formation
or Cross-sectional Heterogeneity?,” Rochester Center for Economic Research Working Paper No.
499.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Analysis of Nonstationary Returns and the Business
Cycle,” Econometrica, 57, 357–384.
Hansen, L. P., and R. J. Hodrick (1980): “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of
Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 88(5), 829–853.
Hodrick, R. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357–386.
Jovanovic, B., and P. L. Rousseau (2003): “Specific Capital and the Division of Rents,” Unpublished paper, New York University.
Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2005): “Does Income Inequality Lead To Consumption Inequality?
Some Empirical Findings and a Theoretical Explanation,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Lamont, O. (1998): “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1563–87.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock
Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.
(2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 583–626.
Lettau, M., S. C. Ludvigson, and J. A. Wachter (2004): “The Declining Equity Premium:
What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?,” NBER Working Paper No. 10270.
Lewellen, J. W. (1999): “The Time Series Relations Among Expected Return, Risk, and book-tomarket,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54, 5–53.
(2004): “Predicting Returns With Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial Economics,
74(2), 209–235.
Liu, J., S. Wu, and J. Zidek (1997): “On Segmented Multivariate Regressions,” Statistica Sinica,
7, 497–525.
Lustig, H., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2005a): “Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and
Risk Premia: An Empirical Perspective,” Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1167–1219.
(2005b): “How Much Does Household Collateral Constrain Regional Risk Sharing,” Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Los Angeles and New York University.
(2005c): “Quantitative Asset Pricing Implications of Housing Collateral Constraints,” Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Los Angeles and New York University.
Mankiw, N. G., and M. Shapiro (1986): “Risk and Return: Consumption Beta versus Market
Beta,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 68, 452–59.
McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott (2005): “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S. and
U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies, 72.
Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004): “Understanding Predictability,” Journal of
Political Economy, 112(1), 1–47.
Nelson, C. C., and M. J. Kim (1993): “Predictable Stock Returns: The Role of Small Sample
Bias,” Journal of Finance, 43, 641–661.
Pastor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh (2001): “The Equity Premium and Structural Breaks,” Journal
of Finance, 56(4), 1207–1239.
Paye, B. S., and A. Timmermann (2003): “Instability of Return Prediction Models,” Unpublished
manuscript, University of California San Diego.
Perron, P. (1989): “The Great Crash, the Oil Price Shock, and the Unit Root Hypothesis,” Econometrica, 57(6), 1361–1401.

Pettenuzzo, D., and A. Timmermann (2004): “Optimal Asset Allocation under Structural
Breaks,” Unpublished paper, University of California San Diego.
Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2004): “Housing, Consumption, and Asset Pricing,”
Unpublished paper, University of Chicago.
Quadrini, V., and U. Jermann (2003): “Stock Market Boom and the Productivity Gains of the
1990s,” Unpublished paper, University of Southern California.
Rozeff, M. S. (1984): “Dividend Yields are Equity Risk Premia,” Journal of Portfolio Managment,
49, 141–160.
Stambaugh, R. F. (1986): “Bias in Regressions with Lagged Stochastic Regressors,” Working Paper
University of Chicago.
(1999): “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54, 375–421.
Torous, W., R. Volkanov, and S. Yan (2004): “On Predicting Returns with nearly Integrated
Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Business, 77, 937–966.
Valkanov, R. (2003): “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical Results and Applications,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 68, 201–232.
Viceira, L. (1996): “Testing For Structural Change in the Predictability of Asset Returns,” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002): “Limited Asset Market Participation and Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.
Vuolteenaho, T. (2000): “Understanding the Aggregate Book-Market Ratio and its Implications to
Current Equity-Premium Expectations,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.

A

Data Description

We use annual end-of-year data from 1926-2004 from CRSP on the value weighted market return (NASDAQ,
NYSE, AMEX), with and without dividend capitalization. Net return including dividends are denoted Rt and
returns excluding dividends are Rex . The dividend yield Dt+1 /Pt as the difference of capitalized and uncapitalized
series, the dividend level is the product of the dividend yield Dt+1 /Pt and the price Pt of a portfolio that does
not reinvest dividends. The dividend-price ratio is defined as Dt+1 /Pt+1 and dividend growth as the change
in the dividend level (Dt+1 − Dt )/Dt We then define log returns rt+1 = log(1 + Rt+1 ), log dividend growth
∆dt+1 = log (Dt+1 /Dt ), and the log dividend-price ratio dpt ≡ dt − pt = log (Dt /Pt ).
Data used in Section 4 is derived from monthly S&P 500 dividend-price and price-earnings ratios and
end-of-month composite price index data from Haver. The data are from January 1946-December 2004. Bookto-market ratios are from Vuolteenaho (2000) for 1927-1999. The observations for 1999-2004 are constructed
using the clean-surplus ratio method with earnings and dividend data from Haver.
The second panel of Table 6 reports the subsample and full sample means of the log earnings-price ratio (ep), dividend-earnings ratio (payout rate), and the implied mean changes in long-run expected returns
r or expected dividend growth d. The implied change in r, holding d = 0.0709 fixed, is computed as r =
d
 + (1 + d)(D/E)(E/P
  ). Likewise, the implied change in d, holding r = .1098 fixed, is computed as: d =
r − (D/E)(E/P ) / 1 + (D/E)(E/P ) .

B

A Modified Log-Approximation

In this section we extend the Campbell-Shiller log-linear approximation to allow for time-varying steady-state
growth rates and returns. This framework is a useful organizing principle for the empirical analysis in the main
text, but most of our specifications do not impose the approximation. Our results do not depend on the accuracy
of the approximation, but the framework helps to understand the intuition and implications.
The gross return of an asset is defined as
Rt+1 ≡

Dt+1 1 + Pt+1 /Dt+1
Pt+1 + Dt+1
=
Pt
Dt
Pt /Dt

(17)

As of period t, the steady-state (gross) growth rate of dividends is Dt and steady-state expected (gross) returns
are Rt , implying a steady-state for the price-dividend ratio in levels (P Dt ) and logs (pdt ):
P Dt =

Dt
Rt − D t

=⇒ pdt = dt − log(exp(rt ) − exp(dt )).

(18)

Instead of presuming that the steady-state growth rates and expected returns are constant, we allow for the
possibility that the steady-state may change over time. The only requirement that we impose on the steadystate log returns and log growth rates is that they are martingales; Et [rt+j ] = rt , Et [dt+j ] = dt . In other
words, the steady-state is constant in expectation only. We also assume that the steady-state log P/D ratio is
a martingale; Et [pdt+j ] = pdt . Although in general these assumption can be inconsistent with each other since
the log P/D ratio is a nonlinear function of rt and dt , we show in appendix C that the martingale assumptions
are satisfied to a very good approximation for reasonable break processes. Log-linearizing (17) around the
steady-state in t + 1 and expressing the variables in deviations from steady-state yields
pdt − pdt = (∆dt+1 − dt ) − (rt+1 − rt ) + ρt+1 (pdt+1 − pdt+1 )
+ ∆pdt+1 + ∆rt+1 − ∆dt+1

(19)

where pdt = pt − dt and ρt+1 =

exp(pdt+1 )
.
1+exp(pdt+1 )

The last two assumptions state that ρt is a martingale, and that


deviations from the mean price-dividend ratio are uncorrelated with ρ; Et [ρt+j ] = ρt and Et ρt+j (pdt+j − pdt ) =
0. Given our assumptions, we can take conditional expectations and solve the expectational difference equation
for pdt :
pdt − pdt = Et [∆dt+1 − dt ] − Et [rt+1 − rt ] + ρt Et [pdt+1 − pdt+1 ]
=

∞
X

ρtj−1 Et [∆dt+j − dt ] − Et [rt+j − rt ]

(20)
(21)

j=1

The log price dividend ratio is the sum of the steady-state price dividend ratio and the discounted sum of
expected dividend growth minus expected returns in excess of steady-state growth and returns:
pdt = pdt +

∞
X

ρj−1
Et [∆d˜t+j ] − Et [r̃t+j ],
t

(22)

j=1

where ∆d˜t+j = ∆dt+j − dt and r̃t+j = rt+j − rt . The expression in the main text for dpt follows from (22) and
dpt = −pdt .

C

An Asset Pricing Model with Steady-State Shifts

This appendix solves a fully specified asset pricing model where the steady-state log dividend-price ratio follows
an approximate, bounded martingale. Breaks in the steady-state dividend-price ratio originate in breaks in the
steady-state mean dividend growth rate. Log dividend growth is ∆dt+1 = g+qt +εt+1 . The unconditional average
consumption growth rate is g, qt is the stochastic component of the long-run mean, and εt+1 is a temporary
consumption growth shock, εt+1 ∼ N (0, σε2 ). Let Qt = (1 − A exp(qt ))−1 for a constant A given below. We
assume that Qt is a martingale and show below that this implies that log dividend growth is also a martingale.
Qt+1 = Qt + ηt+1
The innovation to the random walk is independent from εt+1 and has the following distribution:
ηt+1 =

(

0
wt+1

w.p. π
2
).
w.p. 1 − π and wt+1 ∼ N (0, σw,t+1

With probability π the innovation wt+1 is 0, where π is close to 1 to capture that a break is a rare occurrence.
With the complementary probability 1 − π there is a break with normally distributed break size. The innovation
standard deviation of wt+1 is time-varying. It takes on the following form
σw,t+1 = σ̄w (1 − exp(κ(1 − Qt ))).

(23)

This implies that for Qt  1, σw,t+1 ≈ σ̄w and as Qt → 1, σw,t+1 → 0. The parameter κ governs how fast the
standard deviation of w shrinks as Qt approaches 1 from above. This specification guarantees that Qt > 1 (at
least in continuous time). In other words, Qt is a bounded martingale.

If investors are risk neutral with a time discount factor of β, asset returns have to satisfy the Euler equation
1 = Et

"

Pt+1

Dt+1 1 + Dt+1
β
Pt
Dt
D

#

.

t

Conjecture that the price-dividend ratio takes the following form
Pt
= Qt − 1.
Dt
Using this conjecture, the Euler equation becomes becomes


Qt+1
1 = Et βeg+εt+1 A−1
.
Qt
Because the innovation to Qt+1 is independent from the innovation εt+1 , the conjecture is verified for
2

A = βeg+σε /2 Et




2
Qt+1
= βeg+σε /2 ,
Qt

because Qt is a martingale. The log dividend-price ratio is also an (approximate) martingale. Consider a Taylor
approximation of dt+1 − pt+1 around Qt :
dt+1 − pt+1 = dt − pt +

1
(Qt+1 − Qt ) + Ot+1 .
1 − Qt

Because Qt is a martingale, Et [dt+1 − pt+1 ] = dt − pt + Et [Ot+1 ]. As long as the conditional mean of the
higher order terms Ot+1 is small, the log dividend-price ratio is approximately a martingale. For reasonable
break processes the higher order terms turn out to be neglible. For example, if π = .99, σ̄w = 5 and κ =,
the conditional mean of the higher order terms is 0.00006 for a price-dividend ratio level of 40, 0.00017 for a
price-dividend ratio level of 20, and 0.00048 for a price-dividend ratio of 2, which tiny compared to the value of
d − p which is -3.10 on average in a simulation with the same parameters. By the same token, Et [qt+1 ] ≈ qt .
The difference between the conditional expectation of qt+1 and qt is -0.000005 for a price-dividend ratio level
of 40, -0.0000068 for P/D=20 and -0.0003114 for a price-dividend ratio of 2. Again this is small relative to the
simulation average for q of -0.0094.
The above specification imposes that Qt > 1, or equivalently qt > −∞. It would be easy to impose tighter
restrictions on the steady-state log dividend growth rate process qt , based on a priori ‘reasonable range’ for log
dividend growth by modifying (23). For example, one could impose that the long-run dividend growth rate
should not be smaller than -5% per year. This amounts to price-dividend ratios in excess of 11.5 (Q̃ > 12.5).
The same bounded martingale approach would work with such a restriction.

D

A Structural Model

We propose a model for log dividend growth ∆d and log returns r, where expected dividend growth z and
expected returns x follow an AR(1) with autoregressive coefficient φ:
∆dt+1 − d = zt + t+1

zt+1 = φzt + ζt+1

(24)

rt+1 − r̄ = xt + ηt+1

xt+1 = φxt + ξt+1

(25)

where d is the long-run mean log dividend growth and r̄ is the long-run mean return. The model has three
fundamental shocks: a dividend innovation t+1 , an innovation in expected dividends ζt+1 , and an innovation in
expected returns ξt+1 . Campbell (1991)’s return decomposition implies that
ηt+1 = −

ρ
ρ
ξt+1 +
ζt+1 + t+1 .
1 − ρφ
1 − ρφ

(26)

We assume that all three errors are serially uncorrelated and have zero cross-covariance at all leads and lags:
Cov(t+1 , ζt+j ) = 0, ∀j 6= 1, and Cov(t+1 , ξt+j ) = 0, ∀j 6= 1, except Cov(ζt , ξt ) = χ and Cov(ζt , t ) = λ.


, hence DP ≈ r̄−d
and ρ ≈ 1+d
In steady-state, the log dividend-price ratio is dp = log r̄−d
1+r̄ . The log
1+d
1+d
dividend-price ratio can be written as
dpt = dt − pt = dp +

xt − zt
.
1 − ρφ

(27)

This equation clearly shows that the demeaned dividend-price ratio is an imperfect forecaster of returns. Returns
are predicted by xt (25) which not only contains the demeaned dp ratio, but also expected dividend growth zt :
xt = (1 − ρφ)(dpt − dp) + zt .
This structural model implies a reduced form model that recovers the two predictability equations from
Section (2):
d
(∆dt+1 − d) = κd (dpt − dp) + τt+1

(28)

r
κr (dpt − dp) + τt+1
dp
.
φ(dpt − dp) + τt+1

(29)

(rt+1 − r̄) =
(dpt+1 − dp) =

(30)

The third equation of this Vector Error Correction Model is an AR(1) process for the dividend-price ratio.
Because of equation (6), the dividend-price ratio is the difference of two AR(1) processes with the same root φ,
which is again an AR(1) process. We also considered a model where expected dividend growth has a different
autoregressive coefficient ψ 6= φ: zt+1 = ψzt + ζt+1 . In that case the dividend-price ratio is an ARMA(1,1) with
roots φ + ψ and −φψ. Since the dp ratio is well described by an AR(1) model in the data, we set φ = ψ.
The slope coefficients are related to the structural parameters:
κd =

−(1 − ρφ)(σζ2 − χ)
Cov(∆dt+1 , dt − pt )
=
V ar(dt − pt )
σξ2 + σζ2 − 2χ

(31)

κr =

(1 − ρφ)(σξ2 − χ)
Cov(rt+1 , dt − pt )
=
V ar(dt − pt )
σξ2 + σζ2 − 2χ

(32)

The innovations to the VECM, τ = (τ d , τ r , τ dp ), are given by:

r
τt+1
dp
τt+1






−κd
κr
+ zt
1 − ρφ
1 − ρφ




κr
ξt+1 − ζt+1
−κd
+ zt
−ρ
= t+1 + xt
1 − ρφ
1 − ρφ
1 − ρφ
ξt+1 − ζt+1
=
.
1 − ρφ

d
τt+1
= t+1 + xt

(33)
(34)
(35)


dp
d
r
= τt+1
− τt+1
. Another way to
The structural model imposes a restriction on the innovation vector: ρτt+1

write this restriction is as a restriction on a weighted sum of κr and κd :
κr − κd = 1 − ρφ.
We call this restriction the present value constraint.
Leaving aside the mean parameters (d, r̄, dp) which play no role in the demeaned system, the structural
parameter vector is Θ = (φ, σζ , σξ , σ , χ, λ). The variance ση2 is implied by (26). The vector of parameters from
the reduced form model (VECM) is b = (κd , κr , φ, Στ ), where Στ is the variance-covariance matrix of τ . There
are six unique elements in this covariance matrix and the present value constraint imposes three restrictions
on these six elements. In addition, the present value constraint imposes a restriction on one of the elements
in (κr , κd , φ). Hence, there are five unique elements in b = (κr , κd , στ r , στ d , στ r ,τ d ), where στ r and στ d are the
standard deviations of τ r and τ d , and στ r ,τ d is the covariance between the two. When we estimate the nonsingular system of equations (28) and (29), we can use these five coefficients to identify five out of six structural
parameters in Θ. Therefore, whenever we back out structural parameters from the reduced form estimates, we
find it convenient to tabulate results for a range of values for Vz , which measures the contribution of expected
dividend growth to the variance of the dividend-price ratio:
Vz =

E

σζ2
σz2
=
.
2
(1 − ρφ)2 σdp
(σξ2 + σζ2 − 2χ)

(36)

Monte Carlo Simulations

The Monte Carlo exercise simulates the model under the null hypothesis of 1 break or 2 breaks in the dividendprice ratio. It then asks what the univariate long-horizon slope coefficients and R2 are in a small sample (of the
f For the one-break
same length as the data) when we use the unadjusted dp as regressor versus the adjusted dp.
case reported in the top panel of Table 8, we use the following algorithm:
step 1 To find the true parameters, we estimate the (1, 3, 5)-year VECM under the assumption of one break
in 1991 for the full sample. This delivers reduced form estimates: b = (.0121, .2098, .1410, .1868, .0176).
Throughout, ρ = .9616, the value implied by the mean price-dividend ratio in the sample.
step 2 We invert these reduced form parameters to obtain structural parameters based on the identification
scheme described above. We need to take a stance on the fraction of the variance in the dividend-price ratio
attributable to expected dividend growth (equation 36). We set Vz = 0.3, but the results are not sensitive
to this choice. The implied structural parameters are: Θ = (.8344, .0182, .0355, .1371, .0004, −.0005).
step 3 In each Monte Carlo iteration, we draw a new 178 × 3 vector of i.i.d. standard normal variables. The
1
structural shocks (εt , ζt , ξt ) are these standard normal variables pre-multiplied by Σu2 , where Σu is the
covariance matrix of the structural innovations:


σε2 λ
0


Σu =  λ σζ2 χ 
0 χ σξ2
step 4 We recursively build up time-series for x, r − r̄, z, and ∆d − d according to (25) and (24). We form a
time series for the demeaned dividend-price ratio from (27).
step 5a Under the null hypothesis of 1 break in 1991, the break-adjusted series for returns, dividend growth
and the dividend-price ratio are obtained by adding constant long-run means r̄, d, and dp to the demeaned

series. I.e. the adjusted dp series is the demeaned series plus the mean over the entire sample 1927-2004,
which is dp = −3.272. Likewise, the adjusted dividend growth series ∆d is formed by adding to the
demeaned series ∆d − d the sample mean d = .0432. We then back out r̄ = d + (1 + d) exp(dp) = .0827,
and form the adjusted return series as the demeaned series plus this r̄.
step 5b On the other hand, the unadjusted series still displays a break in 1991. To obtain the unadjusted
series we need to add in a different mean before and after 1991. As before, we assume d did not change,
so that the change in dp entirely comes from a change in r̄. The unadjusted dp series is obtained by
adding in the 1927-1991 mean (-3.133) before 1991 and the 1992-2004 mean (-3.968) after 1991. Likewise
for returns we add in .0886 before 1991 and .0629 after 1991. These are the subsample means dp and r̄
that were reported in lines 1 and 2 of Table 6 (left panel).
PH
step 6 We form annualized, cumulative long-horizon returns and dividend growth rates H1 j=1 ∆rt+j and
PH
1
j=1 ∆dt+j in the same way. There is one set of unadjusted series and one set of adjusted series,
H
corresponding to each horizon H.
step 7 After the formation, we discard the first 100 observations (burn-in), and are left with the same number
of observations as in the data: 78- longest horizon+1. For the 1-, 3-, and 5-year system we report on, the
longest horizon is 5, so all statistics are computed with 74 observations.
step 8 We then run univariate 1-, 3-, and 5-year ahead predictability regressions of adjusted returns and dividend growth on both unadjusted and adjusted dividend-price ratios. We keep track of the predictability
coefficients and regression R2 .
step 9 We repeat this procedure 10,000 times and report the average predictability coefficients and R2 across
Monte Carlo iterations.
The Monte Carlo exercise in the two-break case is exactly analogous (bottom panel of Table 8). In step
1, we estimate the 1-, 3-, and 5-year ahead VECM system under the null of 2-breaks in 1954 and 1994. The
VECM coefficient vector is b = (0.0795, 0.4089, 0.1391, 0.1743, 0.0157). The implied structural parameter vector
for Vz = 0.3 is Θ = (0.6974, 0.0293, 0.0635, 0.1339, 0.0014, −0.0012). To construct the unadjusted dp and return
series we use the means reported in the right panel of Table 6.
We conduct a separate Monte Carlo exercise for the out-of-sample predictability (panels 2 and 3 in Table
5). We simulate the model under the null hypothesis of two breaks in 1954 and 1994. For simplicity we use the
same true parameters in both panels 2 and 3. They are obtained from estimating the 1-year ahead VECM under
the assumption of two breaks in 1954 and 1994, but for the period 1947-2004, which is the same sample period
as we use in the data (panel 1 of Table 5). We then construct adjusted and unadjusted dp ratios as in the above
algorithm, and run the same out-of-sample predictions as in the data.

Table 1: Forecasting Returns and Dividend Growth with the Dividend-Price Ratio.
r
d . The first
This table reports estimation results for the equations rt+1 − r̄ = κr (dpt − dp) + τt+1
and ∆dt+1 − d = κd (dpt − dp) + τt+1

two columns report the equation for returns. The next two columns report the predictability equation for dividend growth. The last
two columns are for excess returns instead of gross returns. The table reports point estimates and standard errors in parentheses of
κr and κd , as well as regression R2 in square brackets. The parameters (r̄, d, dp) are the sample means of log returns r (log excess
returns in the last two columns), log dividend growth ∆d and the log dividend-price ratio dp. The top panel compares the case
of no break in the log dividend-price ratio (dp is fixed) with the case where there is a break in the log dividend-price ratio: dp1
is the sample mean log dividend-price ratio for 1927-1991 and dp2 is the mean for 1992-2004. The estimation is by GMM, where
the moments are the OLS normal conditions. Standard errors are by Newey-West with four lags. Row 1 reports results for the full
sample; rows 2 and 3 report results for two subsamples. Row 4 reports the F-statistic and associated p-value from a Chow test with
null hypothesis of no structural break in 1991 in the forecasting equations. The bottom panel compares the case of no break in the
log dividend-price ratio (dp is fixed) with the case where there are two breaks in the log dividend-price ratio: (dp1 is the sample
mean log dividend-price ratio for 1927-1954 (row 6), dp2 is the mean for 1955-1994 (row 7), and dp3 is the mean for 1995-2004 (row
8). Row 9 reports the F-statistic and associated p-value from a Chow test with null hypothesis of no structural breaks in 1954 and
1994 in the forecasting equations.

Returns
Sample

No Break 1 Break

Dividend Growth

Excess Returns

No Break

1 Break

No Break

1 Break

1927-2004

.094
(.046)
[.038]

.235
(.058)
[.100]

.005
(.037)
[.000]

.019
(.047)
[.001]

.113
(.049)
[.050]

.282
(.059)
[.132]

1927-1991

.235
(.065)
[.087]

.235
(.065)
[.087]

.014
(.053)
[.001]

0.014
(.053)
[.001]

.295
(.071)
[.125]

.295
(.071)
[.125]

1992-2004

.235
(.134)
[.199]

.235
(.134)
[.199]

.035
(.103)
[.006]

.035
(.103)
[.006]

.241
(.139)
[.198]

.241
(.139)
[.198]

Chow F -stat
p-val

3.408
[.038]

.134
[.875]

.114
[.892]

.024
[.977]

4.383
[.016]

.230
[.795]

No Break

2 Breaks

No Break

2 Breaks

Sample

No Break 2 Breaks

1927-2004

.094
(.046)
[.038]

.455
(.081)
[.223]

.005
(.037)
[.000]

.124
(.073)
[.032]

.113
(.049)
[.050]

.441
(.101)
[.193]

1927-1954

.510
(.175)
[.163]

.510
(.175)
[.163]

.037
(.182)
[.002]

.037
(.182)
[.002]

.529
(.192)
[.170]

.529
(.192)
[.170]

1955-1994

.383
(.106)
[.240]

.383
(.106)
[.240]

.142
(.077)
[.064]

.142
(.077)
[.064]

.336
(.144)
[.151]

.336
(.144)
[.151]

1995-2004

.532
(.129)
[.546]

.532
(.129)
[.546]

.226
(.097)
[.126]

.226
(.097)
[.126]

.539
(.145)
[.533]

.539
(.145)
[.533]

Chow F -stat
p-val

4.390
[.003]

.235
[.918]

.998
[.414]

.500
[.736]

3.261
[.016]

.186
[.945]

Table 2: Tests for Change in Mean of Log Dividend-Price Ratio
The first panel reports dates of structural breaks in the mean of the log dividend price ratio estimated by the Perron procedure as
well as the changes in the mean before and after the breaks. The second panel reports sup-F (i,j) statistics where i is the number of
breaks under the null hypothesis and j is the number of breaks under the alternative. ‘*’, ‘**’, ‘***’ denote significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% level, respectively. The third panel reports the number of breaks chosen according to the Bayesian Information criterion
(BIC) and the modified Schwartz’ criterion proposed by Liu, Wu, and Zidek (1997) (LWZ). The tests allow for autocorrelation in
the residuals and the trimming value is set to 5% of the sample. The bottom panel reports first and second order autocorrelation
coefficients, an Augmented Dickey Fuller test, testing the null hypothesis of a unit root (and associated p-value), and the time-series
standard deviation for the unadjusted log dividend-price ratio, the log price ratio adjusted for a change in its mean in 1991, and the
log dividend-price ratio adjusted for a change in its mean in 1954 and 1994.

# of Breaks

Date(s)

∆dp

1

1991

-.86

2

1954, 1994

-.37, -.78

Test (H0 , H1 )

Statistic

sup-F (0,1)

13.7***

sup-F (0,2)

23.9***

sup-F (1,2)

9.64*

Information Criterion

# of Breaks

LWZ

2

BIC

2

Persistence Properties of Adjusted Dividend-Price Ratio
AC(1) AC(2) ADF Test p-val s.d.
dp, unadjusted
f adjusted, 1 break
dp,
f adjusted, 2 breaks
dp,

.91

.81

-1.383

.586

.42

.77

.55

-3.016

.038

.26

.61

.23

-4.731

.010

.20

Table 3: Tests for Change in Mean of Financial Ratios
The top half of the table reports the test-statistic of a sup-F Perron structural break tests of the null hypothesis of no break against
the alternative hypothesis of one (first row) or two (second row) breaks with unknown break date. It reports the p-value of the test
statistic, as well as the resulting break date. The last column reports the estimated change in means before and after the break(s).
These tests are performed for the log earnings-price ratio ep = e − p, the log book value -to-market value of equity ratio bm = b − m,
the log dividend-earnings ratio de = d − e, the log dividend-price ratio adjusted for repurchases dprep , and the log dividend-price
ratio of the universe of CRSP firms that excludes the NASDAQ firms dpnas .

Structural Break Tests

ep

bm

de

dpnas

dprep

H0

H1

sup−F-Test

p-value

0 break

1 break

15.5

0 break

2 breaks

0 break

Date(s)

∆mean

< 1%

1990

-.67

18.0

< 1%

1953, 1994

-.50, -.62

1 break

9.3

< 10%

1953

-.80

0 break

2 breaks

17.9

< 1%

1953, 1990

-.71, -.33

0 break

1 break

5.6

> 10%

1993

-.24

0 break

2 breaks

5.3

> 10%

1990, 1993

+.27, -.46

0 break

1 break

10.2

< 5%

1992

-.75

0 break

2 breaks

18.1

< 1%

1954, 1995

-.35, -.70

0 break

1 break

3.7

> 10%

1990

-.43

0 break

2 breaks

4.5

> 10%

1954, 1991

-.23, -.34

0 break

3 breaks

20.1

< 1%

1957, 1973, 1990

-.46, +.50, -.57

Table 4: Forecasting Returns With Other Financial Ratios.
r , where y is the log earnings-price ratio ep = e − p
This table reports estimation results for the equation rt+1 − r̄ = κr (yt − y) + τt+1

in the first row, the log book-to-market value ratio bm = b − m in the second row, the log dividend-price ratio without the NASDAQ
firms dpnas in the third row, and the repurchase adjusted log dividend-price ratio dprep in the fourth row. The table reports point
estimates and standard errors in parentheses of κr , and the regression R2 in brackets. The regressor is the unadjusted valuation
ratio in the first column, the one-break adjusted valuation ratio in the second column, and the two-break adjusted valuation ratio
in the third column. For the predictor dprep , we report the three-break case as well. The break dates for all regressors are reported
in Table 3. The sample is 1946-2004 in row 1, and 1927-2004 in all other rows.

Predictor y

No Break

1 Break

2 Breaks

ep

.119
(.030)
[.104]

.214
(.039)
[.190]

.216
(.045)
[.185]

bm

.070
(.036)
[.030]

.255
(.063)
[.154]

.308
(.064)
[.188]

dpnas

.110
(.048)
[.043]

.250
(.056)
[.105]

.417
(.090)
[.182]

dprep

.191
(.054)
[.079]

.282
(.065)
[.126]

.361
(.084)
[.161]

3 Breaks

.576
(.097)
[.250]

Table 5: Out-of-Sample Predictability.
The table reports one-period-ahead return forecast errors based on the Random Walk model (row 1) and based on the forecasting
r
equation rt+1 − r̄ = κr (dpt − dp) + τt+1
with fixed dp (row 2). Rows 3 through 5 use the real time Perron procedure to estimate
P
c . We report results for three different methods of selecting the number of break: the sequential sup-F test with 10% critical
dp

value, and the LWZ and BIC information criteria. Rows 6 and 7 use the ex-post break adjusted dividend price ratios with a change
in dp in 1991 (row 6), and two changes in the mean dp in 1954 and 1994 (row 7). Rows 8 and 9 use the Hamilton approach to
c H . The regime switching probabilities are estimated in real time, but the regime means
construct adjusted dividend-price ratios dp
are estimated from the full sample. We consider the cases of two regimes (row 8) and three regimes (row 9). All numbers denote

returns per annum. The second and third panels report results from a Monte Carlo exercise. We simulate the structural model under
the null hypothesis that the data generating process has one break in 1991 (panel 2) or has two breaks in 1954 and 1994 (panel 3).
We compare the same three out-of sample forecasting exercises as in the data (panel 1). Except in the last panel, we also look at
the forecast errors when we only correct for the second break and not the first one. The structural parameters in panels 2 and 3 are
the same and were obtained from the Vector Error Correction Model (VECM) parameters estimated under the assumption of two
breaks in 1954 and 1994 for the period 1947-2004, the same forecasting period as in panel 1.

Mean absolute error

Root mean squared error

Panel 1: Data
Benchmarks
Random Walk
Unadjusted dp
Pure OOS
P
c - Perron sequential sup-F
dp
P
c - Perron LWZ criterion
dp
c
dp

P

- Perron BIC criterion

Pseudo OOS
f - ex-post, 1 break
dp
f - ex-post, 2 breaks
dp
H

c - Hamilton, 1 break
dp
H
c - Hamilton, 2 breaks
dp
Random Walk
Unadjusted dp
f - ex-post, 1 break
dp
Random Walk
Unadjusted dp
f - ex-post, 1 break
dp
f - ex-post, 2 breaks
dp

.1338
.1411

.1605
.1685

.1350

.1661

.1391

.1680

.1370

.1646

.1309
.1158

.1558
.1421

.1330

.1590

.1238

.1509

Panel 2: Monte Carlo - 1 break
.1212
.1210
.1058

.1525
.1555
.1334

Panel 3: Monte Carlo - 2 breaks
.1222
.1203
.1165
.1064

.1533
.1516
.1493
.1336

Table 6: Implied Changes in Steady-state Expected Returns and Dividend Growth
The top panel (bottom panel) of the table reports the mean log dividend-price ratio (log earnings-price ratio) in the subsamples, as
well as the difference between the two. On the second row is reports the mean return r in the subsamples if all of the changes in
dp (ep) in the first row were attributable to changes in mean returns. The third row reports mean dividend growth rates d in the
subsamples if all of the changes in dp (ep) in the first row were attributable to changes in mean dividend growth. The left panel
reports the case of one break; the right panel the case of two breaks. For the log dividend-price ratio the break date is estimated to
be 1991 for the one break case (1954 and 1994 for the two break case). For the log earnings-price ratio, the break is estimated to be
1990 for the one break case (1953 and 1994 for the two break case). In the bottom panel, we also report the change in the payout
rate, the log dividend-earnings ratio de. The sample for the top panel is 1927-2004, the sample for the bottom panel is 1946-2004
(see Appendix A).

Dividend-Price Ratio
27-91

92-04

Change

27-54

55-94

95-04

Changes

dp

-3.133

-3.968

-.835

-2.940

-3.301

-4.086

-.362, -.785

r ↓, d constant

8.86%

6.29%

-2.60%

9.83%

8.16%

6.07%

-1.67%, -2.09%

d ↑, r constant

5.00%

7.54%

2.54%

4.07%

5.68%

7.76%

1.61% , 2.08%

Earnings-Price Ratio
46-90

91-04

Change

46-53

54-94

95-04

ep

-2.540

-3.202

-.662

-2.217

-2.652

-3.267

-.435, -.616

Payout rate de

-.665

-.779

-.114

-.606

-.661

-.889

-.056, -.227

r ↓, d constant

11.72%

9.24%

-2.47%

13.70%

11.25%

8.87%

-2.46%, -2.38%

d ↑, r constant

6.38%

8.79%

2.41%

4.52%

6.83%

9.16%

2.31%, 2.33%

Table 7: Estimation with Long-Horizon Moments
This table reports GMM estimates for the parameters (κd , κr , φ), their asymptotic standard errors and p-values. The results in
panel A are for the system with one-year ahead equations for dividend growth and returns (H = 1, N = 0). The results in panel B
are for the system with one-year, three-year and five-year ahead equations for dividend growth and returns (H = {1, 3, 5}, N = 2).
The estimation is by GMM. The first stage weighting matrix is the identity matrix. The asymptotic standard errors and p-values
are computed using the Newey-West HAC procedure (second stage weighting matrix) with four lags in panel A and H = 5 lags in
panel B. The first number in the last column denotes the present-value constraint violation of the univariate OLS slope estimators:
ols
(1 − ρφols )−1 (κols
r − κd ). It is expressed in the same units as κd and κr . In panel B this number is the average violation of the

three constraints, one constraint at each horizon. The second number in the last column reports the average moment violation. In
panel A that number is not available (N/A) because the system is exactly identified. The dividend-price ratio in rows 1 and 4 is the
unadjusted one. In rows 2 and 5, the dividend-price ratio is adjusted for one break in 1991 (see equation 8), and in rows 3 and 6, it
is the series adjusted for two breaks in 1954 and 1994. All estimation results are for the full sample 1927-2004.

κd

κr

φ

PV violation

moment violation

Panel A: No Long-Horizon Moments H = {1}
No Break

.005
(.037)

.094
(.046)

.945
(.052)

-.046

N/A

1 Break (’91)

.019
(.047)

.2353
(.0554)

.813
(.052)

.004

N/A

2 Breaks (’54, ’94)

.124
(.073)

.4553
(.0792)

.694
(.070)

-.001

N/A

Panel B: Long-Horizon Moments H = {1, 3, 5}
No Break

.021
(.018)

.068
(.038)

.990
(.032)

.189

.205

1 Break (’91)

.012
(.019)

.210
(.043)

.834
(.042)

.076

.085

2 Breaks (’54, ’94)

.080
(.065)

.409
(.078)

.697
(.060)

.100

.144

Table 8: Long-Horizon Predictability in Data and Monte Carlo Exercise.
The table reports results from univariate regressions of cumulative long-horizon returns on the log dividend-price ratio. The left
columns denote slope coefficients for one-year, three-year, and five-year horizon regressions; the middle columns report standard
errors for the slope coefficients; the right columns report the corresponding regression R2 . The rows labeled ‘Data, dp unadj.’ denote
regressions run with real data using the unadjusted log dividend-price ratio as independent variable. The rows labeled ‘Data, dp
adj.’ denote regressions run with real data using the log dividend-price ratio, adjusted for a break in the mean dp. In the top panel
there is one break in this mean in 1991; in the bottom panel there are two breaks in 1954 and 1994. The results for the data are
contrasted with a the results from a Monte carlo exercise. The return and dividend growth system is estimated until 1991 in the
top panel (1954 in the bottom panel) on real data. The estimated parameters imply ‘true’ structural parameters. The theoretical
long-horizon slope coefficients and regression R2 are reported in the row with label ‘True Values in Sim.’ For these parameters,
the structural model is then simulated 10,000 times for 78 periods. The row ‘Sim., dp unadj.’ denotes the Monte carlo average
slope coefficient and R2 statistic using the unadjusted log dividend-price ratio as independent variable. The row ‘Sim., dp adj.’ also
reports regression coefficients and statistics of regressions on artificial data, but now the independent variable comes from a model
where the mean r is adjusted to equal the change in dp in the data.

κr
Horizon

1

3

R2 (%)

s.e.
5

1

3

5

1

3

5

8.9

20.0

25.2

True Values in Sim.

.222

.187

.159

One Break in 1991
N/A
N/A
N/A

Sim., dp unadj.
Data, dp unadj.

.115
.087

.092
.095

.075
.071

.064
.065

.034
.037

.025
.026

5.1
2.4

11.5
8.1

14.6
9.2

Sim., dp adj.
Data, dp adj.

.264
.220

.214
.200

.175
.150

.093
.084

.048
.047

.034
.033

10.5
8.6

22.7
20.0

28.0
22.0

20.7

37.0

38.8

Two Breaks in 1954 and 1994
N/A
N/A
N/A

True Values in Sim.

.456

.330

.249

Sim., dp unadj.
Data, dp unadj.

.128
.087

.089
.095

.064
.071

.063
.065

.032
.037

.023
.026

6.2
2.4

11.5
8.1

12.8
9.2

Sim., dp adj.
Data, dp adj.

.483
.442

.340
.355

.249
.231

.110
.102

.052
.054

.037
.041

21.4
20.7

37.5
37.4

38.6
30.8

Figure 1: Forecasting Returns - Rolling Regressions
r . It shows the estimates for κ using 30-year
The top panel plots estimation results for the equation rt+1 − r̄ = κr (dpt − dp) + τt+1
r
rolling windows. The dashed line in the left panels denote the point estimate plus or minus one standard deviation. The parameters
r̄ and dp) are the sample means of log returns r and the log dividend-price ratio dp. The data are annual for 1927-2004. The middle
f adjusted for 1 break in 1991 (see
panel gives the slope coefficient κr from a regression where the right-hand side variable is dp,
f adjusted for
Section 3.3). The bottom panel gives the slope coefficient κr from a regression where the right-hand side variable is dp,
2 breaks in 1954 and 1994 (see Section 3.3). The standard errors are asymptotic.

30−Year Rolling Estimates for Return Coefficient − No Break
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

30−Year Rolling Estimates for Return Coefficient − One Break in 1991
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

30−Year Rolling Estimates for Return Coefficient − Two Breaks in 1954 and 1994
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Figure 2: Change in the Mean of the Dividend-Price Ratio.
The top left panel plots the log dividend-price ratio dpt = dt − pt (solid line) as well as its sample means dp1 in the subsample
1927-1991 and dp2 in the subsample 1992-2004 (dashed line). The bottom left panel overlays the subsample means dp1 in 1927-1954,
f = dpt − dp , t = 1, ..., τ and
dp2 in 1955-1994, and dp3 in 1995-2004. The top right panel plots the adjusted dividend-price ratio dp
t
1
dpt − dp2 , t = τ, ..., T . The bottom right panel plots the adjusted dividend-price ratio in the two-break case. In the two bottom
panels, the adjusted series is rescaled so that it coincides with the adjusted series for the first subsample.

One Break in 1991

One Break in 1991

−2.5

−2.5

−3

−3

−3.5

−3.5

−4

−4

−4.5

undajusted d−p
adjusted d−p 1 break

−4.5
1940

1960

1980

2000

1940

Two Breaks in 1954 and 1994

1960

1980

2000

Two Breaks in 1954 and 1994

−2.5

−2.5

−3

−3

−3.5

−3.5

−4

−4

−4.5

undajusted d−p
adjusted d−p 2 breaks

−4.5
1940

1960

1980

2000

1940

1960

1980

2000

Figure 3: The Empirical Distribution of the Dividend-Price Ratio.
The figure plots the smoothed empirical distribution of the log dividend-price ratio dp (solid line), alongside the smoothed density
obtained from drawing from the empirical distribution with replacement (bootstrap, dash-dotted line), and the smoothed density
from a Monte-Carlo exercise (dashed line).

Histogram of d-p
0.4
Data
Monte Carlo
Bootstrap

Densities

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
-4.5

-4

-3.5

-3

d-p

-2.5

-2

Figure 4: Recursive Estimation of the Empirical Distribution of the Dividend-Price Ratio.
dp
using data up to time t + 1, and
We recursively estimate an AR(1) for the log dividend-price ratio dp, dpt+1 = c + φdpt + τt+1
dp
}. The dashed
bootstrap percentiles of the empirical distribution by drawing with replacement from the residuals {τ1dp , · · · , τt+1
lines represent the 2.5, 5, 95, and 97.5 percentiles of the bootstrapped distribution. The initial sample is 1927-1951. Each successive
exercise adds one year of data. The solid line represents the observed log-dividend-price ratio in deviation from its recursive sample
mean.

Recursive Bootstrapped Quantiles of d-p
2

1.5

Data
2.5%
5%
95%
97.5%

1

d-p

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Year

Figure 5: Regime Switching Model for the Log Dividend-Price Ratio - Two Regimes
This figure reports estimation results from a Hamilton regime-switching model for the log dividend-price ratio d − p.

Probability of Low d−p Regime − 2 Regime Case
1
High−dp regime: −3.148
Low−dp regime: −4.044
0.5

0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Probability of Low and Middle Regime − 3 Regime Case
1
High−dp regime: −2.959
Middle−dp regime: −3.312
Low−dp Regime: −4.110
0.5

0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1990

2000

Log Dividend−Price Ratio d−p
−2.5
−3
−3.5
−4
−4.5
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

Figure 6: Estimation with Long-Horizon Moments
This figure compares the univariate OLS long-horizon regression coefficients, κd (H) − OLS and κr (H) − OLS to the GMM estimates
that impose the present-value restriction (12), κd (H) − GM M and κr (H) − GM M . The system contains 10 equations, 5 return and
5 dividend growth equations. The horizons (in years) are H ∈ 1, 3, 5, 7, 10. The top panel uses the unadjusted dp ratio as predictor,
f ratio adjusted for one break in 1991, and the bottom panel uses the dp
f ratio adjusted for two breaks
the middle panel uses the dp
in 1954 and 1994.

0.3
κ (H)−OLS
d

κr(H)−OLS

0.25

κd(H)−GMM
κ (H)−GMM
r

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05
1

2

3

4

5
6
horizon (years)

7

8

9

10

0.3
κd(H)−OLS
κr(H)−OLS

0.25

κ (H)−GMM
d

κ (H)−GMM
r

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

−0.05
1

2

3

4

5
6
horizon (years)

7

8

9

10

0.45
κd(H)−OLS
0.4

κr(H)−OLS
κ (H)−GMM
d

0.35

κ (H)−GMM
r

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1

2

3

4

5
6
horizon (years)

7

8

9

10

