                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               USING MONETARY CONTROL 10 DAMPEN THE
          BUSINESS CYCLE: A NEW SET OF FIRST PRINCIPLES



                         Robert J. Gordon




                      Working Paper No. 1210




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1983




This research is supported by the National Science Foundation.
am grateful to Stephen King and John Veitch for their help. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #1210
                                            October 1983



          Using Monetary Control to Dampen the Business Cycle:
                     A New Set of First Principles


                               ABSTRACT




     This paper reviews the main characteristics
                                                 of cyclical behavior in
the postwar U. S. economy and reviews the arguments for and against
                                                                     an
activist stabilization policy to dampen business cycles. Four major
behavioral characteristics are identified from summary data on U. S.
postwar business cycles. These involve (1) the volatility of velocity
growth in comparison with that of money growth, (2) the inertia of
inflation, (3) the natural rate of unemployment as a dividing line
between Conditions of accelerating and
the role of supply shocks.             decelerating inflation, and (4)


     The volatility of nominal CNP growth suggests that a target for
nominal GNP growth might be considered as a possible alternative to
control of monetary aggregates. Major qualifications to the case for
this approach include lags and forecasting
                                           errors, uncertainty about
policy multipliers, uncertainty about the natural rate of unemployment,
and recent critiques based on the rational expectations view of macro-
economic behavior.

     The paper treats supply shocks and institutional rigidities as
constraints faced by policymakers.   These influence the optimal degree
of monetary accommodation of Supply shocks and the choice among
alternative paths for economic recovery. The analysis of constraints
faced by the central bank contrasts with the usual analysis of a central
bank operating in isolation.




                                          Robert J. Gordon
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Northwestern University
                                          Evanston, IL 60201

                                           (312) 492—3616
                             TABLE OF CONTENTS



                                                                   Page
  I. INTRODUCTION                                                       1


       Effect of the Business Cycle on Economic Ideas               1
       Four Central Characteristics of Macroeconomic Behavior       3

 II. LESSONS FROM POSIWAR BUSINESS CYCLES                           5

       An Analytic Arrangement of the Data                          5
       Evidence on the Four Central Characteristics                 6
       TABLE 1                                                      7
       Lessons from the Postwar Experience                         11

III. RECONSIDERING THE CASE AGAINST ACTIVISM                       13

       Lags and Forecasting                                        14
       Uncertain Economic Structure and Policy Multipliers         16
       Uncertainty about the Natural Rate                          17
       The Lucas Critique and the Credibility Hypothesis           21
       The Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition                      24

 IV.   MONETARY AND FISCAL CONTROL OF NOMINAL GNP GROWTH           26

       Sources of Shifts in Velocity Growth                        26
       Reassessing the Choice of Targets                           30
       The Role of Fiscal Stabilization                            32
       Political Objections to a Nominal GNP Target                34

 V. SELECTING A PATH FOR NOMINAL GNP GROWTH                        36

       When the Economy is Already at the Natural Rate             37
       When the Economy is Far Away from the Natural Rate          38

VI. SUPPLY SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONAL RIGIDITIES                     40

       Should Supply Shocks Be Accommodated?                       40
       Overshooting and the 1982—83 Policy Environnnt              41
       Effect on Supply Shock Policy of Institutional Rigidities   42
       More General Effects of Institutions on Monetary Policy     44

VI. CONCLUSION                                                     46

       FOOTNOTES                                                   49

       REFERENCES                                                  52
                              I. INTRODUCTION


     In late 1982 the U. S. economy experienced the most serious bus!—

ness slump since the Great Depression of the 1930s. This verdict,

supported by a wide variety of economic indicators, lends urgency to the

search for a new approach to achieve a dampening of business cycles.

Our concern with business cycles stands in marked contrast to the heady

optimism of the late 1960s, when courses labelled "Business Cycles" were

being expunged from the economics curriculum and when conferences were

being organized to debate the topic "Is the Business Cycle Obsolete?"


Effect of the Business Cycle on Economic Ideas


     In retrospect the nine—year business expansion between early 1961

and late 1969 appears to have been the exception, and in other decades

of this century recurrent expansions and contractions have been the

rule. Between late 1949 and early 1961 there were three complete busi-

ness cycles, with an average duration of 3.7 years. Between late 1970

and late 1982 again there were three complete business cycles, with an

average duration of 4.0 years. Worse yet, by almost any measure,

economic performance during the 1970—82 period was inferior to that

between 1949 and 1961. Economists have a serious professional obli-

gation to explain why macroeconomic performance should have deteriorated

while the tools of their trade have advanced in sophistication.

     The   adverse turn of events in the 1970s had not been predicted by
the reigning orthodox wisdom of the 1960s, which combined a textbook
Keynesian   approach to aggregate demand behavior with a Phillips—curve

approach to aggregate supply behavior. Not surprisingly, this con-

sistent set of surprises and forecast errors unleashed an intellectual
                                   2




counterrevolution. Milton Friedman and Robert Lucas have often been

viewed as the Copernicus and Galileo of a new business cycle theory,

overthrowing the previous Aristotelian orthodoxy of postwar Keynes—

ianism. In fact Lucas and his colleague Thomas Sargent consciously

adopted a revolutionary rhetoric, and in a famous polemic described

themselves as "sorting through the wreckage" of the Keynesian Revolu—

     1



     Despite differences in the details of their economic models,

particularly the length of the horizon being addressed, Friedman and

Lucas and their followers were united in their opposition to the "fine

tuning" or "activist" monetary and fiscal intervention favored by main-

stream Keynesians. The deteriorating performance of the economy in the

1970s brought many new adherents to their "monetarist counterrevolution"

and its primary policy recommendation——that the Federal Reserve carry

out a simple constant—growth monetary rule (CGMR).

     The debate between Keynesians and monetarists over the control of

the business cycle still rages. Many commentators have interpreted the

shift by the Federal Reserve in October, 1979, toward greater emphasis

on targets for monetary growth as representing the official adoption of

monetarism. Yet neither school of thought is pleased with the perfor-

mance of policy since 1979. Monetarists disavow the Fed's policy

because of the high short—run volatility in monetary growth that

occurred over short periods. Keynesians charge that the Fed's policies,

whatever they are called, allowed the economy to collapse and unemploy—

ment to rise to a postwar record in 1982.

     This paper sets out a few simple but central ideas about stabiliza-

tion policy, in an attempt to clarify the current debate about the
                                    3




 conduct of policymakers. It begins by identifying four main character-

 istics of the economy's behavior and discusses manifestations of that

 behavior over postwar business cycles. It then reviews some of the main

arguments forand against activist policy intervention. The unifying

theme is the search for policies to dampen the business cycle and reduce

the human and economic waste that has been experienced in the early

1980s.



Four Central Characteristics of Macroeconomic Behavior


     We distinguish four central characteristics of the economy's

response to policy actions. These help us to understand just where the

mainstream Keynesian approach went wrong. But the four characteristics

also help us to understand why the monetarist CCMR panacea fails to

provide a solution to the flaws in the l960s Keynesian remedy. And they

point the way to a reconstructed policy approach which combines rules

with activism, avoiding the weaknesses of both doctrinaire activism and

ritual monetarism.

     The first characteristic concerns the nature of the economy's

fluctuations in nominal aggregate demand, and the other three relate to

the response of real output, i.e., aggregate supply:

          (1) Over postwar business cycles the growth rate of nominal

CNP has been highly variable, averaging almost 8 percentage points

faster at an annual rate over expansion phases of the business cycle

than over recession phases. Procyclical fluctuations in the growth rate

of the money supply, however, account for only a trivial fraction of

fluctuations in nominal CNP growth, 14 percent on average over seven
                                   4




postwar business cycles. The remaining 86 percent is accounted for by

changes in the growth rate of the "velocity" of money, i.e., how much

nominal GNP is purchased with a given amount of money. The timing of

these velocity movements is largely independent of monetary growth

fluctuations and suggests that there would still be substantial

fluctuations in nominal GNP growth even if the Federal Reserve were to

carry out successfully the monetarists' long—sought CGMR policy.

          (2) Changes in real GNP occur by definition when changes in

nominal CNF differ from the rate of inflation. Real GNP could remain

stable in the face of wide swings in nominal GNP growth only if the

inflation rate duplicated those wide swings with little or no lag. But

a fundamental characteristic of the U. S. inflation process is the

sluggish adjustment or "inertia" of inflation in response to fluctua-

tions in the growth rate of nominal GNP. Thus the dampening of business

cycles requires that nominal GNP fluctuations be moderated, unless a way

can be found to increase substantially the speed of inflation's response

to those fluctuations.

          (3) The evidence now seems compelling in support of

Friedman's proposition that the economy has a natural rate of unemploy-

ment. Any attempt to maintain unemployment for a long period below the

natural rate generates a continuously accelerating inflation rate, as we

learned in the late l960s. An unemployment rate substantially above the

natural rate generates downward pressure on the inflation rate, as we

have seen in 1981—83.

          (4) A counterpart of inflation inertia is that "supply

shocks," sudden changes in the prices of important raw materials like

oil, have consequences for the aggregate inflation rate, simply because
                                      5




prices in the rest of the economy (i.e., non—oil prices) are not capable

of dropping quickly enough when oil prices rise, nor of rising quickly

enough when oil prices fall. Adverse supply shocks pose a fundamental

dilemma for policymakers, since the previous rate of inflation cannot be

maintained without a significant loss of non—oil output, whereas main-

tenance of the previous level of output will cause a marked and perhaps

permanent acceleration in the rate of inflation.

     These four characteristics form the basis of our interpretation of

both the 1960s version of activism, and the monetarist CGMR prescrip-

tion. The paper suggests that a new approach is needed, based expli-

citly on these four characteristics of economic behavior. Our

suggestion involves a long—run objective of maintaining the actual

unemployment rate equal to the natural unemployment rate, while

operating monetary policy by establishing a target path for nominal GNP

growth in the short run. Because the proposed policy approach is closer

in spirit to activism than a monetarist CCMR, much of the paper is

concerned with both old and new objections to activist policy

intervention.


                II. LESSONS FROM POSTWAR BUSINESS CYCLES


An Analytic Arrangement of the Data

     Keynesians and monetarists agree that the central actors in

macroeconomic drama are output, unemployment, inflation, and money.

While there are numerous theories about the connections among these

variables, one undeniable fact is the definition that links output,

inflation, and money. This is the growth rate version of the famous

"quantity equation," and states that:
                                      6




                               velocity                inflation +   real   growth
         monetary   growth +              growth


We can give a separate lower—case symbol to each growth rate, and

rewrite the quantity equation as:


          m+v         y        p+q                                   (1)



The "y' inserted in the middle of the quantity equation stands for the

growth rate of nominal G and reminds us that the left side (m +              v)   and

                                                                 nominal
right sides (p +   q) are simply alternative ways of decomposing
GNP growth.
                                                        exhibited in Table 1 in
     Data for seven postwar business cycles are

the same arrangement as equation (1). The timing of each cycle is

dictated by the choices of the National Bureau of Economic Research

 (NBER), whichhas established a chronology of U. S. business cycles

 extending back to 1837. The table shows each business cycle in a

 grouping of three lines, labelled "expansion," "plateau," and "reces-

 sion." The "expansion" begins in the calendar quarter designated by the
                                                   "recession" begins in the
 NBER as the official cycle "trough." The
                                                         An intermediate stage
 quarter designated as the official NBER "peak."

 is defined here that separates the period between trough and peak into

 two intervals, divided at the quarter when real GNP reaches its highest

 level relative to its secular trend. During the plateau phase, the

 economy exhibits continued real GNP growth at a rate slower than the

 secular trend.


 Evidence on the Four Central Characteristics

       The data displayed in Table 1 provide evidence to support our

  interpretation of the four central macroeconomic characteristics of the
                                                 Table 1

                         Basic Characteristics of U. S. Business Cycles
                                            1949—1982




                Date      Length                            Four—quarter growth rates
               Phase     of Phase         Money     +      Velocity     Nominal    GNP    +    Real
Phase         Begins     in Years     Supply(m)            of Ml(v)     GNP(y)     Deflator(p) GNP(q)
                (1)        (2)             (3)               (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)

Expansion     1949:Q4      3.50            4.3               6.5        10.8       3.3         7.5
Plateau         ———       ———             ———                ———         ———       ———         ———
Recession     1953:Q2      1.00            0.8              —2.7        —1.9       1.4         3.3
Expansion     1954:Q2     1.50             2.9               5.6         8.5       2.0        6.5
Plateau       l955:Q4     1.75             0.8               6.1         6.9       3.6        3.3
Recession     l957:Q4     0.75             0.6              —3.2        —2.6       1.0       —3.6

Expansion     1958:Q2      1.00            4.5               6.3        10.8       2.7        8.1
Plateau       1959:Q2      1.00           —0.6               3.8         3.2       1.5         1.7
Recession     1960:Q2      0.75            1.9              —1.4         0.5      0.6        —0.1

Expansion     1961:Q1      5.00            3.8               3.9         7.7       1.9         5.8
Plateau       1966:Q1      3.75            5.0               2.3        7.3       4.3          3.0
Recession     1969:Q4      1.00            5.0              —0.1        4.9       5.0         0.1

Expansion     1970:Q4      2.25            7.7               3.5        11.2      4.6          6.6
Plateau       1973:Q1     0.75             4.8               4.7         9.5       7.3         2.2
Recession     l973:Q4      1.25            4.4               1.4         5.8      10.1       —4.3

Expansion     1975:Q1      3.75            7.1               4.7        11.8       6.5         5.3
Plateau       1978:Q4      1.25            7.4               2.7        10.1       8.5         1.6
Recession     l980:Q1     0.50            10.8              —5.5         5.3       9.5        —4.2

Expansion     1980:Q3      0.50            7.9               8.5        16.4      10.2         6.2
Plateau       198l:Ql      0.50            4.5               3.6         8.1       7.7         0.4
Recession     1981.:Q3     1.50            6.1              —1.6         4.5       5.9        —1.4
Average All Cycles (Weighted by length)
Expansion                  2.53            5.1               5.1        10.2       3.8         6.4
Plateau                    1.28            3.9               3.5         7.4       4.9         2.5
Recession                  0.98            4.0              —1.4         2.6       5.2        —2.6
                                   8




postwar economy. Common features of the seven cycles are summarized in

the bottom section of the table, which provides averages of the varia-

bles for each phase over all seven cycles, with each phase weighted by

its length. Columns (3) through (5) show that nominal GNP growth was

highly volatile, with a 10.2 percent average growth rate during

expansion phases and 2.6 percent rate during recession phases, for a

difference of .56 percent. In contrast, Ml growth was much less

volatile, with growth in expansion phases only 1.1 percent faster on

average than in recession phases. As a result, fluctuations in monetary

growth accounted on average for only 14 percent (1.1/7.6) of fluctua-

tions in nominal GNP growth. The remaining 86 percent is accounted for

by fluctuations in the growth rate of velocity.

     This fact implies that a hypothetical policy which maintained rigid

growth of the money supply over business cycle phases would not

stabilize nominal GNP growth. Nevertheless, monetary mischief was par-

tially responsible for the poor macroeconomic outcome of the past 15

years. First, we notice a consistent tendency for monetary growth to be

lower in recessions during the three business cycles between 1949 and

1961. This destabilizing behavior may be viewed, along with the

procyclical movements of money during the Great Depression, as the

catalyst for Friedman's CGMR proposal. The proposal might not achieve

complete stabilization of the growth of nominal GNP, Friedman reasoned

 in 1960, but it was likely to result in more stability than had been

 achieved by the actual monetary policies observed up to that time.2

      Another prominent feature in Table 1 is the steady acceleration of

 monetary growth in successive business cycles beginning in 1961. The

 weighted average growth rates of money, velocity, and nominal GNP in
                                    9




successive cycles were (in percent):

                            Money        Velocity         Nominal GNP



          1958—61            1.9            3.3                   5.2

          1961—70            4.4            2.7                   7.1

          1970—75            6.2            3.1                   9.3

          1975—80            7.5            3.3                 10.8

          1980—82            6.1            1.5                 7.6

Since velocity growth exhibited no significant change over these cycles,

except for 1980—82, the behavior of money can be blamed for the long—

term increase in nominal GNP growth and in the rate of inflation in the

1970s as compared to the 1950s and early l960s. Thus a careful distinc-

tion must be made between the small role of money growth in contributing

to the short—run timing of individual cycles, and its large role in

contributing to the acceleration of nominal GNP growth and inflation

that occurred in the 1960s and 1970s.

     The behavior of the inflation rate in column (6) averaged over al1

cycles shows a striking pattern, with an average growth rate of 3.8

percent in expansions and 5.2 percent in recessions. This appears to

conflict with the usual view that recessions are a necessary evil to

bring down the inflation rate. An examination of the individual cycles,

however, suggests that the seven—cycle average mixes up three quite

different types of experience. The recessions between 1949 and 1961, as

well as the most recent 1980—82 episode, display the expected

procyclical movement. The middle three cycles between 1961 and 1980,

however, exhibit a strong countercyclical pattern that helps to

demonstrate the effect of two of our central characteristics.
                                     j-'J




     CharacteriStic   (3) refers to the continuous upward adjustment of

the inflation rate that occurs when unemployment remains below its
                                                            most obvious in
natural rate. This gradual adjustment of inflation was

the long 1961—70 cycle. Because inflation adapted with substantial

inertia to rapid nominal GNF growth (characteristic 2), the economy

experienced a period between 1964 and 1969 when the actual unemployment

rate fell substantially below the natural rate of unemployment. The

                                            continued into the 1969—70
gradual upward adjustment of inflation

recession, which witnessed faster inflation than previous phases despite

slower nominal GNP growth. A complementary explanation is that the

slowdown in nominal GNP growth in 1969—70 was the mildest of any of the

postwar cycles, further inhibiting any deceleration of inflation.

     Characteristic (4) refers to the impact of supply shocks (sharp

swings in the relative prices of important materials) on the aggregate

 inflation rate. If the growth rate of nominal GNP were to remain

 constant, then a spontaneous upsurge of the inflation rate following a

 supply shock would cause a reduction in real GNP growth, and, in severe

 cases, a recession. The 1970—75 and 1979—80 business cycles both ended

 with recessions that were triggered by supply shocks and amplified by a

 slowdown in nominal CNP growth. Between late 1972 and 1975 the relative

 price of oil increased by 25 percent, and again by more than 40 percent

 between late 1978 and late 1981. The relative price of food increased
                                            1974. Finally, the recession of
 by about 10 percent between 1972 and
                                                         occurred after the
 1973—75 was aggravated by the extra inflation that

 termination in May 1974 of the Nixon—era price control program.3 As a

 result the inflation rate observed in the recession phase of these two

 cycles was substantially higher than in the expansion phase. The marked
                                      11




difference between the countercyclical behavior of inflation in the

1973—75 and 1980 recessions, and its procyclical behavior in the 1981—82

recession, provides a strong confirmation of the view that supply shocks

matter (characteristic 4). These facts serve to refute those who focus

narrowly on prior fluctuations in the growth rate of the money supply as

the sole explanation of the inflation rate and support a view that

inflation depends on both demand factors (summarized in the rate of

nominal GNP growth) and on supply factors as well.

     There was an additional consequence of supply shocks. Partly as a

result of cost—of—living escalators in wage contracts, supply shocks had

the effect of permanently raising the rate of inflation at any given

unemployment rate. This forced policymakers to choose between prolonged

recession and an acceleration in monetary growth to ratify the upward

ratchet of inflation caused by the supply shock. During the 1975—78

expansion the choice was made to "ratify" or "validate" the inflation

rate. In this sense the postwar peak in the growth rates of money and

nominal GNP during the 1975—80 cycle was not simply a perverse action by

misinformed policymakers, but rather an indirect consequence of the

supply shocks themselves.



Lessons from the Postwar Experience


     This brief review of postwar business cycles suggests several

lessons that should guide the development of any new approach to

dampening business cycles.

          1. Policymakers may be tempted to move the economy below the

             natural rate of unemployment to generate jobs or above

              that rate to stop inflation, but in doing either they only
                        12




   breed future instability. By allowing the economy to re-

   main so far below the natural unemployment rate between

   1964 and 1969, policymakers of the l960s indirectly

   created future business cycles by forcing the policymakers

   of the 1970s and 1980s to implement restrictive anti

   inflationary demand management policies. And by allowing

   the economy to operate so far above the natural unemploy-

   ment rate in 1982 and 1983, current policymakers may

   indirectly be causing "echo" effects in the form of future

   cycles.

2. While control of nominal GNP growth is an essential

   prerequisite to the dampening of real cycles, nominal GNP

   growth should not always be maintained at a single

    constant rate. If the economy were in full equilibrium,

    operating with zero inflation and at the natural rate of

    unemployment, stable nominal GNP growth would be the

    optimal policy.4 But in two other circumstances, there is

    no presumption in favor of stable nominal GNP growth.

    First, if the economy starts out with actual unemployment

    far above the natural rate, as in 1983, a sustainable

    recovery cannot be achieved by stable nominal GNP growth,

    for reasons discussed below. Second, in the face of a

                                              circumstances find
    supply shock, policyinakerS may in some

    that it is optimal to accommodate the shock fully or

    partially, that is, to allow nominal GNP    growth to rise in

    response to higher inflation in order to insulate real GNP

    growth.
                                       13



                 III.   RECONSIDERING THE CASE AGAINST ACTIVISM


     The case in favor of a CGMR approach to policymaking has both a

positive and a negative component. In favor of such a policy is the

argument that by setting a lid on the growth rate of nominal income, a

CGMR prevents emergence of the conditions necessary for an acceleration

of inflation. There is nothing special about money in this connection,

however, since a lid on nominal income can be maintained by a target for

aggregate credit, as recently recommended by Benjamin Friedman (1983),

and, better yet, by a target for nominal GNTP growth itself. More

central to the concern of this paper is the negative component of the

case for a CGMR policy. This criticizes as utopian the set of assump-

tions about the policy environment required to justify an activist

approach.

     Arthur Okun (1972) crystallized the monetarist case by setting out

the main characteristics of a hypothetical "activist's paradise' in

which stabilization policy could achieve almost perfect control over

nominal GNP growth:

            1. Policymakers have the ability to forecast perfectly future
                 changes in the private demand for and supply of goods and
                 services.
            2. Policymakers can forecast perfectly the future effect of

                 current changes in monetary and fiscal policy.

            3. Policymakers possess policy instruments that have a strong

                 impact   on nominal GNP growth.
            4. There are no costs of changing policy instruments.
            5.   There are no political constraints on the use of policy

                 instruments for stabilization purposes.
                                   14




     Okun's activist paradise does not and has not ever existed.

                                                                   But
Knowledge and control techniques are imperfect in numerous ways.

the existence of imperfection does not create a definitive case against

activism. The basic question, albeit a hypothetical one, is whether an

economy under imperfect activist control exhibits more stable nominal

GNP growth than an economy operating under CGMR.


Lags and Forecasting

     Milton Friedman (1961) made a centerpiece of the case for a CGMR

the argument that "long and variable lags" in the effect of monetary

policy or spending are likely to make countercyclical monetary policy

actions destabilizing. In that paper he accentuated the negative aspect

of the formal stabilization analysis that he had developed a decade

earlier (1953). In a subsequent theoretical article Stanley Fischer and

J. Phillip Cooper validated part but not all of Friedman's thesis. They

 found that the variability of lags was a stumbling block that could well

 allow a CGMR to outperform a more activist policy, but the mere length

 of the lag called for a more active policy keyed to the rates of change

 of target variables like inflation and unemployment.

      Actually the length and variability of lags in the effectiveness of

 monetary policy have been substantially exaggerated. Many monetarists

 believe that lags are short. In fact Milton Friedman now describes the

 effect of money on output as beginning after only six months. A simple

 comparison of cyclical peaks in the real money supply with subsequent
                                                 mean lag in the effect of
 peaks in the coincident indicators suggests a

 monetary policy of only 9 months, with a narrow range over five postwar

 cycles between 6 and 12 quarters.5
                                     15




      Lags in the range of two to four quarters seem short enough to be

 circumvented through the use of forecasts. Despite the much—publicized

 failures of forecasters during the l970s that has led some commentators

 to adopt a skeptical disregard for the value of forecasts, a

 reconsideration of the evidence does not suggest so pessimistic a

 verdict. Forecasters failed completely to foresee the enormous upsurge

 in the inflation rate during the period between early 1973 and early

 1975. But nominal GNP growth errors were
                                            relatively small, in the range
 of one to two percentage points on a four—quarter—ahead basis, so that

the positive inflation errors (i.e., actual greater than predicted) had

their counterpart in negative errors in forecasts of real GNP growth.6

     Since the basic policy proposal of this paper is for the Federal

Reserve to target on forecasts of nominal CMI' growth, the relative

accuracy of the nominal GNP forecasts in the 1970s is reassuring. For

instance, a Federal Reserve policy of maintaining steady 10 percent

growth in nominal GNP during the 1975—80 would have required tighter

monetary policy much earlier than actually occurred, since the four—

quarter—ahead consensus forecast of nominal GNP growth exceeded 10

percent during tmst quarters between early 1976 and mid—1978. The most

serious errors in forecasting nominal GNP growth appear to have occurred

during the 1981—82 recession; there was little recognition by commercial

forecasters in the fall of 1981 of the sharp decline in velocity growth

that was about to occur. This important fact suggests that at least

part of the 1982 economic slump was inevitable and could not have been

offset by even the most enlightened policymakers.
                                   16




Uncertain Economic Structure and Policy Multipli

     Perfect knowledge of monetary and fiscal multipliers is the second

overly optimistic aspect of the activists' paradise.    In a classic paper

(1967) William Brainard showed that when policy multipliers are un-
                                           and target real GNP should be
certain, the expected gap between actual
                                             demonstration illustrates the
closed by only a fraction of the gap. His

danger that a policy stimulus introduced to close a GNP gap may lead to

overshooting and an acceleration of inflation, or that policy restraint
                                                the economy into a
introduced to eliminate overheating will push

reces sion.

     Multiplier uncertainty is a double—edged sword. In connection with

monetary policy, it can be interpreted as a loose relation between
                                  nominal GNP. But nominal GNP is the
changes in money and changes in

goal variable of concern to policymakerS, while the value of the money
                                         of its effect on nominal GNP. The
 supply is of no concern independently

 discovery that there is a loose connection between the two would imply

 that a CGMR is a poor way to stabilize nominal GNP, not just that

 activist fluctuations in money might cause unpredictable changes in

 nominal GNP.

      The monetary control dilemma occurs because there is a loose

 connection between the monetary instruments that the Fed controls pre-

 cisely, unborrowed reserves and the discount rate, and the goal variable

 of ultimate concern, nominal GNP. The money supply is neither an
                                                 intermediate variable that
 instrument nor a goal variable, but rather an

 is often called irrelevant" in the sense that its numerical value is of

  no direct concern to the welfare of the population. Multiplier

  uncertainty can refer equally to the looseness of the link between
                                     17




unborrowed reserves and the money supply, as well as to the link between

money and nominal GNP. Thus there is no presumption that multiplier

uncertainty supports the case for a CGMR over a nominal GNP growth

target. Instead, such uncertainty implies only that changes in bank

reserves do not have a reliable impact on either money or nominal GNP.

     Since multiplier uncertainty is a genuine phenomenon, it qualifies

the case for a nominal GNP target.   If the economy were to revive in the

mid—1980s sufficiently for unemployment to approach the natural rate,

then, following Brainard, the Federal Reserve should not attempt to

close the entire gap between actual and target unemployment within a

short period. This qualification is even more important if there is

substantial uncertainty about the value of the natural unemployment rate

itself.


Uncertainty about the Natural Rate


     The ultimate goal of monetary policy is to maintain the unem-

ployment rate at the natural rate of unemployment, and real GNP at the

corresponding level of natural real GNP. Recall that this situation

with unemployment at its natural rate is defined as one in which the

inflation rate remains constant, neither accelerating nor decelerating.

If the economy is in the fortunate initial situation that unemployment

equals the natural rate, then the Fed can maintain this situation and

keep the inflation rate constant by maintaining nominal GNP growth

constant at a rate equal to the inherited inflation rate plus the growth

in the economy's natural real GNP.7 If the economy starts off with

unemployment far below the natural rate, as in 1966, or far above, as in

1982, then the Fed's job in choosing a nominal GNP path is more difficu1t.
                                               18




    My best estimate (1982) of the natural rate of unemployment in 1982

is about 6 percent. In the last quarter of 1982 the economy was

operating at an output ratio of roughly 90 percent, i.e., achievement of

a 6 percent unemployment rate would have required a level of real GNP 11

percent higher than actually occurred. Such estimates, however, are

subject to substantial uncertainty. The history of U. S. research on

the wage—price process reveals a continuous shift of consensus in a

pessimistic direction, with studies in the late 1960s tending to deny

Friedman's natural rate hypothesis, and studies in the early l970s

accepting that hypothesis but estimating the natural rate to be in the

range of 4.5 to 5.0 percent unemployment. This contrasts with the

current retrospective evaluation that the natural rate had already

reached almost 6 percent by 1972, and has changed little since then.

     Issues involved in estimating the natural unemployment rate can be

summarized in terms of a simplified equation that explains the time path

of the inflation rate          as depending on lagged values of the

inflation rate (p), the unemployment rate (Un), one or more variables

representing the influence of supply shocks (zt), and an error term

(er). The e term represents any influences on inflation that have been

omitted from the equation:


          Pt = a +      bptl   —
                                   cU +   dz   +
                                                    e.                 (2)



If the fitted estimate of the "b" parameter, the response of inflation

to past inflation, is equal to unity, and if supply shocks (zr) and the

error term (er) are equal to zero, then (2) can be solved for the

unemployment rate (Ut) that will make the inflation rate          equal to

 its lagged value
                                               19



                   =   a   +        —
           p                            cUt,

so    Pt =             then
             Pt_is

           U           a/c.                                                (3)



     The concept defined in (3) is sometimes called the "no—shock"

natural rate of unemployment, since it is defined by assuming that all

supply shocks (zt) are absent. The presence of supply shocks, that is,

positive values of z, helps to explain why inflation accelerated during

the decade of the 1970s despite an average unemployment rate that was

higher than the l950s or l960s. The natural unemployment rate, taking

account of the influence of actual supply shocks and the error term, can

be written more generally as:

                           a + dzt + e t
               t                c
                                                                           (4)



Thus in maintaining the economy at the natural unemployment rate, the

Federal Reserve has a difficult, multi—part decision problem to solve.

First, it must estimate the no—shock natural rate (a/c) on the basis of

the best available evidence. The accuracy of these estimates depends

heavily   on the use of accurate proxies for the influence of supply
shocks (zr). Second, the Fed must moderate its policy if        the   economy is

experiencing       or is expected to experience long—lasting supply shocks,

since positive values of z in (4) raise the natural rate, while

negative values lower the natural rate. Finally, the performance of

equation (2) in tracking the actual outcome of the inflation process

must be monitored continually, and consistent positive errors, with

inflation turning Out to be greater than forecast, would call for an

upward revision of the current estimate of the natural rate.
                                   20




     My own research provides an example of how the Fed might implement

a policy of choosing a nominal GNP growth rate in order to guide the

economy to its natural unemployment rate. First, my estimate of a

slightly more complex version of equation (2) provides an estimate of

the "no—shock" natural unemployment rate, about 6 percent during the

late l970s and early l980s.8 The sample period of this equation is the

interval between early 1954 and the end of 1980. To test whether the

"et" error term has been of significant magnitude since the end of 1980,

the equation can be used to forecast the inflation rate for 1981 and

1982, using actual values of the independent variables but generating

its own values, quarter—by-quarter, for the lagged inflation rate

variable. The result is the following forecasting record:



                              Four quarters Four quarters Eight quarters
                                 of 1981       of 1982      of 1981—82

   Actual inflation rate          8.5            4.9             6.7

   Predicted inflation rate       7.5            5.1             6.3

                                                —0.2             0.4
   Error (actual —   predicted)   1.0




 Thus the actual inflation rate has turned out to be slightly higher than

 predicted, indicating that, thus far in the prediction period, my 6.0

 percent estimate for the natural unemployment rate may be a bit too

 optimistic. This prediction record also has another important

 implication, that the relatively rapid deceleration of inflation

 observed in 1982 is not "surprising" and does not suggest any important
                                                            compared to the
 shift in the economy toward greater price flexibility as

 1954—80 period. The downward flexibility of the inflation rate in 1982

 reflects the combined influence of high unemployment and beneficial
                                     21




supply shocks, especially a reduction in the real price of oil and an

appreciation of the exchange rate.

     While the evidence suggests that the "no shock" natural

unemp1oynnt rate might be 6.5 rather than 6.0 percent, the band of

uncertainty surrounding this question is more important for policymaking

in future years than it is in 1983, with an unemployment rate around 10

percent. Another mitigating factor that somewhat eases the Fed's task

is the inertia of the inflation process itself. If policy errors do

cause unempooyment to slip half a point below the natural rate for six

months or a year, no great disaster will occur. Five years with

unemployment two percentage points below the natural rate in the l960s

were required to generate an acceleration of inflation from 1.5 percent

in 1964 to 5 percent in 1969. More modest errors will have more modest

consequences.


The Lucas Critique and the Credibility Hypothesis


     Robert Lucas (1976) added a new dimension to the Brainard analysis

of policy multipliers by pointing out that both structural coefficients

and policy multipliers were endogenous and would respond to the

particular policies chosen, thus making the conduct of policy even more

uncertain. The Iicas critique," which holds that agents respond

rationally to changes in the policy environment, has applied with

special force to the behavior of fnancial markets. Between 1979 and

1982 market participants believed that the Fed was attempting to

maintain growth rates of money supply aggregates within relatively

narrow bounds. A Friday afternoon announcement of a high outcome for

the money supply that week tended to raise interest rates, as
                                          that policy would be forced in
speculators increased their probability

the following week to shift toward restriction. This positive short—
                                           and interest rates replaced the
term correlation between monetary growth
                                           in standard textbook models of
short—term ngatiVe correlation imbedded

macroeconomics.

     Some economists have taken the negative message of the Lucas

critique too seriously, as if the possibility of shifting response
                                                                but also
patterns not only makes activist monetary policy impossible,
                                             replete with error. Well—
renders any econometric policy evaluation

informed speculative behavior during the 1979—82 period is important
                                             markets but does not imply
information for anyone studying financial
                                             for market expectations in
 that monetary policy had become impotent,

 1979—82 were             by the knowledge that the Fed was attempting to

                                           After the Fed announced in Octo-
 maintain a particular monetary target.

 ber, 1982, that it was abandoning its previous targets for the money

 supply concept Ml, due to deposit shifts caused by financial deregu-
                                           Between October 1982 and April
 lation, market expectations adjusted.

 1983, Ml growth rate jumped to double digits without any significant

 increase in short—term interest rates.
                                                      of the Lucas critique
      William Fellner (1979) developed an analogue

                                     the inertia in price adjustment that
 for our characteristic (2) above,

  led many commentators in 1980 and 1981 to predict that a deliberate

  policy—induced reduction in nominal GNP growth would reduce the
                                              significant loss in real
  inflation rate only at the cost of a very

  GNP. Fellner, following Lucas, argued that the sticky price adjustment
                                                          expectations
  process was an aspect of public behavior conditioned on
                                                responded slowly to a
  about the behavior of policymakers prices
                                  23




deceleration in nominal GNP growth only because the public had come to

expect policymakers to reverse themselves quickly. Firms were reluctant

to cut prices in recessions, because they expected policymakers to

overreact to any decline in real GNP, and thus to boost nominal GNP

growth after only a short recession. If the government were only to

adopt a "credible" policy of consistently slow nominal GNP growth and

maintain it for five years or more, Feliner argued, firms and workers

would adapt. Seeing that government nominal GNP creation would not bail

them out, firms and workers would be more willing to accept price and

wage cuts in recessions.

     There is a valid element in the Feilner view, that the response of

inflation to high unemployment (the c coefficient above in equation 2)

is not immutable. Indeed, that coefficient was higher in some earlier

historical periods than in the postwar U. S., and higher in some other

countries. But there are two problems with Feilner's view. First, the

government has no way to convince the public that its determinaton to

fight inflation is more serious than in the past, other than actually to

carry out a slow—nominal—CNP—growth policy. By the time the public

catches on to the new toughness of policymakers, the damage may already

have been done in the form of lost output and high unemployment.

Second, the historical evidence for the postwar U. S. suggests that the

response of inflation.to changes in the unemployment rate (the c

coefficient) was not very different under the restrictive monetary

policy pursued by policymakers in the late 1950s than under the

expansive policy pursued after 1967.

     These criticisms of the Feilner hypothesis were made prior to the

1981—82 recession. The unexpectedly high level of unemployment ex—
                                        24




perienced during 1982, combined with the failure of inflation to

decelerate faster than predicted, suggests that there was no substantial

change in the structure of the wage— and price—setting process. Each

economic agent may have believed in the Fed's new toughness, but this

belief   did not provide the incentive nor the coordination required for
all economic agents to decide en masse to alter their long—term
contracting   arrangements for wages and prices.


The Policy Ineffectiveness Proposition

     Lucas, along with Thomas Sargent, Neil Wallace, and Robert Barro,

constructed "equilibrium business cycle models" that make changes in

output depend on money "surprises," that is, on deviations between the

actual and expected growth rate of the money supply. Sargent and

Wallace (1976) have used such models to show that a monetary policy that

reacts in a systematic way to past events, say a derivative control rule

responding to past values of inflation and unemployment, cannot cause
                                                              will incor-
the required monetary surprise. Instead, rational agents

 porate the systematic component of monetary behavior into their estimate

 of the expected change in money. The Fed has no control over the

 difference between actual and expected monetary growth, on which the

 level of real GNP depends in these equilibrium business cycle models.
                                                              is obviously a
 The Sargent—Wallace "policy ineffectiveness proposition"

 startling result, since it denies that a systematic countercyclical

            policy   can have any impact at all on real output.
 monetary

         Ironically, the Sargent—Wallace result, if true, would make

 systematic countercyclical policy not only futile, but also un-

 necessary. The proposition is based on equilibrium business cycle
                                  25




models in which prices are assumed to be perfectly flexible, so that

markets always clear and the voluntary supply of labor by workers always

equals the voluntary demand for labor by firms. In the Lucas—Sargent—

Wallace models the Fed could eliminate inflation simply by announcing

that henceforth it would expand the money supply at a rate compatible

with price stability. The large output loss in the U. S. recession of

1981—82, in the face of an announced disinflationary monetary policy,

does not seem consistent with the equilibrium interpretation of output

fluctuations based on errors in forecasting money.

     Lucas (1980) has defended the unrealistic assumptions of the

equilibrium models by claiming that "equilibrium models of this new

class seem to do about as well in fitting time series as do models based

on the neoclassical synthesis," where the latter is his label for the

traditional Keynesian macroeconomic model combined with a gradual

adjustment inflation equation like (2). Yet Lucas' sanguine view,

expressed about three years ago, is no longer justified. In detailed

analyses of both postwar data and U. S. historical data going back to

1890, Mishkin (1982) and Cordon (l982b) have shown that the policy

ineffectiveness proposition is empirically refuted, and that he

equilibrium business cycle approach fits the data poorly. Thus far no

spokesman for the policy ineffectiveness proposition has shown how an

empirical case for that hypothesis can be resuscitated, nor how the

behavior of the unemployment rate in 1981 and 1982 (much less 1930—40)

can be made consistent with that view. In the end the 1981—82 recession

may prove to have been as fatal to the Lucas—Sargent—Wallace proposition

as the Creat Depression was to pre—Keynesian classical macroeconomics.
                                  26




         IV. MONETARY AND FISCAl CONTROL OF NOMINAL GNP GROWTH


     A continuing theme of this paper is the need to distinguish between

two separate aspects of the stabilization policy problem, issues

involved first, in achieving short—run control of nominal GNP growth,

and second, in determining the optimal path for nominal GNP growth in

light of the economy's starting value of the unemployment rate. In this

section we examine the first issue, that is, how control of nominal GNP

growth would actually be carried out, and how the adoption of this new

policy target would differ from previous eras in which the Federal

Reserve emphasized stabilizing either interest rates or the growth of

monetary aggregates.


Sources of Shifts in Velocity Growth

     If the growth rate of velocity were constant, quarter after quarter

and year after year, there would be no difference between a CGMR and a

policy of maintaining nominal GNP growth at a constant rate. But we

have seen in Table 1 that most of the difference in the growth rate of

nominal GNP between expansion and recession phases of the business cyle

has been due to fluctuations in velocity growth, not in money growth.

Velocity can shift as a result of decisions made in both the "commodity

market" (the market for goods and services) or in the "money market"

(the market in which interest rates adjust to equate the supply and

demand for money).

     The commodity market contributes to velocity shifts through the

behavior of fixed investment, inventory changes, and the foreign trade

balance. Fixed investment fluctuations are best described by what

economists call a "multiplier—accelerator" mechanism. The level of net
                                   27



investment tends to respond to the growth rate of real GNP; an expansion

of consumption spending raises business firm estimates of the amount of

plant and equipment that will be needed next year. Investment in-

creases, and this, through the multiplier, raises consumption further.

Eventually the process comes to an end and is reversed, but, while it is

occurring, the economy can experience a period of rapid velocity growth,

as in 1955, 1965, 1973, and 1978. During those years of rapid growth,

the share of real GNP taking the form of expenditures on durable goods

reaches its highest point of the business cycle.9 The reverse occurs in

recession years.

     Inventory changes tend to exaggerate the amplitude of swings in

nominal GNP growth and, hence, in velocity growth. Business cycle

troughs tend to occur in quarters like 1975:Q1 and l982:Q4 when

inventory liquidation is greatest. In contrast to the 4.4 percent

decline in velocity that occurred in 1982 (comparing 1982:Q4 with

1981:Q4), the decline in velocity would have been 2.7 percent if

inventory changes had been excluded. Forecasting models tend to miss

extreme swings in the process of inventory accumulation and decumula—

tion, and likewise the Fed should ignore such swings in attempting to

control nominal GNP growth. In the jargon of national income ac-

counting, ignoring inventory change means that the Fed should control

the growth of "nominal final sales," not nominal GNP.

     The decline in the foreign trade balance, exports minus imports,

played a major role in accounting for the depth of the 1981—82

recession. In an arithmetic sense the decline in real net exports

accounted for fully 75 percent ($27/$36 billion) of the decline in the

level of real GNP between 1981:Ql and l982:Q4. The main cause of this
                                    28




deterioration was the 40 percent appreciation of the dollar that oc-

curred between 1980 and l982:Q4, and this in turn was caused in large

       by the high level of real interest rates experienced during   1981
part

and 1982. We recall in this connection the fourth and fifth aspects of
Okun's   "activist's paradise," the proposition that there are no costs of

changing policy instruments nor any political constraints on such

changes. Maintenance of either a CGMR policy or constant growth in

nominal GNP is likely to require greater fluctuations in real interest

rates than a policy of stabilizing interest rates themselves, and this

interest rate instability is then likely to be communicated to the

exchange rate and to the trade balance. Forecasters missed this channel

of influence of monetary policy in 1981—82, largely because exchange

rates were fixed during much of the historical sample period typically

used to estimate time—series econometric equations.

       The money market is also a significant source of instability in

velocity growth. Since the late 1970s there have been continuing

financial market innovations, spurred by the Depository Institutions

Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980. Deregulation has allowed

interest to be paid on a growing share of checkable deposits, and this

has had the effect of altering the response of the demand for such

deposits to changes in interest rates paid on traditional short—term

 market securities like Treasury bills. In the months following October,

 1982, the Federal Reserve announced that shifts among types of deposits

 had made it impossible to maintain the money aggregate Ml within its

 previous target growth range.     The rapid growth of Ml during this

 period, with the corresponding decline in velocity, is an extreme exam-

 ple of multiplier uncertainty. That is, 'the Fed admitted that it no
                                    29




longer knew how total spending was related to Ml. Because total

spending matters and Ml does not for the determination of inflation and

output growth, the Fed wisely decided temporarily to abandon targeting

Ml.

      Financial market innovations have also altered the response of

spending to changes in interest rates. In periods of high market

interest rates prior to the late 1970s, deposit rate ceilings at savings

banks induced depositors to shift funds to market instruments like

Treasury bills. This process was called "disintermediation." In

response to this loss of deposit funds, savings banks in turn slammed

shut the mortgage window, and mortgage loans could not during some

periods be obtained at any price. Through this mechanism only a rela-

tively modest increase in interest rates was required to send the

housing industry into a tailspin.

      But in recent years, with savings banks allowed to offer depositors

close to the market rate through a wide variety of certificates,

disintermediation has not occurred on the same scale. Instead, to choke

off housing construction, a much higher level of interest rates is re-

quired in order to reduce the demand for mortgage funds. In a nutshell,

the effect of monetary policy in the old days operated by a strong

rationing channel, but now must rely on a weaker price—substitution

channel. Much of the volatility of interest rates in the 1979—82 period

can be attributed to reliance on the price—substitution effect, combined

with the Fed's adoption of monetary growth targets which left interest

rates free to float and find their own new levels.
                                    30




Reassessing the Choice of Targets

     In a classic analysis William Poole (1970) showed that an interest

rate target for monetary policy was preferable to a money supply target

when the demand for money is unstable, and a money—supply target was

preferable when the demand for commodities is unstable. This analysis

was carried out in a context (the same as Brainard's in 1967) in which

the ultimate goal of policymakers is the stabilization of real GNP at a

target level, and as such is compatible with the orientation of this

paper toward equalizing the actual and natural rates of unemployment.

In a formal model like Poole's, it is standard practice to define the

concept of "unstable money demand" and "unstable commodity demand" as

totally unpredictable random variables which policymakers have no hope

of offsetting.

     But actually, as Benjamin Friedman (1977) has stressed, the opera-

tional content of instability means in practice that the demand for

money or commodities drifts away from predicted values not just for a

day or a week, but for several quarters or even years at a time.

Periods of high durable goods demand like 1955, 1965, 1973, and 1978,

tend to persist for four to six quarters. Unexplained swings in the

demand for money also tend to persist, as in the famous "case of the

missing money" that occurred between 1975 and 1978, when the actual

money supply fell far short of predictions based on previously estimated

econometric models. Friedman's point is that policymakers can learn

about such instability as it occurs, since new data on the state of

commodity demand are issued at least monthly, while data on Ml are

issued weekly. Policy is more efficient when it utilizes the latest

available information that the demand for commodities and/or money has
                                      31




shifted and adjusts its policy accordingly.

       Because both commodity and money demand exhibit instability, there

is no simple rule that the Fed can follow for the policy instruments

under its direct. control, unborrowed bank reserves and the discount

rate. The experience of 1981 and 1982 has taught us that the level of

real interest rates and of the effective exchange rate has a strong but

delayed impact on nominal GNP growth. And growth rates of nominal

monetary aggregates, whether bank reserves or Ml itself, must ultimately

be related to the growth rate of nominal spending on goods and services.

Thus the Federal Reserve can do no better than to use the best recent

models and other information to decide what current combination of

interest rates, reserve growth, and the exchange rate is compatible with

the nominal GM? growth path that it has set.

       Poole's analysis reminds us that stabilization of interest rates

may   be   desirable in cases when the demand for money is particularly

unstable, as in late 1982 and early 1983 when deposit shifts were pro-

nounced. But stabilization of interest rates would seem on the surface

to run aground on the shoals of Milton Friedman's famous (1968) proposi-

tion that the Federal Reserve cannot control the nominal interest rate.

Friedman pointed out that if the Fed attempted to maintain a fixed

nominal interest rate when there was an upward blip in the demand for

commodities, it would be forced to print the money to accommodate the

increase in the demand for money, and that this would raise the expec-

ted rate of inflation and depress the real interest rate, thus further

stimulating the demand for commodities and generating an unstable pro-

cess ad infinitum. But our recommended approach to the setting of

monetary policy deals with this problem directly. First, the Fed would
                                     32




use interest rates as one of several guideposts to the control of

nominal GNP. Any sustained upward blip in the demand for commodities

would   raise forecasts for the next year's growth rate of nominal GNP
and,   as this predicted rate rose above the Fed's stated target, interest
rates would be allowed to increase.
        If unexplained shifts in the demand for commodities and money were
totally    random and had no serial persistence, the Fed would have no hope

of controlling nominal GNP growth and could do no better than Poole's

procedure of weighting interest rates and money growth as targets ac-

cording to the respective variances of money demand and commodity

demand. But, as B. Friedman recognized, serial persistence in the

shifts creates the potential for direct control of nominal GNP growth.

The new wrinkle added to the Poole/Friedman analysis by events of recent

years has been the important role of flexible exchange rates as a chan-

nel of transmission of monetary policy. As it learns more about the

response of the U. S. trade balance to major and sustained fluctuations

in the effective exchange rate of the dollar, the Fed may find that

intervention in foreign exchange markets to dampen excessive swings in

the dollar becomes a necessary component of its overall policy of sta-

bilizing nominal GNP growth.


The Role of Fiscal Stabilization

        Temporary income tax changes formed the lynchpin of countercyclical

 stabilization policy in the "new economics" of advisers to the Kennedy

 and Johnson administrations in the early l960s. But these changes in

 tax rates would of necessity be temporary, and it was soon recognized

 that temporary income tax changes may have little potency (thus viola—
                                   33



ting the third item in the description of Okun's "activist paradise").

Robert Eisner (1971), using Milton Friedman's permanent income hypothe-

sis of consumption, showed that a temporary income tax cut or surcharge

would fail to alter permanent income and thus would have a low spending

multiplier. Not only did Eisner thus discredit the temporary tax

changes favored by the mid—l960s activists, but also indicated that the

lag in the effect of such fiscal changes might be long and variable,

depending on the public's assessment of the likelihood that the tax

change would soon be reversed. The most recent empirical work on this

issue by Alan Blinder (1981) suggests that a temporary tax change does

cause a change in consumption spending, but the effect is partial and

drawn out over two years.

     Eisner's point about temporary income tax changes works in the

opposite way for temporary excise tax changes. These are more effective

than permanent tax changes in creating an intertemporal displacement of

spending. The main qualification here is the familiar political one:

the necessity for Congressional debate of such fiscal measures may lead

not only to perverse spending effects in anticipation of future tax

changes, but also to delays which cause tax changes to be made at the

wrong stage of the business cycle. The main tax of this type in the

U. S. fiscal stabilization arsenal has been the investment tax credit,

and the historical record of tax changes in the l960s and early l970s

indicates a perversely procyclical impact.

     John Taylor (1982) has recently called attention to a quasi—

automatic method of fiscal stabilization used in Sweden between 1955 and

1972, the countercyclical investment stabilization fund. The timing of

"releases" from the fund to stimulate investment spending in recessions
                                   34




was not keyed to respond automatically to a particular cyclical indica-

tor, but was based on the decision of a particular government agency.

Taylor shows however, that the decisions on releases were prompt and

amounted to a countercyclical policy rule. A related type of counter—

cyclical fiscal policy has operated in Japan, where the speed of

completion of large public works projects is accelerated or decelerated

according to the phase of the cycle.

     The fact that such policies have not been successfully implemented

in the U. S. says more about the institutional drag imposed by our

Constitution than about any inherent defects in such plans. But the

Constitutional barrier is severe, since it not only inhibits rapid

implementation of countercyclical fiscal policy but also interferes with

the coordination of monetary and fiscal policy. Because the Federal

Reserve can move quickly, while the fiscal policy process tends to move

slowly, I believe that the main burden of dampening the business cycle

must fall on the Federal Reserve, and that out of necessity it is forced

to base its actions on a guess about the likely future course of fiscal

policy, not on any actual influence in a coordinated policy setting.


Political Objections to a Nominal CNP Target

     Two contradictory reactions are sometimes heard to the proposal for

an explicit nominal CNP growth target. One is that this is what the Fed

has been doing implicitly all along, at least before 1979 when it

 adopted an explicit policy based on monetary aggregates. The poor

 performance of the Fed in carrying out this implicit policy is then

 taken as a condemnation of the idea itself. This criticism is unconvin-

 cing, however, because there is no evidence that the Fed ever implemen—
                                   35




ted a nominal GNP target nor that it based decisions on projected devia-

tions of actual nominal GNP growth from any such target.

     The opposite criticism is that it is not politically feasible for

the Fed to adopt a policy based on nominal GNP growth. 'Announcing a

GNP target comes close to announcing an unemployment rate——and one that

is often unacceptable——whereas a monetary target implies no precise

unemployment level because of the variability in velocity. Thus while

the Federal Reserve has a nominal GNP target in mind when it announces

its money targets, there is no politically embarrassing admission of an

associated unemployment rate.     Consider, however, a policy approach

that attempted to stabilize nominal GNP along a path designed to keep

the unemployment rate equal to its natural rate in the long run. In

carrying out such a policy, the Fed would not actually be required to

announce its current opinion about the value of the natural unemployment

rate, but would need only to use that opinion in a behind—the—scenes

meeting when considering its target path for nominal GNF over the

forthcoming year or two years. There is little reason for the Fed to be

concerned over the political repercussions of its choic.e of a nominal

GNP path, judging by the observed behavior of the actual Republican

Administration in its economic statements in early 1983, in which it

showed no reluctance to announce that the actual unemployment rate would

remain above the natural rate until 1988, and that unemployment was

likely to be near or above 10 percent throughout 1983.

     There is another political consideration. Evaluation of the Fed's

performance by Congress and by the public, it is suggested, must be

based on something that the Fed can actually control, and no one pre-

tends that the Fed can control nominal GNP growth. The logic behind
                                      36




this objection sounds as if there were an "eitheror" proposition

involved. But there is no black—and—white dividing line between macro-

economic variables labelled "money' and those labelled "spending." The

Fed controls unborrowed bank reserves and the discount rate directly,

but it must rely on indirect channels of transmission to influence

either money or spending. Further, the Fed's ability to control money

aggregates has been eroded by deregulation. By March 1984 bank reserve

requirements on all the nontransactions components of M2 will have

disappeared. The political argument thus appears to strip the Fed of

anything but nonborrowed bank reserves as a target, yet there are too

many   slips   between the cup of bank reserves and the lip of nominal GNP

growth to make this an acceptable alternative.



                  V. SELECTING A PATH FOR NOMINAL GNP GROWTH


       Once the Fed has convinced itself to use its control of interest

rates and bank reserves to stabilize the growth rate of nominal GNP

around some path, it must choose a number (or range of numbers) for that

path. Its choice is constrained by the inertia of inflation and by the

obvious fact that this year's unemployment rate depends not just on the

growth rate of real GNP achieved by the Fed, but on last year's unem-

ployment rate. The Fed's choice of path involves quite different

issues, depending on whether the economy last year experienced an actual

 unemployment rate near the natural rate, or far away from the natural

 rate.
                                   37




When the Economy is Already at the Natural Rate

     If the actual unemployment rate is at the natural unemployment

rate, then by definition it will stay there if the growth rate of actual

real GNP equalsthe growth rate of natural real GNP (q    qN) Also by
definition, there will be no tendency for the inflation rate (p) to

accelerate or decelerate from its recent value if there are no supply

shocks. Thus the appropriate path for nominal GNP growth (y) is the sum

of recent inflation and natural output growth (y = p +   h. If,   for

instance, inherited inflation is 5 percent and natural real CNP growth

is 3 percent, then a nominal GNP growth path of 8 percent would tend to

ratify the initial situation. This choice would have to be altered only

if a significant supply shock occurred; the issues raised by such an

event are discussed in a separate section below.

     Some readers will balk at the suggestion that the Fed should an-

nounce that it is planning explicitly to ratify an ongoing inflation, 5

percent in the preceding example. Should not the Fed constantly strug-

gle to push the inflation rate toward zero, so that the nation can once

again enjoy price stability? The obvious problem is that a further

deceleration of inflation, beginning at the natural rate of

unemployment, requires the Fed to create a recession. This leads to the

familiar short—run cost of lost output. But, more important in the

context of our overall objective to dampening the business cycle, any-

thing the Fed does to push the economy away from the natural rate gener-

ates instability, overshooting, and "echo effects" far into the future.

The Fed, by destabilizing the economy in 1982, bred significant

instability far into the future.

     The best recent evaluations of the welfare cost of inflation, e.g.,
                                    38




Fischer (1982), conclude that almost every cost is associated with a

particular legislative or institutional rule. For instance, inflation

Sets up a process of redistribution from creditors to debtors.   This

problem would be avoided if bonds and mortgages with interest payments

fixed in nominal terms were replaced by indexed bonds. Similarly,

inflation causes a distortion when companies using historical cost

depreciation and FIFO accounting rules are overtaxed. Such distortions

would not occur in a fully inflation—adjusted tax system. Passbook

savers have been hurt by inflation, but interest rate ceilings on pass-

book savings accounts are gradually being phased out. The bedrock

welfare cost of inflation is the "shoe—leather cost" associated with

capital losses on currency and bank reserves. The government could pay

interest on bank reserves, and, as Fischer points out, the inflation tax

on currency holdings may actually be an efficient means of extending the

reach of the tax system to the elusive underground economy. The depen-

dence of inflation's welfare cost on obsolete institutions suggests an

additional theme for this paper: monetary policy often is forced into

destabilizing actions that aggravate the business cycle, when institu-

tional reform would achieve society's objectives more efficiently, and

without aggravating the business cycle.


When the Economy is Far Away from the Natural Rate

      The difficulties of managing the economy when the initial unemploy-

 ment rate is far away from the natural rate can be likened to the

 problem
           of a pilot in bringing an airplane in for a smooth landing on a
 runway.    Here altitude corresponds to the unemployment rate, and the

 runway corresponds to the natural unemployment rate. The problem is to
                                     39




avoid crashing into the runway. The worst thing the Fed can do is

choose a constant growth rate of nominal GNP and stick to it, for this

guarantees a crash.

     The   reason for the crash can be stated in terms of our basic
inflation equation (2) above. This states that in the absence of supply
shocks (z = 0),   the inflation rate slows down compared to last period's

inflation rate if the unemployment rate is above the natural

unemployment rate. Starting in a situationlike early 1983, when the

actual unemployment rate was 10 percent in contrast to the natural

unemployment rate of 6 or 6.5, there was considerable pressure for

inflation to continue its deceleration. Yet by definition nominal GNP

growth is divided between inflation and real GNP growth. Thus in the

1983 situation a constant rate of nominal GNP growth would be accompan-

ied by a slowing down of inflation and a speeding up of real GNP

growth. This speeding up would continue until the economy reached the

natural level of unemployment, and so at that point the actual rate of

unemployment would be falling so fast that it would be bound to

"overshoot," i.e., to fall well below the natural rate of unemployment.

In short, the airplane (the unemployment rate) would crash through the

runway (the natural unemployment rate).

     To avoid this problem there is no alternative to a gradual slowing

down of the rate of nominal GNP growth as the economy approaches its

natural rate. Just as a quantitative inflation equation like that

described in (2) above is needed to learn roughly where the runway is

located, so the same equation is needed to calculate by how much nominal

GNP growth must be slowed in order to achieve a soft landing. The

important point is that momentum or "inertia" in the inflation process
                                  40



(the second characteristic outlined above) makes the economy as

difficult to steer as a large ocean liner; a favorable future free of

business cycles will not occur if nominal GNP growth is set at some

arbitrary constant number.



            VI. SUPPLY SHOCKS AND INSTITUTIONAL RIGIDITIES


Should Supply Shocks be Accommodated?

     The problems raised by supply shocks can again be separated into

two sub—problems, those that arise when the economy was previously

operating at the natural rate, and those that arise when the unemploy-

ment rate is far above the natural rate. When the Fed stabilizes

nominal GNP growth and an adverse supply shock introduces spontaneous

upward pressure on the inflation rate, real GNP growth must decline and

the unemployment rate is likely to rise. The Fed must then decide

whether to maintain costant nominal GNP growth, to "accommodate" the

shock by raising nominal GNP growth to insulate unemployment, or to

"extinguish" the shock by reducing nominal GNP growth to insulate the

inflation rate.

     If the shock is truly temporary, e.g., a freeze in Florida that

temporarily reduces the orange crop, then accommodation is the appro-

priate policy. The lost crop will soon return, and the inflation con-

sequences will soon be reversed. The temporary bulge of inflation has

no important welfare consequences, since it is soon to disappear.

Maintenance of stable unemployment avoids potential future problems of

readjusting after a recession caused by nonaccommodation.

     The optimal response to a permanent shock, e.g., the OPEC oil price
                                      41




increases of 1973—74 and 1979—80, poses a more serious dilemma. If

there is a one—time upward ratchet of the relative price of oil, then

there is a temporary positive bulge in the rate of change of the rela-

tive price of oil. If the nominal wage rate in the rest of the economy

were to remain constant, then the aggregate inflation rate would exhibit

only a temporary bulge. The Fed could accommodate without fearing a

permanent increase in the rate of inflation. But, unfortunately, the

nominal wage rate in most countries is implicitly or explicitly

escalated in response to changes in the consumer price index. Thus a

permanent oil shock causes inflation to ratchet upward permanently to a

new higher rate. The Fed must choose between ratifying permanently

higher inflation, and causing lost output and higher unemployment if it

chooses a non—accommodative policy.


Overshooting and the 1982—83 Policy Environment

     There is an additional aspect of the accommodation debate that

reflects the benefit of hindsight. Oil conservation is a gradual

process. This creates a natural "overshooting" phenomenon, since a jump

in the relative price of oil, like that achieved by OPEC in 1979—80,

breeds a lagged adjustment process by hundreds of millions of consumers

around the world. Eventually after a few months or years the demand for

oil relative to real GNP begins to fall, and downward pressure is

exerted on the relative price. In this sense an oil shock that appears

at the time to be permanent is not permanent, and with sufficient

patience the Fed can avoid making the difficult choice among accommo-

dative, constant—nominal—GNP—growth, and extinguishing policies.

Patience, however, is eminently lacking from the policy process and from
                                   42




the political oratory that surrounds it. In early 1980 the Carter

Administration introduced ill—advised and destabilizing credit controls

as its reaction to a transitory bulge in the CPI inflation rate.     When

the Fed was created in 1913—14, the term of Governors was set at 14

years to insulate them from short—run political pressure.      In the same

spirit the Governors should take a long horizon when dealing with supply

shocks.

     A novel decision problem is created by the   decline   in the relative

price of oil that has occurred in 1982 and 1983, when the economy is far

away from the natural rate of unemployment.   This "beneficial supply

shock" may appear to be an unalloyed blessing, in that it allows a more

rapid growth rate of real GNP for any path of nominal GNP growth. And

the example of Figure 2 suggests that real GNP growth should be as rapid

as possible at the beginning of the recovery in order to minimize the

cost of high unemployment while allowing for a slowdown later on.

     The main argument for resisting rather than enjoying the decline in

the relative price of oil is not monetary, but fiscal. The interval of

declining relatIve oil prices provides an ideal environment for intro-

ducing a substantial excise tax on imported oil. This policy, endorsed

by many economists as early as 1974, takes on an added appeal in 1983 in

 light of large projected structural fiscal deficits.


 Effect on Supply Shock Policy of Institutional Rigidities

      If all tax rules, regulations, and institutions had been inflation—

 neutralized, there would be no problem. It would be optimal to ratify

 the faster inflation. Critics could claim rightly that the process of

 inflation—adjusting the institutions had actually caused the faster
                                     43




inflation, but defenders of' the Fed's accommodation would point out that

this criticism was now irrelevant because the inflation rate no longer

mattered, at least within limits.'5 And defenders of accommodation

would point out that the extra unemployment caused by failure to accom-

modate has not just been a short—run cost, but also has created a long—

run cost by causing future economic instability and making a future soft

landing more difficult to achieve.

     Not only do tax rules and regulations and financial institutions

matter in the consideration of supply—shock policy, but the nature of

labor market institutions is also crucial. A contrast can be drawn

between two extreme forms of labor contracts, with contract forms in

most real—world industrialized nations falling between the two

extremes. The first paradigm would be a three—year contract that sets

in advance the exact growth rate of the nominal wage rate over the full

three—year period. This type of contract allows the real wage to be

extremely flexible, since the nominal wage rate does not respond at all

to the extra inflation caused by a supply shock. The inflexibility of

the nominal wage rate allows the central bank to accommodate the supply

shock without the need for any concern that inflation will accelerate

beyond the extra amount directly attributable to the supply shock. And

the corresponding flexibility of the real wage rate provides an

incentive to employers to maintain employment at a relatively high

level, thus minimizing the unemployment caused by the supply shock. It

is generally agreed that the United States, while experiencing some

acceleration of nominal wage growth in response to the 1974 and 1979—80

supply shocks, is closer to this first contract paradigm than any other

industrialized nation.
                                      44



    The second paradigm would involve contracts that call for prompt

100 percent escalation of nominal wage rates in response to changes in

the consumer Price Index. Such contracts would rigidify the real wage

rate. Accommodation of a supply shock would then be extremely risky for

the central bank, since its accommodative policy would supplement the

initial round of inflation directly caused by the shock with additional

rounds of inflation as nominal wage rates are marked up through the

indexation formula. Further, such real wage rigidity would be harmful

for employment. The oil shocks of the 1970s reduced the growth rate of

labor productivity, both by cutting energy consumption and by making

many tpes of capital goods obsolete. However, in nations with rigid

real wage growth, the real wage quickly became excessive relative to

labor productivity. Labor's share in national income increased, and the

share of profits was squeezed. This caused firms to reduce the

employment of overpaid labor, and in addition to cut back on capital

investment and thus to cause a further slowdown in productivity

growth. There is considerable controversy about the applicability of

this second contract paradigm. Most observers feel that it applies

accurately to the U. K., with other major European countries

experiencing milder cases. Certainly ther is little doubt that

unemployment has increased far more since 1973 in Europe than in the U.

 S., and the relatively greater rigidity of real wage rates in Europe as

 compared with the U. S. is a prime candidate to provide an explanation.


 More General Effects of Institutions on Monetary Policy


      A wide range of society's institutionS constrain monetary policy.

 Instead of allocating to norietary   and fiscal policy the dominant role in
                                   45



discussions of business cycles, increased attention should be devoted to

possible shifts in institutions to improve macroeconomic efficiency and

place less of a burden on traditional policy tools.

     'rhe list of institutions that matter for macroeconomic policy is a

long one. Three—year union wage contracts in the U. S. contribute

significantly to wage and price inertia and raise the output cost of

disinflation (albeit while facilitating the accommodation of supply

shocks and reducing the short—run inflation cost of an output boom that

pushes unemployment beneath the natural rate). Deposit rate ceilings

and usury laws prevent the adjustment of interest rates to inflation,

contribute to inflatjons redistribution of wealth from creditors to

debtors, and thus raise the welfare cost of inflation. Similarly, the

failure to index tax brackets and set other tax rules in real terms, and

the failure of the government to offer an indexed bond, add to

inflation's welfare cost.

     The absence of a national value—added or sales tax prevents

policies, recommended by Arthur Okun and myself in 1974—75, to insulate

the price level from adverse supply shocks by taxing the shocked product

and reducing the sales tax on the unshocked sector. Improved labor

market institutions could lower the natural unemployment rate itself,

which should not be viewed as truly natural, optimal, nor immutable.

     Our constitutional system and its associated legislative lags

inhibit adoption of well—timed countercyclical fiscal policies, like the

Swedish investment fund and the Japanese practice of variable timing for

public works. Our constitutional system also bears some blame for the

fiscal policy impasse that has caused large Federal budget deficits to

be projected into the foreseeable future after 1983.
                                     46




     Institutional reform is a slow process, and economists have not

advanced very far in understanding why apparently counterproductive

institutions exist. Thus the conduct of monetary policy, while welcom-

ing reform, must continue to operate within the framework of constraints

set by existing institutions.

                                 CONCLUSION


     This paper has examined the background of the debate between

monetarists and Keynesians on the conduct of stabilization policy. It

has criticized the "CCMR policy recommendation of the monetarists for

two basic reasons. First, the growth rate of velocity has been quite
                                                      since 1981. This
variable over the postwar period and especially so

weakens the case for making the growth rate of a monetary aggregate the

primary focus of monetary policy. Second, the element of constancy in

the monetarist CGMR recommendation is inappropriate when the economy

begins from a situation like that of 1983, with its actual unemployment

 rate far above its natural unemployment rate.

      Just as it criticizes the monetarists, the paper also does not

                                recommendations of Keynesians. The use of
 support the standard policy

 fiscal policy for the purposes of countercyclical stabilization policy

 is severely handicapped, because our Constitutional system precludes

 prompt and decisive coordinated action by the President and Congress in

 most situations. A second problem is that some Keynesians have
                                          stabilize real variables like
 suggested that monetary policy should

 output or unemployment in the short run. This conflicts with the notion

 that the basic business of the central bank is to stabilize something

 nominal. By stabilizing the growth rate of a nominal variable, the Fed

 would automatically allow real economic activity to weaken in response
                                   47




either to a supply shock cit to a discovery that inflation is proceeding

at a more rapid rate than had previously been forecast to occur at that

level of unemployment.

    The paper provides numerical examples of a policy which stabilizes

the growth rate of nominal GNP along a path designed to achieve a 'soft

landing" of the actual unemployment rate at the natural unemployment

rate. Such an approach would be "activist" in two senses. First, it

would involve attempting to use monetary policy to offset sustained

movements in velocity above its trend (as in 1978—79) or below trend (as

in 1981—82). This role for monetary policy would not be feasible if the

lags of monetary policy effects were long and variable, as has sometimes

been suggested, but the postwar record demonstrates that monetary policy

seems able to alter the course of real economic activity within the

relatively short time period of six to nine months. The ability of the

Fed to counteract velocity swings also depends on the availability of

accurate advance forecasts of those swings, which appears from past

evidence to be feasible in some situations and difficult in others.

     Consider as an example a situation in which the best available

forecast of future nominal CNP growth has fallen below the target that

has been set to achieve a "soft landing"? Nominal spending would be

stimulated by a Fed policy of encouraging lower interest rates, faster

growth of bank reserves, and a depreciation in the exchange rate. The

reverse actions would occur when the forecast rises above the target

path. Since excessive short—term volatility in interest rates and the

exchange rate imposes direct costs on private decisionmakers, actions to

guide nominal GNP growth back on track would be taken gradually.

Caution would be required in taking such actions, since econometric
                                  48




estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, or of the response of

nominal spending to specified monetary actions, are of necessity based

on a sample period extending back 20 or 30 years and cannot adequately

incorporate more recent phenomena. Thus input on recent changes in

institutions, e.g., the process of financial deregulation and the impact

of flexible exchange rates, would be required as a supplement to

econometric forecasts. Such an approach would combine a "judgmental"

technique of monetary control with an explicit set of medium—term

targets for nominal spending.
                                   49




                               FOOTNOTES



1. Lucas and Sargent (1978).

2. Friedman's seminal articles on economic policy (1948, 1953)

    recognized that there was an irreducible error term which

    guaranteed continuing fluctuations. The most complete statement of

    the case for a CCMR is contained in Friedman (1959).

3. This empirical interpretation of inflation in the 1973—75 period

    was introduced in Gordon (l975b) and confirmed later by Blinder

    (1979) (1982) and Eckstein (1980). A simple theoretical analysis

    showing the conditions necessary for a supply shock to create a

    recession in the rest of the economy is developed in Gordon (1975a)

    and Phelps (1978).

4. Here I ignore the analyses of Hall (1976), Phelps (1973), and Okun

    (1981), all of whom provide reasons why the optimum rate of infla-

    tion might be higher than zero, and why a policymaker confronted

   with the "full equilibrium" described in the text might rationally

    choose to accelerate nominal GNP growth.

5. This comparison is exhibited in Gordon (1981, p. 494) and seems to

   be confirmed at the 1981 cyclical peak, when the respective high

   points for real money and the coincident indicators were separated

   by only four months.

6. This evidence is summarized in Cordon (1981, p. 380—1), on the

   basis of a continuing effort by Stephen McNees to collect forecasts

   of the leading commercial forecasting firms (1979).
                                   50




7. By definition from equation (2) y = p ÷ q. But unemployment

    remains constant at its natural rate if real GNP growth (q) is set

    at its natural growth rate (qN)• Thus the Fed's job is to set

    y =    + qN.
8. See Gordon (1982). The equation differs from (2) in several

    respects, including the use of a long series of lagged values of

    inflation rather than just a single lagged value; the use of George

    Perry's (1970) demographically weighted unemployment rate rather

    than the official rate; the inclusion of the change in that uneni—

    ployment rate as well as the level; and the inclusion of a long

    list of additional supply shift variables, including the deviation

    of productivity growth from trend, and changes in the relative

    price of imports, food, and energy, in the effective exchange rate

    of the dollar, in the effective minimum wage, and in the effective

    social security payroll tax rate. Allowance is also made for the

    impact of the Nixon—era price controls in holding down inflation in

    1971—72 and raising the inflation rate in 1974.

9. Table 1 above shows that the velocity of Ml grew on average at 3.4

    percent per annum between 1949 and 1982. The growth rate of

    velocity during the four quarters of the "durable goods boom years"

    1955, 1965, 1973, and 1978, were, respectively, 6.9, 5.9, 5.5, and

    6.0.

10. Albert Wojnilower in "Discussion," Brookings Papers on Economic

    Activity, vol. 13 (1982, no. 1), p. 269.

11. Arnold C. Harberger, in a recent conversation evaluating general

    lessons of Latin American inflation, reports that the public used

    to act as if inflation was costly at a 100 percent rate, but
                                51




further institutional adjustments have raised this threshold of
pain to a 400 percent rate.
                                    52



                                 REFE RENCE S




Blinder, Alan S.    (1979) Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation,

       (New York: Academic Press)

________ (1981)    "Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending, Journal

       of Political Economy, vol. 89 (No. 1, February), pp. 26—53.

________ (1982)       The Anatomy of Double—Digit Inflation in the 1970s,"

       in R. E. Hall, ed., Inflation: Causes and Consequences

       (University of Chicago Press for NBER), pp. 261—82.

Brainard, William (1967) "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"

       American Economic Review (May), pp. 411—25.

Eckstein, Otto (1980) Core Inflation, (Prentice—Hall).

Eisner, Robert (1971) "What Went Wrong?", Journal of Political Econony,

       vol. 79 (May/June), pp. 629—41.

Feilner, William (1979), "The Credibility Effect and Rational

       Expectations," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 10

       (no. 1), pp. 167—79.

Fischer, Stanley (1981) "Towards an Understanding of the Costs of

        Inflation: II," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, The Costs and

       Consequences of Inflation, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series

        on Public Policy, volume 15, Autumn, pp. 5—56.

                                                "StabililzatiOrl Policy and
________ and Cooper, J. Phillip (1973)
        Lags," Journal of Political Economy vol. 81 (July/August),

        pp. 847—77.
                                                 53




Friedman, Benjamin (1983), "Using a Credit Aggregate Target to

          Implement Monetary Policy in the Financial Environment of the

          Future," Monetary Policy Issues in the 1980s, (Federal Reserve

          Bank of. Kansas City), pp. 223—48.

________ (1977)          "The Inefficiency of Short—run Monetary Targets for

          Monetary Policy, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2,

          pp. 293—346.

Friedman, Milton (1948) "A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic

          Stability," American Economic Review, vol. 38 (June), pp. 245—64.

________ (1953)         "The Effects of a Full—Employment Policy on Economic

          Stability: A Formal Analysis," in Essays on Positive Economics

          (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 117—32.

________ (1960)         A Program for Monetary Stability, New York.

________ (1961) "The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy," Journal of

          Political Economy, vol. 69 (no. 2), pp. 447—66.

________ (1978)          "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic

          Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1—17.

Gordon, Robert J. (l975a) "Alternative Responses of Policy to External

          Supply Shocks," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 6

          (no. 1), pp. 183—206.

________     (l975b)      "The Impact of Aggregate Demand on Prices," Brookings

          Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 6 (no. 3), pp. 61362.

              (1981) Macroeconomics, Little, Brown & Co., Second Edition.

________      (l982a)      "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural

          Rate of Unemployment," in M. N. Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs and

          Inflation (Brookings), pp. 88—157.

             (l982b) "Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the
                                          54




        United States," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90 (December),

        pp. 1087—1117.

________ and King, Stephen R. (1982) "The Output Cost of Disinflation
        in traditional and Vector Autoregressive Models," Brookings

        Papers on Economic Activity), vol. 13 (no. 1), pp. 205—42.



Hall, Robert E. (1976) "The Phillips Curve and Macroeconomic Policy,"

        Carnegie—Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 127

         48.

Lindsey, David E. (1982) "Recent Monetary Developments and

         Controversies," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (no. 1),

         pp. 245—69.

Lucas, Robert (1976) "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"

         Carnegie—Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19

         46.


________ (1980)      "Methods and Problems in Business Cycle Theory,"

         Journal of Money, Credit and Banking), vol. 12, (November, Part

         II), pp. 696—714.

________ and Sargent, Thomas J. (1978) "After Keynesian Macro—
         economics," After the Phillips Curve, Federal Reserve Bank of

         Boston Conference Series 19, pp. 49—72.

 McNees, Stephen S. (1979) "The Forecasting Record for the l97Os," New

         England Economic Review, (September/October), Table 5, p. 50.

 Mishkin, Frederick (1982) "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter" An

         Econometric Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90

         (No. 1, February), pp. 22—51.

 Perry, George (1970) "Changing Labor Markets and Inflation," Brookings
                                    55




       Papers on Economic Activity, vol 1 (rio. 3), pp. 411—41.

Phelps, Edmund S.     (1973) "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance,"

       Swedish Journal of Economics, vol. 75 (March), pp. 67—82.

_______ (1978)      "Commodity—Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary

       Policy," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 10, pp. 206—

       21.

Poole, William (1970) "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in

       a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics,

       vol. 83 (May), pp. 197—216.

Okun, Arthur (1972) "Fiscal—Monetary Activism: Some Analytical

       Issues," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol 3 (no. 1),

       pp. 123—63.

________ (1981)     Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis,

       (Brookings).

Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil (1976) "Rational Expectations and

       the Theory of Economic Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics,

       vol. 2, pp. 169—84.

Taylor, John B. (1982) "The Swedish Investment Funds System as a

       Stabilization Rule," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.

       53 (No. 1), pp. 57—99.
