                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          A DYNAMIC THEORY OF PUBLIC SPENDING, TAXATION, AND DEBT

                                             Marco Battaglini
                                              Stephen Coate

                                          Working Paper 12100
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12100


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




We thank Roland Benabou, Faruk Gul, Per Krusell and seminar participants at Berkeley, Cal Tech, Cornell,
Northwestern and Princeton for helpful comments. We also thank Jon Eguia for very detailed comments on
a previous draft. Marco Battaglini gratefully acknowledges financial support from a NSF CAREER Award.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Marco Battaglini and Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation and Debt
Marco Battaglini and Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 12100
March 2006
JEL No. H6

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a dynamic political economy theory of public spending, taxation and debt. Policy
choices are made by a legislature consisting of representatives elected by geographically-defined
districts. The legislature can raise revenues via a distortionary income tax and by borrowing. These
revenues can be used to finance a national public good and district-specific transfers (interpreted as
pork-barrel spending). The value of the public good is stochastic, reflecting shocks such as wars or
natural disasters. In equilibrium, policy-making cycles between two distinct regimes:
“business-as-usual” in which legislators bargain over the allocation of pork, and
“responsible-policy-making” in which policies maximize the collective good. Transitions between
the two regimes are brought about by shocks in the value of the public good. In the long run,
equilibrium tax rates are too high and too volatile, public good provision is too low and debt levels
are too high. In some environments, a balanced budget requirement can improve citizen welfare.

Marco Battaglini
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
mbattagl@princeton.edu

Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu
1     Introduction

This paper presents a dynamic political economy theory of public spending, taxation and debt.
The theory is designed to shed light on fiscal policy in political systems in which legislators have
primary loyalty to the districts they represent as opposed to a national political party. The theory
yields positive predictions concerning the dynamic evolution of public debt, taxation, and the
allocation of public revenues between national public goods and pork-barrel spending. It also
provides predictions concerning the size of the coalitions that pass legislation. Furthermore, the
theory delivers insights into the normative performance of political decision-making and the case
for fiscal restraints in the form of balanced budget requirements.
    The theory considers a political jurisdiction in which policy choices are made by a legislature
comprised of representatives elected by single-member, geographically-defined districts. The leg-
islature can raise revenues in two ways: via a proportional tax on labor income and by borrowing
in the capital market. Borrowing takes the form of issuing one period bonds. The legislature
can also purchase bonds and use the interest earnings to help finance future public spending if
it so chooses. Public revenues are used to finance the provision of a public good that benefits
all citizens and to provide targeted district-specific transfers, which are interpreted as pork-barrel
spending. The value of the public good to citizens is stochastic, reflecting shocks such as wars or
natural disasters. The legislature makes policy decisions by majority (or super-majority) rule and
legislative policy-making in each period is modelled using the legislative bargaining approach of
Baron and Ferejohn (1989). The level of public debt acts as a state variable, creating a dynamic
linkage across policy-making periods.
    There exists a unique political equilibrium and the equilibrium distribution of public debt
converges to a unique invariant distribution. There are two regimes of government policy-making:
business-as-usual (BAU) in which legislators bargain over the allocation of pork and responsible-
policy-making (RPM) in which legislators choose to forsake their parochial interests for the national
good. In the BAU regime, the level of public debt and the tax rate are state independent. Public
good spending is responsive to changes in the value of the public good, but these spending changes
are financed entirely by adjustments in pork-barrel spending. Legislation is passed by minimum
winning coalitions. In the RPM regime, legislators allocate all revenues to providing the public
good and servicing the debt. No pork is provided and legislation is passed unanimously. Changes



                                                  1
in the value of the public good lead to changes in taxes and debt as well as public good spending.
   The prevailing regime is determined by both the current stock of public debt and the value
of the public good. Specifically, there is a cut-oﬀ value of the public good that is decreasing in
the stock of debt. Below this cut-oﬀ the legislature is in the BAU regime, while above it RPM
prevails. The structure of the equilibrium reflects the fact that revenues are costly to raise since
they must ultimately be financed by distortionary income taxation. When the value of the public
good and/or the stock of debt to be repaid is high, the opportunity cost of allocating revenues to
pork-barrel spending is large and hence legislators refrain from such spending.
   Transitions between the two regimes are brought about by shocks in the value of the public
good. Periods of BAU are brought to an end by a high realization of the value of the public good.
This triggers an increase in public debt and taxes to finance higher public good spending as well
as a cessation of pork-barrel spending. Once in the RPM regime, further high realizations of the
value of the public good result in additional increases in debt and taxes. The economy returns
to BAU only after a suitable sequence of low realizations of the value of the public good. The
larger the amount of public debt that has been built up, the greater the expected time before
returning to BAU. In this way, the economy cycles through periods of BAU and periods of RPM.
Both policy-making regimes are persistent in the sense that the probability of remaining in them
is greater than the probability of transitioning from them.
   When the level of public debt chosen in the BAU regime is positive, the economy is in perpetual
deficit, with the extent of the deficit spiking up after a sequence of high values of the public good.
However, legislators do not necessarily borrow in the BAU regime. In some environments, they
purchase bonds with the aim of financing future public good spending with the interest earnings.
In such environments, the government will run budget surpluses in the BAU regime and deficits
will arise only after a suitably long sequence of high public good values. The key feature of the
environment determining whether the legislature borrows or saves in the BAU regime is the size of
the tax base relative to the economy’s desired public good spending. Paradoxically, it is economies
with relatively large tax bases that experience perpetual deficits.
   With respect to citizen welfare, the equilibrium policy choices generate a strictly lower level of
utility than those that would be made by a benevolent planner. The planning solution involves
the government gradually accumulating a stock of bond holdings suﬃcient to allow it to finance
first best public good provision in all states, without income taxation (Aiyagari et al (2002)). By


                                                  2
contrast, in equilibrium, the level of public debt never converges to a deterministic steady state
and is bounded below by the level of debt that legislators choose in the BAU regime. Even when
this is negative, so that legislators acquire bonds in the BAU regime, these bond holdings are
insuﬃcient to finance first best public good provision in all states. Thus, in equilibrium, taxes are
too high and public good provision too low in the long run. Moreover, taxes are too volatile.
    The theory also has implications for the desirability of balanced budget requirements. We study
a fiscal restraint that requires the legislature to ensure that tax revenues equal public spending
in every period. We suppose the government initially has no debt, so that under the restraint
spending is just on public goods and transfers. We ask when will citizens’ welfare be enhanced by
the constraint that public spending be financed solely by tax revenues? The key determinant of
the desirability of a balanced budget requirement is again the size of the tax base relative to the
economy’s desired public good spending. When the tax base is relatively large, a balanced budget
requirement will enhance citizen welfare, but when it is relatively small, the opposite conclusion
applies.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In the next section we discuss
related literature. Section three presents the model. Section four characterizes the political
equilibrium and develops the positive predictions of the theory. Section five studies the eﬃciency
of political equilibrium and section six studies the desirability of a balanced budget requirement.
Section seven oﬀers a brief conclusion. The Appendix contains the proofs of the propositions.




2     Related literature

Our theory builds on the well-known tax smoothing theory of fiscal policy stemming from Barro
(1979). According to this view, the government should use budget surpluses and deficits as a
buﬀer to prevent tax rates from changing too sharply. Thus, the government should run a deficit
in times of high government spending needs and a surplus when needs are low. Underlying this
theory are the assumptions that government spending needs fluctuate over time and that the
deadweight costs of income taxes are a convex function of the tax rate.
    In an important paper, Aiyagari et al (2002) point out that the tax smoothing logic does not
necessarily imply the counter-cyclical theory of deficits and surpluses that it had been presumed
to. In the absence of “ad hoc” limits on government bond holdings, they prove that in some


                                                 3
environments the optimal policy is for the government to gradually acquire suﬃcient bond holdings
so as to eventually be able to finance any level of spending with the interest earnings from these
holdings. This permits the financing of government spending without distortionary taxation.
Interest earnings in excess of spending needs are rebated back to citizens via lump-sum transfers.
    The economic environment underlying our theory is similar to that in Aiyagari et al (2002).1
 The only diﬀerences are (i) that we specify a stochastic value of public goods as opposed to a
stochastic government spending level and (ii) that we include district-specific transfers in the policy
space. Our main departure from the tax smoothing literature is that policy decisions are made by
a legislature of elected representatives rather than a benevolent planner. This innovation produces
a theory of fiscal policy consistent with the original intuitions from the literature, but without
ad hoc limits on government bond holdings. Thus, while the optimal policy in our environment
involves the government gradually acquiring suﬃcient bond holdings to finance all spending needs
with interest earnings, in political equilibrium the level of public debt fluctuates in accordance
with the value of the public good and serves to smooth income taxes.
    Our theory also relates to the political economy of deficits literature.2                A key theme of this
literature is that deficits can arise because of “redistributive uncertainty” (Alesina and Tabellini
(1990), Lizzeri (1999)).3       Such uncertainty arises when citizens do not know whether they will
benefit from redistributive transfers in the future. When faced with such uncertainty, citizens
will favor the transfer of resources from the future to the present if they are certain that these
resources will be used to their benefit. This can result in deficits. In our model, legislators face
uncertainty as to whether in the next period they will be in the BAU or RPM regimes. In addition,
conditional on being in the BAU regime, they face uncertainty as to whether they will be included
in the minimum winning coalition of districts that receive pork. This redistributive uncertainty
means that if those legislators who are currently in the minimum winning coalition could simply
   1 Following Lucas and Stokey (1983), Aiyagari et al (2002) consider an infinite-horizon general equilibrium model

with no capital, a linear tax on labor income, and stochastic government expenditures. Their model departs from
Lucas and Stokey in assuming that the government cannot issue state-contingent debt.
   2 For more on this literature see Alesina (2000), Alesina and Perotti (1995), Persson and Svensson (1989), and

Persson and Tabellini (2000).
   3 More generally, such redistributive uncertainty can explain many ineﬃcient decisions in dynamic political

economy models. For example, public investments that are potentially Pareto improving may not be undertaken
because those currently holding political power are uncertain as to whether those holding political power in the
future will share the fruits of the investment (Besley and Coate (1998)). For further discussions of political failure
in dynamic models see Acemoglu (2003), Besley and Coate (1998), Coate and Morris (1999) and Hassler et al
(2003).



                                                          4
transfer a dollar costlessly from the future to the present period, they would want to do so. This in
turn explains why it is the case that the equilibrium level of public debt (even when it is negative)
is always above the eﬃcient level.
    The contribution of our paper relative to the political economy of deficits literature is that
we imbed a sophisticated model of political decision-making into a dynamic general equilibrium
model that incorporates the key assumptions of the tax smoothing literature. Thus, our underlying
economic model incorporates an infinite horizon, stochastic public good preferences, distortionary
income taxation, district-specific transfers, and public debt. This allows us to integrate the polit-
ical economy and tax smoothing literatures by developing a theory of fiscal policy with a rich set
of economic and political predictions. Moreover, the theory permits a welfare analysis of both the
eﬃciency properties of equilibrium and the case for fiscal restraints.4
    Finally, our paper relates to the literature on the eﬃciency of legislative policy-making in
political systems in which legislators have geographically-defined constituencies. In a well-known
paper, Weingast, Shepsle and Johnsen (1981) argue that pork-barrel spending will lead to a
government that is too large. They do not model the process of passing legislation, assuming
instead that legislative policy-making is governed by a “norm of universalism”. Under this norm,
each legislator unilaterally decides on the level of spending he would like on projects in his own
district and the aggregate level of taxation is determined by the need to balance the budget.
Policy-making then becomes a pure common pool problem. A number of authors have argued
that this common pool logic may also explain budget deficits - see, for example, Inman (1990)
and von Hagen and Harden (1995). Velasco (2000) formally models the accumulation of public
debt as a dynamic common pool problem. While there is no social role for debt in his model,
he demonstrates the existence of an equilibrium in which deficits and debt accumulation continue
unabated until the government’s debt ceiling is reached.
    A number of papers study the eﬃciency of legislative policy-making using the legislative bar-
   4 Lizzeri (1999) considers a two period model with one good and Downsian political competition in each period.

Social welfare is unaﬀected by the allocation of resources across the periods. Alesina and Tabellini (1990) study the
steady states of an infinite horizon model in which in each period two political parties hold oﬃce with exogenous
probability. There are two goods that may be publicly-provided, but each party’s constituency values only one.
Accordingly, the goods can be thought of as transfers targeted to the two parties’ constituencies. Taxes are
distortionary. In each period, the winning party chooses taxes, debt and how much to spend on the publicly
provided good that its constituency cares about. Our model generalizes this set-up in two key ways. First, we
have n political decision makers with distinct constituencies who must collectively choose policy in each period via
majority rule. Second, we have a national public good with stochastic value as well as targeted transfers. The
latter assumption creates a tax smoothing role for debt.




                                                         5
gaining approach employed in this paper. Baron (1991) shows that legislators may propose projects
whose aggregate benefits are less than their costs, when these benefits can be targeted to particular
districts. Related models are elaborated by Persson and Tabellini (2000) and Austen-Smith and
Banks (2005). LeBlanc, Snyder and Tripathi (2000) argue that legislatures will under-invest in
public goods. They make their argument in the context of a finite horizon model in which in each
period a legislature allocates a fixed amount of revenue between targeted transfers and a public
investment that serves to increase the amount of revenue available in the next period. In a paper
that lays some of the analytical ground work for the theory presented in this paper, Battaglini and
Coate (2005) develop an infinite horizon model of legislative policy-making in which the legislature
can raise revenues via a distortionary income tax and these revenues can be used to finance invest-
ment in a national public good and pork-barrel spending. They explore the dynamics of legislative
policy choices, focusing on the eﬃciency of the steady state level of taxation and the allocation of
tax revenues between pork and investment. They obtain conditions under which the equilibrium
size of government is too large and the level of public goods too low. However, they also show
that there are conditions under which legislative decisions are eﬃcient and/or government is too
small. In contrast to the present paper, there is no public debt, and it is investment in the public
good that creates the dynamic linkage across policy-making periods. Moreover, the value of the
public good is deterministic.


3     The model

A continuum of infinitely-lived citizens live in n identical districts indexed by i = 1, ..., n. The size
of the population in each district is normalized to be one. There are three goods - a public good
g; consumption z; and labor l. The consumption good is produced from labor according to the
technology z = wl and the public good can be produced from the consumption good according
                                                                                         l(1+1/ε)
to the technology g = z/p. Each citizen’s per period utility function is z + Ag α −        ε+1 ,    where
α ∈ (0, 1) and ε > 0. The parameter A measures the relative importance of the public good to
the citizens. Citizens discount future per period utilities at rate δ.
    The assumptions on technology imply that the competitive equilibrium price of the public
good is p and the wage rate is w. Moreover, the quasi-linear utility specification implies that the
interest rate is ρ = 1/δ − 1. At this interest rate, citizens will be indiﬀerent as to their allocation
of consumption across time and hence their welfare will equal that which they would obtain if

                                                   6
they simply consumed their net earnings each period. At wage rate w, each citizen will work an
amount l∗ (w) = (εw)ε in each period, so that ε is the elasticity of labor supply. The associated
per period indirect utility function is given by

                                                            εε wε+1
                                           u(w, g; A) =             + Ag α .                                           (1)
                                                             ε+1

    The value of the public good varies across periods in a random way, reflecting shocks to the
society such as wars and natural disasters. Specifically, in each period, A is the realization of a
random variable with range [A, A] (where 0 < A < A) and cumulative distribution function G(A).
The function G is continuously diﬀerentiable and its associated density is bounded uniformly
below by some positive constant ξ > 0, so that for any pair of realizations such that A < A0 , the
diﬀerence G(A0 ) − G(A) is at least as big as ξ(A0 − A). Thus, G assigns positive probability to all
nondegenerate sub-intervals of [A, A].
    Public decisions are made by a legislature consisting of representatives from each of the n
districts. One citizen from each district is selected to be that district’s representative. Since all
citizens are the same, the identity of the representative is immaterial and hence the selection
process can be ignored. The legislature meets at the beginning of each period. These meetings
take only an insignificant amount of time, and representatives undertake private sector work in
the rest of the period just like everybody else. The aﬃrmative votes of q ≤ n representatives are
required to enact any legislation.
    The legislature can raise revenues in two ways: via a proportional tax on labor income and
via borrowing in the capital market. Borrowing takes the form of issuing one period bonds with
interest rate ρ.5        Thus, if the government borrows an amount b in period t, it must repay
b(1 + ρ) in period t + 1. Public revenues can be used to finance the provision of public goods
but can also be diverted to finance targeted district-specific transfers, which are interpreted as
(non-distortionary) pork-barrel spending.6              The legislature can also hold bonds if it so chooses,
so that b can be negative.
    To describe how legislative decision-making works, suppose the legislature is meeting at the
beginning of a period in which the current level of public debt is b and the value of the public
  5 Thus we do not consider state-contingent debt as in Lucas and Stokey (1983). We feel that this is the

appropriate assumption for a positive analysis.
   6 The district-specific transfers could be either direct grants to particular localities or earmarks for specific public

projects that the districts would undertake anyway. In the latter case, the earmarks would be non-distortionary
and equivalent to a direct transfer.


                                                            7
good is A. One of the legislators is randomly selected to make the first policy proposal, with
each representative having an equal chance of being recognized. A proposal is described by an
n + 3-tuple {r, g, x, s1 , ...., sn }, where r is the income tax rate; g is the amount of the public good
provided; x is the proposed new level of public debt; and si is the proposed transfer to district i’s
residents. The revenues raised under the proposal are x + R(r) where

                            R(r) = nrwl∗ (w(1 − r)) = nrw(εw(1 − r))ε ,                              (2)

denotes the tax revenue function. The proposal must satisfy the budget constraint that revenues
must be suﬃcient to cover expenditures. Letting

                               B(r, g, x; b) = x + R(r) − pg − (1 + ρ)b                              (3)

denote the diﬀerence between revenues and spending on public goods and debt repayment, this
                              X
requires that B(r, g, x; b) ≥   si . The set of constraints is completed by the non-negativity
                                   i
constraints that si ≥ 0 for each district i (which rules out financing public spending via district-
specific lump sum taxes).
   If the first proposer’s plan is accepted by q legislators, then it is implemented and the legislature
adjourns until the beginning of the next period. At that time, the legislature meets again with
the diﬀerence being that the initial level of public debt is x and there is a new realization of the
value of public goods. If, on the other hand, the first proposal is not accepted, another legislator is
chosen to make a proposal. There are T ≥ 2 such proposal rounds, each of which takes a negligible
amount of time. If the process continues until proposal round T , and the proposal made at that
stage is rejected, then a legislator is appointed to choose a default policy. The key restriction on
the choice of a default policy is that it must involve a uniform district-specific transfer.
   There are limits on both the amount the government can borrow and the amount of bonds
it can hold. Thus, x ∈ [x, x] where x is the maximum amount that the government can borrow
and −x is the maximum amount of bonds that it can hold. The limit on borrowing is determined
by the unwillingness of borrowers to hold government bonds that they know will not be repaid.
If the government were borrowing an amount x such that the interest payments exceeded the
maximum possible tax revenues; i.e., ρx > maxr R(r), then it would be unable to repay the debt
even if it provided no public goods. Thus, the maximum level of debt is certainly less than this
level, implying that x ≤ maxr R(r)/ρ. In fact, we will assume that x is slightly smaller than


                                                   8
maxr R(r)/ρ. This is because if x equals maxr R(r)/ρ then if government debt ever reached x it
would stay there forever, because the legislature could never pay it oﬀ. For our dynamic results,
it is convenient to assume away this (relatively uninteresting) possibility.
    The limit on the amount of bonds that the government can hold is determined constitutionally.
The government is allowed to hold no more than the amount of bonds that would allow it to finance
the Samuelson level of the public good from interest earnings. Thus, x = −pgS (A)/ρ, where gS (A)
is the level of the public good that satisfies the Samuelson Rule when the value of the public good
is A.7   The Samuelson Rule is that the sum of marginal benefits equal the marginal cost, which
means that gS (A) satisfies the first order condition that nαAg α−1 = p.


4     Political equilibrium

We look for a symmetric stationary equilibrium in which any representative selected to propose at
round τ ∈ {1, ..., T } of the meeting at some time t makes the same proposal and this depends only
on the current level of public debt (b) and the value of the public good (A). Such an equilibrium is
characterized by a collection of functions: {rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)}Tτ =1 . Here rτ (b, A)
is the income tax rate that is proposed at round τ when the state is (b, A); gτ (b, A) is the level of
the public good; and xτ (b, A) is the new level of public debt. The proposer also oﬀers a transfer
of sτ (b, A) to the districts of q − 1 randomly selected representatives where (recall) q is the size
of a minimum winning coalition.8 Any remaining surplus revenues are used to finance a transfer
for the proposer’s own district. We focus, without loss of generality, on equilibria in which at each
round τ , proposals are immediately accepted by at least q legislators, so that on the equilibrium
path, no meeting lasts more than one proposal round. Accordingly, the policies that are actually
implemented in equilibrium are described by {r1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A), s1 (b, A)}.
    To be more precise, {rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)}Tτ =1 is an equilibrium if at each
proposal round τ and all states (b, A), the equilibrium proposal maximizes the proposer’s payoﬀ
subject to the incentive constraint of getting the required number of aﬃrmative votes and the
appropriate feasibility constraints. To state this more formally, let v1 (b, A) denote the legislators’
   7 The substantive conclusions of the paper would be unaﬀected by assuming that the government could hold

more bonds than this or even that there was no upper limit on government bond holdings. It is, however, important
for our conclusions concerning the nature of the planner’s solution that the government can hold at least this level
of bonds (see Aiyagari et al (2002)).
   8 It should be clear that there is no loss of generality in assuming that the proposer only oﬀers transfers to q − 1

representatives.


                                                          9
round one value function which describes the expected future payoﬀ of a legislator at the beginning
of a period in which the state is (b, A). In addition, let vτ +1 (b, A) denote the expected future payoﬀ
of a legislator in the out-of-equilibrium event that the proposal at round τ is rejected. Then, for
each proposal round τ and all states (b, A), (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)) must solve the
problem
                     max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) − (q − 1) s + δEv1 (x, A0 )
                    (r,g,x,s)

                          s.t. u(w(1 − r), g; A) + s + δEv1 (x, A0 ) ≥ vτ +1 (b, A),                             (4)

                                B(r, g, x; b) ≥ (q − 1)s, s ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x].

The first constraint is the incentive constraint and the remainder are feasibility constraints.
   The legislators’ round one value function is defined recursively by

                                                  B(r1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A); b)
v1 (b, A) = u(w(1 − r1 (b, A)), g1 (b, A); A) +                                         + δEv1 (x1 (b, A), A0 ).
                                                                   n
                                                                                                            (5)
To understand this recall that a legislator is chosen to propose in round one with probability 1/n.
If chosen to propose, he obtains a payoﬀ in that period of

         u(w(1 − r1 (b, A)), g1 (b, A); A) + B(r1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A); b) − (q − 1)s1 (b, A).           (6)

If he is not chosen to propose, but is included in the minimum winning coalition, he obtains u(w(1−
r1 (b, A)), g1 (b, A); A)+s1 (b, A) and if he is not included he obtains just u(w(1−r1 (b, A)), g1 (b, A); A).
The probability that he will be included in the minimum winning coalition, conditional on not
being chosen to propose, is (q − 1)/(n − 1). Taking expectations, the pork barrel transfers s1 (b, A)
cancel and the period payoﬀ is as described in (5).
   For all proposal rounds τ = 1, .., T − 1 the expected future payoﬀ of a legislator if the round τ
proposal is rejected is

                                                                      B(rτ +1 (b,A),gτ +1 (b,A),xτ +1 (b,A);b)
          vτ +1 (b, A) = u (w(1 − rτ +1 (b, A)), gτ +1 (b, A); A) +                      n
                                                                                                                 (7)
                                                                  0
                                          +δEv1 (xτ +1 (b, A), A ).

This reflects the assumption that the round τ + 1 proposal will be accepted. Recall that if the
round T proposal is rejected, the assumption is that a legislator is appointed to choose a default




                                                      10
tax rate, public goods level, level of debt and a uniform transfer. Thus,
                       ½                                                                                ¾
                                           B(r, g, x; b)             0
vT +1 (b, A) = max u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                   + δEv1 (x, A ) : B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x] .
               (r,g,x)                          n
                                                                                                      (8)
   Given an equilibrium {rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)}Tτ =1 , we call the interval of debt
levels [inf (b,A) x1 (b, A), x] the policy domain. Levels of debt outside this range will never be ob-
served except when exogenously assumed at date zero. An equilibrium is said to be well-behaved
if the associated round one legislators’ value function satisfies the following three properties: (i)
v1 is continuous on the state space; (ii) for all A, v1 (·, A) is concave on [x, x] and strictly concave
on the policy domain; and (iii) for all b, v1 (·, A) is diﬀerentiable at b for almost all A. We will
restrict attention to well-behaved equilibria in what follows, showing that there exists a unique
such equilibrium. Henceforth when we refer to an equilibrium it should be understood to be well-
behaved. Finally, note that economy-wide aggregate utility in an equilibrium at the beginning of
some period in which the state is (b, A) is given by nv1 (b, A). This follows from the fact that each
district has a population of size 1 and representatives obtain the same payoﬀs as their constituents.

4.1    The equilibrium policy proposals

The basic structure of the equilibrium policy proposals is easily understood. To get support for
his proposal, the proposer must obtain the votes of q − 1 other representatives. Accordingly,
given that utility is transferable, he is eﬀectively making decisions to maximize the utility of q
legislators. The optimal policy will depend upon the state (b, A). If the level of public debt (b)
and/or the value of the public good (A) are suﬃciently high, then even though the proposer is
only taking into account the well-being of q legislators, he will still not want to divert resources
to pork. Pork requires reducing public good spending or increasing taxation in the present or
the future (if financed by issuing additional debt). When b and/or A are suﬃciently high, the
marginal benefit of spending on the public good and the marginal cost of increasing taxation are
both too high to make pork attractive. The proposer will therefore choose a policy package that
does not involve pork and the outcome will be as if he is maximizing the utility of the legislature
as a whole. If b and/or A are lower, then the opportunity cost of pork is lessened and the collective
utility of the q legislators will be maximized by diverting some resources to pork. Accordingly,
the proposer will propose pork for the districts associated with his minimum winning coalition.
   In equilibrium, therefore, there will exist a cut-oﬀ value of the public good, inversely related

                                                   11
to the level of public debt, that divides the state space into two ranges. Above the cut-oﬀ, the
legislature will be in the responsible-policy-making regime (RPM) and, in every proposal round,
the proposer will propose a no-pork policy package that maximizes aggregate legislator (and also
citizen) utility. These proposals will be supported by the entire legislature. Below the cut-oﬀ,
the legislature will be in the business-as-usual regime (BAU) and, in every proposal round the
proposer chooses a policy package that provides pork for his own district and those of a minimum
winning coalition of representatives. The tax rate-public good-public debt triple maximizes the
aggregate utility of q legislators, given that they appropriate all the surplus revenues. The transfer
paid out to coalition members is just suﬃcient to make them favor accepting the proposal. Thus,
only those legislators whose districts receive pork vote for these proposals.
   To develop this more precisely, consider the problem of choosing the tax rate-public good-
public debt triple that maximizes the collective utility of q representatives under the assumption
that they divide any surplus revenues among their districts and that the constraint that these
revenues be non-negative is non-binding. Formally, the problem is:

                                                         B(r,g,x;b)
                        max(r,g,x) u(w(1 − r), g; A) +       q        + δEv1 (x, A0 )
                                                                                                      (9)
                                            s.t. x ∈ [x, x] .

Using the first-order conditions for this problem together with equations (1) and (2), it can easily
be verified that the solution is (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ) where the tax rate r∗ satisfies the condition that

                                         1  1    1 − r∗
                                           = [               ],                                      (10)
                                         q  n 1 − r∗ (1 + ε)

the public good level g ∗ (A) satisfies the condition that

                                                             p
                                           αAg ∗ (A)α−1 =      ,                                     (11)
                                                             q

and the public debt level x∗ satisfies

                                1        ∂v1 (x∗ , A0 )
                                  ≥ −δE[                ] (= if x∗ < x).                             (12)
                                q             ∂x

   To interpret these conditions, note that (1 − r)/(1 − r(1 + ε)) measures the marginal cost of
taxation - the social cost of raising an additional unit of revenue via a tax increase. It exceeds
unity whenever the tax rate (r) is positive, because taxation is distortionary. For a given tax
rate, the marginal cost of taxation is higher the more elastic is labor supply; that is, the higher

                                                   12
is ε. Condition (10) therefore says that the benefit of raising taxes in terms of increasing the
per-legislator transfer (1/q) must equal the per-capita cost of the increase in the tax rate (1 −
r)/n(1 − r(1 + ε)). Condition (11) says that the per-capita benefit of increasing the public good
must equal the per-legislator reduction in transfers that providing the additional unit necessitates.
Condition (12) says that the benefit of increasing debt in terms of increasing the per-legislator
transfer must equal the per-capita cost of an increase in the debt level. This cost is that there is a
higher initial level of debt next period. This condition can hold as an inequality, if the debt level
is at its ceiling.
    Now define the function A∗ (b, x) as follows:
                         ⎧
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎨ max{A : B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) ≥ 0} if B(r∗ , 0, x; b) ≥ 0
                ∗
              A (b, x) =                                                             .                        (13)
                         ⎪
                         ⎪
                         ⎩                0       if B(r∗ , 0, x; b) < 0

Intuitively, A∗ (b, x) is the largest value of A consistent with the triple (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x) satisfying the
constraint that B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) ≥ 0. It follows that if A ≤ A∗ (b, x∗ ), the proposer proposes the
triple (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ) together with a transfer just suﬃcient to induce members of the coalition to
accept the proposal and the legislature is in the BAU regime. If A > A∗ (b, x∗ ), then the constraint
that B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 must bind and the solution equals that which maximizes aggregate legislator
utility. This follows from the observation that if the solution to the problem of maximizing the
utility of q representatives does not involve transfers, then this solution must also solve the problem
of maximizing the utility of n representatives. The legislature is therefore in the RPM regime.
Thus, we have:

Proposition 1: Let {rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)}Tτ =1 be an equilibrium with associated
value function v1 (b, A). Then, there exists some debt level x∗ such that for any proposal round τ
if A > A∗ (b, x∗ )
                                                   ⎧                                                      ⎫
                                                   ⎪
                                                   ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                   ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +      B(r,g,x;b)
                                                                                  n        + δEv1 (x; A ) ⎪
                                                                                                      0   ⎬
     (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) = arg max
                                                   ⎪
                                                   ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                                          ⎪
                                                   ⎩           B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]             ⎭

and sτ (b, A) = 0, while if A ≤ A∗ (b, x∗ )

                             (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ )




                                                       13
and                       ⎧
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                    B(r∗ ,g ∗ (A),x∗ ;b)
                          ⎨                                              if τ = 1, ...., T − 1
                                                        n
            sτ (b, A) =                                                                          .
                          ⎪
                          ⎪
                          ⎩ vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − r∗ , g ∗ (A); A) − δEv1 (x∗ , A0 ) if τ = T


     In the RPM regime (i.e., when A > A∗ (b, x∗ )), Proposition 1 implies that the equilibrium tax
rate-public good-public debt triple is implicitly defined by the following three conditions:

                                                                   1−r
                                             nαAg α−1 = p[                   ],                      (14)
                                                                1 − r(1 + ε)

                                      1−r                 ∂v1 (x, A0 )
                               [                ] ≥ −δnE[              ] (= if x < x),               (15)
                                   1 − r(1 + ε)               ∂x
and
                                                    B(r, g, x; b) = 0.                               (16)

Condition (14) says that the level of the public good should be such that the social marginal benefit
equals the price p times the marginal cost of taxation. The social benefit of raising additional
revenue by issuing more public debt is that it saves raising that revenue by taxes. Thus, condition
(15) says that the level of public debt should be such that the marginal social benefit of raising
public debt equals the expected marginal social cost. In the Appendix (section 8.2), we show that
in the RPM regime, the tax rate, public debt level, and the level of the public good all depend
positively on the value of the public good (A). In addition, the tax rate and level of public debt
depend positively on the current level of debt (b), while the level of the public good depends
negatively on b.
     It is important to note that at A = A∗ (b, x∗ ) the triple (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ) maximizes aggregate
legislator utility. To see this, note that B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ; b) equals zero at A = A∗ (b, x∗ ). Fur-
thermore, using the definition of r∗ in (10) we may write the first order conditions (11) and (12)
as
                                                                         1 − r∗
                                          nαAg ∗ (A)α−1 = p[                         ],              (17)
                                                                      1 − r∗ (1 + ε)
and
                                  1 − r∗               ∂v1 (x∗ , A0 )
                           [        ∗
                                             ] ≥ −δnE[                ] (= if x∗ < x).               (18)
                               1 − r (1 + ε)                ∂x
Thus, the equilibrium policy proposal is a continuous function of the state (b, A). Moreover, given
the monotonicity properties of the solution in the RPM regime, it follows that when A > A∗ (b, x∗ ),



                                                              14
the equilibrium policy proposal involves a tax rate higher than r∗ , the provision of a public good
level below g ∗ (A), and a level of debt that exceeds x∗ . The level of debt x∗ therefore forms a lower
bound on the government’s debt holdings.
   Further progress can be made by characterizing the debt level x∗ . Proposition 1 tells us that,
in equilibrium,
             ⎧            ⎧                                                 ⎫
             ⎪
             ⎪            ⎪
                          ⎪                                                 ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
                          ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +   B(r,g,z;x)
                                                      n      + δEv1 (z, A) ⎪⎬
             ⎪
             ⎨ max{r,g,z}                                                        if A > A∗ (x, x∗ )
                          ⎪
                          ⎪                                                 ⎪
                                                                            ⎪
 v1 (x, A) =              ⎩        B(r, g, z; x) ≥ 0 & z ∈ [x, x]           ⎭                       .
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪                                 ∗ ∗      ∗
             ⎩ u(w(1 − r∗ ), g ∗ (A); A) + B(r ,g (A),x ;x) + δEv1 (x∗ , A0 ) if A ≤ A∗ (x, x∗ )
                                                   n
                                                                                                             (19)
Thus, by the Envelope Theorem:
                             ⎧
                             ⎪
                             ⎪     1−r1 (x,A)
                 ∂v1 (x, A) ⎨ −( 1−r1 (x,A)(1+ε) )( n ) if A > A (x, x )
                                                   1+ρ               ∗ ∗
                           =                                             .                                   (20)
                    ∂x       ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎩        −( 1+ρ )     if A ≤ A∗ (x, x∗ )
                                                         n


The discontinuity that arises in the derivative of the value function reflects the fact that a higher
future level of debt reduces pork if the legislature is in the BAU regime and increases taxes if the
legislature is in the RPM regime. Increasing taxes is more costly than reducing pork because of
the marginal cost of public funds.
   Using (20), we have that the expected marginal social cost of debt is
                                                             Z    A
                     ∂v1 (x, A)                                                   1 − r1 (x, A)
             −δnE[              ] = G(A∗ (x, x∗ )) +                       (                        )dG(A)   (21)
                        ∂x                                    A∗ (x,x∗ )       1 − r1 (x, A)(1 + ε)

Combining this with equations (10) and (18), the debt level chosen in the BAU range x∗ must
satisfy
                                    Z   A
           n                                              1 − r1 (x∗ , A)
             ≥ G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ )) +                  (                          )dG(A) (= if x∗ < x).          (22)
           q                        A∗ (x∗ ,x∗ )       1 − r1 (x∗ , A)(1 + ε)

Our assumption concerning the maximum debt level x implies that A∗ (x, x) < A. Thus, since
taxes exceed r∗ in the RPM regime, the expected marginal social cost of debt must exceed n/q
when x∗ = x. It follows that x∗ < x and condition (22) holds as an equality.
   Condition (22) provides important insights into the determinants of the debt level x∗ . When
q < n, it implies that A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) must lie strictly between A and A. Intuitively, this means that the
debt level x∗ must be such that the legislature will transition out of BAU with positive probability

                                                             15
and stay in it with positive probability. Recall that A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) is implicitly defined by the equation
R(r∗ ) − ρx∗ = pg ∗ (A). Thus, if R(r∗ ) > pg ∗ (A), interest payments must be positive to soak up
the excess tax revenues and hence x∗ is positive. On the other hand, if R(r∗ ) < pg ∗ (A), then
interest earnings are required to supplement scarce tax revenues and x∗ must be negative. The
key determinant of the magnitude of x∗ is therefore the size of the tax base as measured by R(r∗ )
relative to the economy’s desired public good spending as measured by pg ∗ (A). The greater the
relative size of the tax base, the larger is the debt level chosen in the BAU regime.

4.2    Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium

The foregoing analysis of equilibrium policy proposals presumes that an equilibrium exists. The
key to validating this presumption is to demonstrate the existence of a round one value function
v1 (b, A) with the desired properties. In general, establishing the existence of a value function
in dynamic games is much more diﬃcult than establishing the existence of a value function for
a planner’s problem, because the equilibrium policy proposals do not necessarily maximize the
players’ value function. However, we can exploit the structure of the equilibrium unveiled in the
previous section to make the problem tractable.
   To prove the existence of an equilibrium we start by defining F ∗ to be the set of all real valued
functions v defined over the state space that are continuous and concave in x for all A. Then, for
all z ∈ [x, x], we define an operator Tz on F ∗ as follows:
                                     ⎧                                                         ⎫
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
                                     ⎨   u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r,g,x;b)
                                                                    n     + δEv(x, A0 )        ⎬
              Tz (v)(b, A) = max                                                                    (23)
                             (r,g,x) ⎪
                                     ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
                                     ⎩ B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, g ≤ g ∗ (A), r ≥ r∗ , & x ∈ [z, x]   ⎭

Thus, given that future payoﬀs are described by δEv(x, A0 ), the problem is to maximize average
legislator utility, but subject to the constraint that the tax rate must be at least r∗ , the public
debt level must be at least z and the public good level can be no more than g ∗ (A). By standard
arguments (see Stokey, Lucas and Prescott (1989)), Tz is a contraction and Tz (v) belongs to F ∗ .
Thus, for all z, there exists a unique fixed point vz which is continuous and concave in x for all A.
   From Proposition 1 and the subsequent discussion, it should be clear that if v1 is an equilibrium
round one value function and x∗ is the level of public debt that is chosen in the BAU regime, then
v1 = vx∗ . Moreover, it must be the case that x∗ maximizes x/q + δEvx∗ (x, A). The next step,




                                                     16
therefore, is to define the correspondence

                                                           x
                                     M (z) = arg max{        + δEvz (x, A)},                                     (24)
                                                           q

and to demonstrate that there exists z ∗ such that z ∗ belongs to M (z ∗ ). We then show that
the policy functions associated with the value function vz ∗ are unique and define an equilibrium.
Moreover, for all A, vz∗ (·, A) is strictly concave on the policy domain [z ∗ , x] and for all x the
function vz ∗ (·, A) is diﬀerentiable at x for almost all A. In this way, we establish:9

Proposition 2: There exists an equilibrium.

    Importantly, we can also prove that there can be at most one equilibrium. The argument
proceeds via contradiction. Suppose that there were two equilibria with associated round one
value functions v 0 and v 1 . Let x∗0 and x∗1 be the corresponding debt levels chosen in the BAU
regimes associated with each equilibrium and suppose that x∗0 < x∗1 . Then, we demonstrate that
it must be the case that for any ρ0 ∈ (0, ρ) and any x ∈ [x∗1 , x]
                                                                          x∗ −x∗
                                    ∂v1 (x, A)           ∂v 0 (x − 1+ρ
                                                                    1
                                                                      0 , A)
                                                                       0

                              −δnE[            ] ≥ −δnE[                     ].                                  (25)
                                        ∂b                        ∂b

Thus, the expected marginal social cost of borrowing with an initial debt level x in the high debt
equilibrium exceeds that in the low debt equilibrium with an initial debt level x−(x∗1 −x∗0 )/(1+ρ0 ).
From equation (22), we know that the expected marginal social costs of borrowing at x∗1 and x∗0
respectively, must equal n/q; that is,

                                       ∂v1 (x∗1 , A)           ∂v 0 (x∗0 , A)   n
                               −δnE[                 ] = −δnE[                ]= .                               (26)
                                            ∂b                       ∂b         q

Combining these two equations, yields the conclusion that x∗0 ≥ x∗1 − (x∗1 − x∗0 )/(1 + ρ0 ) - which is
a contradiction. In this way, we obtain:

Proposition 3: There exists at most one equilibrium.


4.3     Dynamics

Having understood the structure of equilibrium policy proposals and established the existence of
a unique equilibrium, we are now ready to explore the dynamic evolution of fiscal policy. We will
show that, irrespective of the economy’s initial debt level, the same distribution of debt emerges in
   9 Our strategy for proving existence suggests a simple two-step algorithm to computing an equilibrium. First,

find the value function vz associated with each z. Then, solve for a fixed point of the correspondence M(z) in [x, x].


                                                         17
the long run. Moreover, this distribution of debt is non-degenerate: even in the long-run, shocks
in the value of the public good induce persistent cycles between the two policy-making regimes.
This is in sharp contrast to the planner’s solution for the economy in which, as we will show in the
next section, the level of debt converges to a unique degenerate value. Political decision-making
therefore fundamentally alters the dynamic pattern of fiscal policy.
   Let {r1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A)} be the equilibrium round one policy functions and let x∗
be the level of public debt chosen in the BAU regime. The equilibrium policies determine a
distribution of public debt levels in each period. Let ψt (x) denote the distribution function of the
current level of debt at the beginning of period t. The distribution function ψ1 (x) is exogenous
and is determined by the economy’s initial level of debt b0 . To describe the distribution of debt
in periods t ≥ 2, we must first describe the transition function implied by the equilibrium. First,
                    b : [x, x] × (x∗ , x] → [A, A] as follows:
define the function A
                       ⎧
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪                       A      if x < x1 (b, A)
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎨
             b x) =
             A(b,         min{A ∈ [A, A] : x1 (b, A) = x} if x ∈ [x1 (b, A), x1 (b, A)] .           (27)
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎪
                       ⎩                      A        if x > x1 (b, A)

             b x) is the smallest value of public goods under which the equilibrium debt level
Intuitively, A(b,
would be x given an initial level of debt b. Then, the transition function is given by
                                        ⎧
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪     b x)) if x ∈ (x∗ , x]
                                        ⎨ G(A(b,
                             H(b, x) =                               .                              (28)
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎪
                                        ⎩ G(A∗ (b, x∗ )) if x = x∗

Intuitively, H(b, x) is the probability that in the next period the initial level of debt will be less
than or equal to x ∈ [x∗ , x] if the current level of debt is b. Using this notation, the distribution
of debt at the beginning of any period t ≥ 2 is defined inductively by
                                                Z
                                     ψt (x) =           H(b, x)dψt−1 (b).                           (29)
                                                    b

   Our main interest is to understand how the equilibrium debt distribution evolves over time. In
particular, does it converge to some limit distribution? We say that the sequence of distributions
hψt (x)i converges to the distribution ψ(x) if for all x ∈ [x∗ , x], we have that limt→∞ ψt (x) = ψ(x).10




                                                         18
 Moreover, ψ ∗ (x) is an invariant distribution if
                                               Z
                                     ψ ∗ (x) = H(b, x)dψ ∗ (b).                                             (30)
                                                     b

We can now establish:

Proposition 4: Let {r1 (b, A), s1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A)} be the round one equilibrium policy func-
tions. Then, the implied sequence of debt distributions hψt (x)i converges to a unique invariant
distribution ψ ∗ (x).

   Thus, no matter what the economy’s initial debt level, the same distribution of debt emerges
in the long run. The lower bound of the support of this distribution is x∗ - the level of public
debt chosen in the BAU regime. There is a mass point at this debt level, since the probability of
remaining at x∗ having reached it is G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ )) - which is positive. However, the distribution
of debt is non-degenerate because there is a positive probability of leaving the BAU regime (since
G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ )) < 1). If x∗ is positive, the economy is in perpetual deficit, with the extent of the
deficit spiking up after a sequence of high values of the public good. When x∗ is negative, the
government will run budget surpluses in good times (i.e., when A is low) and deficits only after a
suitable sequence of high realizations of the value of the public good.
   To get an intuitive feel for the long run dynamics of the system, suppose that the legislature
is in the BAU regime in period t − 1, implying that the level of debt is x∗ at the beginning of
period t. If At is less than A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ), then the legislature remains in BAU in period t. The tax
rate will be r∗ and the amount of public good provided will be g ∗ (At ). Government debt will be
just rolled over and expenditures on pork will be R(r∗ ) − pg ∗ (At ) − ρx∗ . On the other hand, if
At exceeds A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ), then the legislature will transition to RPM. To meet the costs of the public
good pg1 (x∗ , At ), the legislature will raise taxes and borrowing; that is, the tax rate r1 (x∗ , At ) will
exceed r∗ and the level of debt x1 (x∗ , At ) will exceed x∗ . Moreover, it will cease all pork barrel
spending.
   Assuming that At exceeds A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ), the legislature will remain in RPM in period t + 1 if
At+1 exceeds the threshold A∗ (x1 (x∗ , At ), x∗ ). The probability of remaining in RPM exceeds
the probability of transitioning to it in period t since A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) exceeds A∗ (x1 (x∗ , At ), x∗ ). If
At+1 is such that the legislature returns to BAU, the tax rate will be reduced to r∗ , the debt level
 10 In the present environment, this definition is equivalent to the requirement that the sequence of probability

measures associated with hψt (x)i converges weakly to the probability measure associated with ψ(x) (see Stokey,
Lucas and Prescott (1989) Theorem 12.8).


                                                         19
                               r




                             r*



                               x




                             x*


                               g
                      g * ( AH )



                      g * ( AL )


                               t                                            tim e
                                           tL              tH


                        Figure 1: The dynamics of the political equilibrium.


reduced to x∗ and the amount of public good provided will be g ∗ (At+1 ). The retirement of the
additional debt is financed solely by a reduction in pork (as opposed to a cut back in public good
spending or an increase in taxes). On the other hand, if At+1 is such that the legislature remains
in RPM, the higher current level of debt will make the legislature less inclined to spend, in the
sense that g1 (x1 (x∗ , At ), A) is less than g1 (x∗ , A) for all A. Moreover, both taxes and borrowing
will be higher for any given value of the public good (i.e., r1 (x1 (x∗ , At ), A) exceeds r1 (x∗ , A) and
x1 (x1 (x∗ , At ), A) exceeds x1 (x∗ , A) for all A). Thus, if the value of the public good remains as in
period t, citizens will experience a decrease in public good spending and further increases in taxes
and debt.

   For a graphical analysis of the dynamics of the system, let AL be less than A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) and


                                                   20
AH larger than A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ). Again, suppose that the legislature is in BAU in period t − 1 so that
the level of debt is x∗ at the beginning of period t. Further suppose that in periods t through tL
the value of the public good is AL ; in periods tL + 1 through tH the value of the public good is
AH ; and in periods tH + 1 the value of the public good returns to AL . Then, the dynamic pattern
of public debt, tax rates and public good provision is as represented in Figure 1. At date tL + 1
debt, taxes and public good levels jump up in response to the increase in A. During periods tL + 1
through tH , debt and taxes continue to rise, while public good provision falls. In period tH + 1,
public good provision drops in response to the fall in A, overshooting its natural level g ∗ (AL ).
After period tH + 1 debt and taxes start to fall and public good provision increases. Eventually,
the legislature returns to BAU.
    To summarize: in the long-run, legislative policy-making oscillates between BAU and RPM.
Periods of BAU are brought to an end by a high realization of the value of public goods. This
triggers an increase in public debt and taxes to finance higher public good spending and a cessation
of pork-barrel spending. Once in the RPM regime, further high realizations of the value of the
public good trigger further increases in debt and higher taxes. Policy-making returns to BAU
only after a suitable sequence of low realizations of the value of the public good. The larger the
amount of public debt that has been built up, the greater the expected time before returning to BAU.
Both policy-making regimes are persistent in the sense that the probability of remaining in them
is greater than the probability of transitioning from them.


5    The eﬃciency of political equilibrium

To understand the theory’s implications concerning eﬃciency, we focus on a comparison of the
political equilibrium and the policies that would be chosen by a social planner whose objective
is to maximize aggregate utility. We refer to the planner’s solution as “the eﬃcient solution”.
This is motivated by the fact that the planner’s solution is the unique Pareto eﬃcient policy
sequence in the set of policy sequences that provide all citizens with the same expected payoﬀ.
Since all citizens have the same expected payoﬀ in political equilibrium, divergencies between
the equilibrium and the planner’s policy sequences represent Pareto ineﬃciencies and thereby
constitute “political failures” in the sense defined by Besley and Coate (1998).




                                                21
5.1    The eﬃcient solution

While the eﬃcient solution could be derived from first principles, it is instructive to derive it
as a special case of our equilibrium model. The eﬃcient solution is exactly that which would
emerge in equilibrium if the legislature operated under a rule of unaminity; that is, if q = n.
As noted earlier, representatives obtain the same payoﬀs as their constituents and when q = n,
the equilibrium policy sequence maximizes aggregate legislator utility. It follows that the eﬃcient
solution has the same form as the equilibrium, except that the equilibrium variables are those
associated with q = n. Thus, the tax rate in the BAU regime (r∗ ) equals 0 and the level of public
goods provided is the Samuelson level (g ∗ (A) = gS (A)) (see equations (10) and (11)). Because
q = n, the level of debt x∗ that is chosen in this regime satisfies the first order condition (see
equation (22))
                                             Z   A
                                                                   1 − r1 (x∗ , A)
                    1 = G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ )) +                  (                          )dG(A).      (31)
                                             A∗ (x∗ ,x∗ )       1 − r1 (x∗ , A)(1 + ε)
This equation implies that at debt level x∗ , the future tax rate must be 0 with probability one.
Since r1 (x∗ , A) exceeds 0 for all A > A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ), this requires that A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) = A. This in turn
implies that x∗ = x. At this debt level, the government’s interest earnings on its bond holdings
are always suﬃcient to finance the Samuelson level of public goods, implying that no taxation is
necessary.
   We conclude that the eﬃcient solution has the following form. When the state is such that
A ≤ A∗ (b, x), the tax rate is zero, the public good level is the Samuelson level and the debt
level is x. Surplus revenues (which will be positive assuming A < A∗ (b, x)) are redistributed to
citizens via (uniform) district-specific transfers. When the state is such that A > A∗ (b, x), the
optimal policy involves positive levels of taxation, the provision of a public good level below the
Samuelson level and a level of debt that exceeds x. There are no surplus revenues and hence no
district-specific transfers.
   It is clear from this discussion that the distribution that puts point mass on the debt level x is an
invariant distribution. For once the government has accumulated this level of bonds, it can provide
Samuelson levels of the public good without distortionary taxation. Any surplus interest payments
can be redistributed as a uniform district-specific transfer. These transfers are lump-sum and
create no distortion. The legislature has no incentive to run down accumulations by redistributing
revenues via additional transfers because this would necessitate the use of distortionary taxation

                                                      22
in the future.
   It follows from Proposition 4 that the distribution of debt implied by the eﬃcient solution
converges to the distribution that puts point mass on the debt level x. Intuitively, whenever the
government’s holdings of bonds are less than x, the planner must anticipate using income taxation
to finance public good provision in some states of the world either currently or in the future. By
accumulating more bonds when the current value of public goods is low, he can reduce the need
to levy income taxes. This is always beneficial and hence the trend towards an increase in bond
holdings.
   To summarize: the eﬃcient solution converges to a steady state in which bond holdings are
maintained at level x. In this steady state, there is no taxation and the Samuelson level of the public
good is provided in each period. Public good spending is financed entirely from interest earnings.
Interest earnings in excess of public good spending are distributed to citizens via transfers.

5.2    Political failure

Comparing the eﬃcient solution with the equilibrium, we obtain:

Proposition 5: If q < n the equilibrium policy sequence is ineﬃcient. Specifically, in the long
run, the level of debt held by the government is too high relative to the eﬃcient level, tax rates are
too high, and public good levels are too low. Moreover, tax rates are too volatile.

   The fundamental reasons for the ineﬃciency can be understood most easily by seeing what
would happen if the intial level of public debt were equal to the eﬃcient level x. Then, the
minimum winning coalition of legislators controlling policy could levy zero taxes, provide the first
best level of public goods and maintain the level of debt, all while providing transfers to their
districts with the surplus interest earnings. However, they will not do this. They will impose a
positive tax rate (equal to r∗ ) because the cost to their districts from imposing the tax is smaller
than the benefits from the additional transfers the tax can finance. They will provide less than the
first best level of public goods (g ∗ (A) rather than g S (A)) because the cost to their districts from
under-provision is smaller than the benefits from the additional transfers the reduction in public
good spending allows. They will increase the government’s debt level (to x∗ from x) because the
future cost to their districts from reducing the government’s bond holdings is smaller than the
benefits from the additional transfers the reduction in bond holdings allows.
   The distortions in the tax rate and the public good level are static ineﬃciencies in the sense


                                                  23
that within any period in which pork is provided aggregate citizen welfare would be higher if the tax
rate were reduced and the public good level increased. These distortions arise because the decisive
majority does not fully internalize the costs of raising taxes or reducing public good spending to
finance transfers to its members. The distortion in the debt level is a dynamic ineﬃciency in the
sense that the future benefits to citizens from lower debt oﬀset the costs of lower revenues in the
present. The cause of this distortion is “redistributive uncertainty” (Lizzeri 1999). To see this,
suppose that with an initial debt level x the minimum winning coalition reduces bond holdings
by one unit and uses it to finance transfers to coalition members. This would gain 1/q units for
each legislator in the minimum winning coalition and would lead to a one unit reduction in pork
in the next period (assuming that A∗ (x, x∗ ) ≥ A). This has an expected cost of only 1/n in the
next period because members of the current minimum winning coalition are not sure if they will
be included in the next period. The critical role of redistributive uncertainty can be appreciated
by noting that the ineﬃciency would disappear if the identity of the minimum winning coalition
were constant through time.
      The conclusion that tax rates are too volatile should be interpreted with some care. Conditional
on the tax rate being at least r∗ , the public good level being no greater than g ∗ (A), and the debt
level being no smaller than x∗ , the equilibrium policy sequence is indeed eﬃcient.11                 Thus, the
statement that tax rates are too volatile should be understood as a comparison between the first
best level of volatility (which is zero) and the equilibrium. In a second best sense, the volatility
in equilibrium tax rates is optimal.
      Perhaps the most important diﬀerence between the equilibrium and the planner’s solution
is that in the former the long run distribution of debt is stochastic. Consistent with the tax-
smoothing principle, in equilibrium, debt is accumulated when the value of the public good is
high and decumulated when it is low. The planner’s solution displays the same pattern only
when an exogenous limit (smaller than −x) is placed on the amount of bonds the government can
hold (see Aiyagari et al (2002)). It is tempting to suppose that such an ad hoc limit could arise
“naturally” when policies are determined via the political process and our equilibrium analysis
provides support for this idea. Nonetheless, it is important to note that the equilibrium policy
sequence does not equal that which would be chosen by a planner with a set of feasible debt levels
 11  As was noted in section 4.2, the equilibrium round one value function v1 is a fixed point of the operator Tx∗
defined in equation (23).




                                                       24
[x∗ , x]. As is clear from equation (23), the equilibrium solves a planning problem with constraints
on the tax rate and public good level as well as on public debt. The influence of the political
process on policy determination can be captured only if all policy variables are appropriately
constrained. Accordingly, our analysis does not provide a justification for imposing a debt limit
on the planner’s problem and declaring the solution a positive prediction.


6     The desirability of a balanced budget requirement

To illustrate the potential usefulness of the theory for policy analysis, we explore its implications for
the desirability of balanced budget requirements. There has been considerable debate in academic
and policy circles concerning this issue.12       Many of the U.S. states have some form of balanced
budget requirement and there is evidence that they do have an eﬀect.13                      Proponents argue
that they dampen politicians’ ability to borrow to spend inappropriately. Opponents point out
that they restrict the state’s ability to adjust to revenue shocks and/or spending shocks without
having to raise taxes. Both positions seem reasonable, but to provide sharper policy guidance
it is necessary to understand the features of the environment that determine when the benefits
outweigh the potential costs.
    We consider a fiscal restraint that requires the legislature to ensure that tax revenues equal
public spending in every period. We assume that in the first period the government begins with
no debt, so that spending is just public goods and transfers. We seek to understand when citizens’
welfare will be enhanced by the constraint that public spending be financed solely by tax revenues.
    Let (rc (A), gc (A)) denote the equilibrium tax rate and public good level when the value of the
public good is A under the balanced budget requirement. Then, following the logic of Proposition
1, we have that
                     ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎪                                  B(r,g,0;0)
                     ⎨ arg max{u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                   : B(r, g, 0; 0) ≥ 0}   if A > A∗ (0, 0)
                                                            n
(rc (A), gc (A)) =                                                                                             .
                     ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎩                           (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) if A ≤ A∗ (0, 0)
                                                                                                           (32)
Thus, if A ≤ A∗ (0, 0), the legislature is in the BAU regime and districts receive pork, while if
  12 For relevant discussion see Bohn and Inman (1996), Brennan and Buchanan (1980), Niskanen (1992), Poterba

(1994), (1995) and Poterba and von Hagen (1999).
  13 For example, Poterba (1994) shows that states with restraints were quicker to reduce spending and/or raise

taxes in response to negative revenue shocks than those without.



                                                      25
A > A∗ (0, 0), the legislature is in the RPM regime. The solution is stationary because government
cannot issue debt or acquire bonds. If vc (A) denotes expected citizen welfare under the balanced
budget requirement given that the current value of the public good is A, then

                                                           B(rc (A), gc (A), 0; 0)
              vc (A) = u(w(1 − rc (A)), gc (A); A) +                               + δEvc (A0 ).        (33)
                                                                     n

Expected citizen welfare under the constraint is Evc (A) and equation (33) implies that
                     Z   A
                                                              B(rc (A), gc (A), 0; 0)
         Evc (A) =           [u(w(1 − rc (A)), gc (A); A) +                           ]dG(A)/(1 − δ).   (34)
                     A                                                  n

   Let {r1 (b, A), g1 (b, A), x1 (b, A)} be the equilibrium policy functions when there is no balanced
budget requirement, let x∗ be the BAU level of public debt, and let v1 (b, A) be the equilibrum
(round one) value function. Starting from a situation in which the government has no debt,
expected citizen welfare in the unconstrained equilibrium is Ev1 (0, A). Thus, a balanced budget
requirement will be desirable if and only if Evc (A) > Ev1 (0, A).
   Our first result is that when the revenues raised by the tax rate r∗ are never suﬃcient to cover
the cost of the optimal level of public goods, a balanced budget requirement is not desirable.

Proposition 6: If R(r∗ ) ≤ pg ∗ (A), a balanced budget requirement is not desirable.

To see this, recall that the condition of the proposition implies that x∗ must be non-positive,
so that in the BAU region, the winning proposals involve the purchase of bonds. These bond
holdings allow the legislature to lower taxes and provide higher levels of public goods in the long
run. Moreover, the legislature only issues debt in the RPM regime which means that borrowing
will be used only when it will raise aggregate utility. Such borrowing must therefore be socially
beneficial.
   An interesting feature of this case, is that under a balanced budget requirement, the legislature
never engages in pork barrel spending. (This follows from the fact that the condition implies that
A∗ (0, 0) ≤ A.) By contrast, in the unconstrained equilibrium, the legislature does provide pork in
the BAU regime. Thus, the balanced budget requirement is undesirable despite eliminating pork.
This underscores the lesson that there is nothing necessarily undesirable about pork - indeed, in
the eﬃcient solution the government provides pork, redistributing excess revenues from its interest
earnings back to the citizens.
   Our second result is the mirror image of the first: when the revenues raised by the tax rate r∗
are always suﬃcient to cover the cost of the optimal level of public goods when the tax rate is r∗ ,

                                                      26
a balanced budget requirement is desirable.

Proposition 7: If R(r∗ ) ≥ pg ∗ (A), a balanced budget requirement is desirable.

To see this, note that with a balanced budget restraint, the equilibrium will involve the tax rate
r∗ and the public good level g ∗ (A) in every period. Without the restraint, the equilibrium will
involve the legislature immediately borrowing x∗ and using the revenues to finance extra pork.
The amount x∗ must be suﬃciently large that in future periods there is positive probablity that
the tax rate will exceed r∗ and the public good level will be less than g ∗ (A). There is no oﬀsetting
benefit, and hence eliminating the ability to borrow, increases citizen welfare.
   If R(r∗ ) ∈ (pg ∗ (A), pg ∗ (A)) but x∗ ≤ 0, then the argument underlying Proposition 6 remains
and imposing a balanced budget requirement will be harmful. However, if x∗ > 0 the picture is
murkier because there are oﬀsetting eﬀects from imposing the requirement. On the one hand, the
government does not need to service the debt and hence long run taxes and public good levels
must be lower on average with the requirement. On the other, the government’s ability to smooth
tax rates and public good levels by varying the debt level is lost.
   Intuitively, it seems natural to suppose that the larger the size of the tax base as measured by
R(r∗ ) the more likely is a balanced budget requirement to be desirable. After all, the larger the
tax base, the less the need to borrow to meet desired public good spending and the greater the
debt level that will need to be financed when there is no restraint. This idea can be investigated
formally by noting that the size of R(r∗ ) is determined by the magnitude of the private sector wage
                                                                                                   1
w. From (2), we see that R(r∗ ) equals pg ∗ (A) if and only if w = [pg ∗ (A)/nr∗ εε (1−r∗ )ε ] 1+ε . Thus,
                                                          1                                 1
as we increase w between [pg ∗ (A)/nr∗ εε (1 − r∗ )ε ] 1+ε and [pg ∗ (A)/nr∗ εε (1 − r∗ )ε ] 1+ε , we move the
size of the tax base through the interval (pg ∗ (A), pg ∗ (A)). Our conjecture is that there must exist
                                                              1                                            1
a critical wage w∗ greater than [pg ∗ (A)/nr∗ εε (1−r∗ )ε ] 1+ε but less than [pg ∗ (A)/nr∗ εε (1−r∗ )ε ] 1+ε
such that a balanced budget requirement is desirable if and only w > w∗ . Unfortunately, however,
the argument that this is indeed the case has so far proven elusive.
   To summarize: the theory suggests the key determinant of the desirability of a balanced budget
requirement is the size of the tax base relative to the economy’s desired public good spending.
When this size is large, a balanced budget requirement is a good idea and when it is small, the
opposite conclusion holds. The relative size of the tax base will be reflected in the magnitude of
the debt level that is chosen in the BAU regime. Thus, the theory supports the common sense



                                                     27
conclusion that economies with large and perpetual deficits should introduce balanced budget
requirements.


7        Conclusion

This paper has presented a dynamic theory of public spending, taxation and debt. The theory
brings together ideas from the optimal taxation and political economy literatures. From the
former, the theory adopts the basic framework underlying the tax smoothing approach to fiscal
policy. From the latter, the theory employs the legislative bargaining approach to modelling
policy-making and draws on ideas in the political economy of deficits literature. The result is a
tractable dynamic general equilibrium model that yields a rich set of predictions concerning the
dynamics of fiscal policy and permits a rigorous analysis of the normative properties of equilibrium
policies.
       The empirical predictions of the theory are consistent with the fact that historically the
debt/GDP ratio in the U.S. and the U.K. tends to have increased in periods of high govern-
ment spending needs (such as wars) and decreased in periods of low needs (Barro (1979), (1986),
and (1987)). The theory is also consistent with the findings of Bohn (1998) who studies the re-
lationship between the U.S. primary surplus (tax revenues minus non-interest expenditures) and
the debt/GDP ratio. He finds that this relationship is positive and, further, that it is non-linear
and increasing. Intuitively, the idea is that the higher the debt level, the more legislators rein in
spending and/or increase taxes. Our theory delivers this prediction in the sense that an increase in
the debt level always increases the primary surplus and, moreover, increases it more when the debt
level is high enough to put the legislature in the RPM regime.14 While these predictions are also
consistent with the tax smoothing paradigm, our theory does not require either the assumption
that policy is chosen by a benevolent planner or that the government faces an ad hoc debt limit.
       In sharp contrast to the tax smoothing paradigm, the theory is potentially able to explain
  14 In our model, the primary surplus P S(b, A) is the diﬀerence between tax revenues and spending on the public
good and pork. Using the budget constraint, we may write this as P S(b, A) = (1 + ρ)b − x1 (b, A). For a given A,
consider a small increase ∆b in b. If A < A∗ (b, x∗ ) and the legislature is in the BAU regime, then x1 (b, A) = x∗
and ∆P S(b, A)/∆b = (1 + ρ). On the other hand, if A > A∗ (b, x∗ ) and the legislature is in the RPM regime,
then ∆P S(b, A)/∆b = (1 + ρ) − ∆x1 (b, A)/∆b which exceeds 1 + ρ since x1 (b, A) is decreasing in b. In both cases,
therefore, the relationship between the primary surplus and debt is positive, but the eﬀect is larger when debt is
higher. We have not proven that in the RPM regime x1 (b, A) is concave and so we cannot conclude that primary
surplus is globally convex in b. However, this is not what Bohn (1998) shows. In one specification, he considers
a piecewise linear regression with a cutpoint at the average level of debt b: he shows that the linear intercept for
b ≥ b is higher than for b < b.



                                                        28
why countries have very diﬀerent average debt/GDP ratios (see Alesina and Perotti (1995) for
discussion). In the model, this variation could arise from diﬀerences in the level of debt that is
chosen in the BAU regime (x∗ ). An increase in this debt level serves to shift the support of the
debt distribution to the right. As we have noted, x∗ is determined by the size of an economy’s tax
base relative to its desired public good spending. Diﬀerences in the relative size of the tax base
may arise even in very similar economies, if (say) the elasticity of labor supply varies because of
diﬀerent labor market insititutions or social welfare arrangements. Alternatively, diﬀerences in x∗
could reflect the fact that diﬀerent political institutions translate into diﬀerences in the required
majority to pass legislation.15
       The theory also provides novel predictions on the dynamic evolution of the composition of
public spending. It is of course diﬃcult to empirically distinguish spending on national public
goods and pork, so directly testing whether the allocation of spending follows the dynamic pattern
suggested by the model may be problematic. However, voting behavior might be used to test the
model. According to the theory, winning coalitions on budget bills should be minimal in periods
of BAU, but should turn to super-majorities in the presence of exceptional events such as wars or
natural disasters.
       The normative analysis provides a clean account of how politically determined policy choices
diverge from eﬃcient policies in an environment that incorporates the key assumptions of the
tax smoothing theory of fiscal policy. Equally importantly, the framework permits a non-trivial
analysis of an important policy question - namely, is a fiscal restraint in the form of a balanced
budget requirement desirable? Obviously, such restraints are never optimal in a model in which
policy is chosen by a planner because they limit the available policy options. The theory suggests
that the key determinant of the desirability of a balanced budget requirement is the size of the tax
base relative to the economy’s desired public good spending. When this size is large, a balanced
budget requirement is a good idea and when it is small, the opposite conclusion holds.
       There are numerous ways the theory might usefully be extended. One important extension
would be to introduce cyclical fluctuations in tax revenues due to the business cycle. This could
be achieved by specifying a stochastic process for the private sector wage. One could then derive
predictions concerning the cyclical behavior of fiscal policy. While the tax smoothing paradigm
  15    Recall that r∗ depends negatively on q and hence the size of the tax base as measured by R(r∗ ) is decreasing
in q.




                                                          29
suggests that deficits might be observed in recessions and surpluses in booms, observed fiscal pol-
icy is often procyclical (Alesina and Tabellini (2005)). It would be interesting to know what the
theory developed here predicts. A further important set of extensions concerns the implications
of diﬀerent political institutions for the dynamics of fiscal policy. For example, one could model
decision making in a bicameral legislative system or a presidential system with veto power. Un-
derstanding how these diﬀerent institutions impact the equilibrium and its dynamics would be
helpful in interpreting cross-country (or cross-state) variation in the time series on debt and other
key fiscal variables (see Woo (2003)). Finally, it would be interesting to study the implications of
diﬀerent decision-making procedures or consitutional rules governing policy-making (see von Ha-
gen (2002) for discussion). For example, suppose that tax rates were determined before spending
decisions or that tax increases must be approved by a majority of voters in a referendum. Under-
standing how these diﬀerent budgetary rules or protocols impact fiscal policy could contribute to
debates concerning piecemeal institutional reform.




                                                 30
References
   Acemoglu, D., (2003), “Why not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict, Commitment
   and Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(4), 620-652.
   Aiyagari, R., A. Marcet, T. Sargent and J. Seppala, (2002), “Optimal Taxation without
   State-Contingent Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1220-1254.
   Alesina, A., (2000), “The Political Economy of the Budget Surplus in the United States,”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3), 3-19.
   Alesina, A. and R. Perotti, (1995), “The Political Economy of Budget Deficits,” IMF Staﬀ
   Papers, 1-31.
   Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini, (1990), “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government
   Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, 57, 403-414.
   Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini, (2005), “Why is Fiscal Policy often Procyclical?” NBER
   Working Paper #11600.
   Austen-Smith, D. and J. Banks, (2005), Positive Political Theory II: Strategy and Structure,
   Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
   Baron, D., (1991), “Majoritarian Incentives, Pork Barrel Programs, and Procedural Con-
   trol,” American Journal of Political Science, 35, 57-90.
   Baron D. and J. Ferejohn, (1989), “Bargaining in Legislatures,” American Political Science
   Review, 83, 1181-1206.
   Barro, R., (1979), “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
   87, 940-971.
   Barro, R., (1986), “U.S. Deficits since World War I,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
   88(1), 195-222.
   Barro, R., (1987), “Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices, and Budget Deficits in the
   United Kingdom, 1701-1918,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, 221-247.
   Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2005), “Ineﬃciency in Legislative Policy-Making: A Dynamic
   Analysis,” NBER Working Paper #11495.
   Besley, T. and S. Coate, (1998), “Sources of Ineﬃciency in a Representative Democracy: A
   Dynamic Analysis,” American Economic Review, 88(1), 139-156.
   Bohn, H., (1998), “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 113(3), 949-963.
   Bohn, H. and R. Inman, (1996), “Balanced Budget Rules and Public Deficits: Evidence
   from the U.S. States,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 45, 13-76.
   Brennan, G. and J. Buchanan, (1980), The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of a Fiscal
   Constitution, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
   Coate, S. and S. Morris, (1999), “Policy Persistence,” American Economic Review, 89, 1327-
   1336.


                                            31
Hassler, J., Rodriguez Mora, J., Storesletten, K. and F. Zilibotti, (2003), “The Survival of
the Welfare State,” American Economic Review, 93(1), 87-112.
Inman, R., (1990), “Public Debts and Fiscal Politics: How to Decide?” American Economic
Review, 80(2), 81-85.
Leblanc, W., J. Snyder and M. Tripathi, (2000), “Majority-Rule Bargaining and the Under
Provision of Public Investment Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 21-47.
Lizzeri, A., (1999), “Budget Deficits and Redistributive Politics,” Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 66(4), 909-928.
Lucas, R. and N. Stokey, (1983), “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55-93.
Niskanen, W., (1992), “The Case for a New Fiscal Constitution,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 6(2), 13-24.
Persson, T. and L. Svensson, (1989), “Why a Stubborn Conservative would Run a Deficit:
Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 325-345.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Poterba, J., (1994), “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Eﬀects of Budgetary Institutions
and Politics,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 799-821.
Poterba, J., (1995), “Balanced Budget Rules and Fiscal Policy: Evidence from the States,”
National Tax Journal, 48(3), 329-336.
Poterba, J. and J. von Hagen, eds., (1999), Fiscal Rules and Fiscal Performance, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rockafellar, R. T., (1970), Convex Analysis, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Stokey, N., R. Lucas and E. Prescott, (1989), Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Velasco, A., (2000), “Debts and Deficits with Fragmented Fiscal Policymaking,” Journal of
Public Economics, 76, 105-125.
von Hagen, J., (2002), “Fiscal Rules, Fiscal Institutions, and Fiscal Performance,” The
Economic and Social Review, 33(3), 263-284.
von Hagen, J. and I. Harden, (1995), “Budget Processes and Commitment to Fiscal Disci-
pline,” European Economic Review, 39, 771-779.
Weingast, B, K. Shepsle and C. Johnsen, (1981), “The Political Economy of Benefits and
Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics,” Journal of Political Economy, 89,
642-664.
Woo, J., (2003), “Economic, Political, and Institutional Determinants of Public Deficits,”
Journal of Public Economics, 87, 387-426.




                                         32
8     Appendix
8.1    Proof of Proposition 1

We begin by establishing the claim made in the text that, given that utility is transferable, the
proposer is eﬀectively making decisions to maximize the collective utility of q representatives under
the assumption that they get to divide any surplus revenues among their districts.

Lemma A.1: Let {rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A), sτ (b, A)}Tτ =1 be an equilibrium with associated value
function v1 (b, A). Then, for all states (b, A), the tax rate-public good-public debt triple (rτ (b, A),
gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) proposed in any round τ solves the problem

                                                            B(r,g,x;b)
                          max(r,g,x) u(w(1 − r), g; A) +        q        + δEv1 (x, A0 )

                                    s.t.   B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x] .

Moreover, the transfer to coalition members is given by

              sτ (b, A) = vτ +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A); A) − δEv1 (xτ (b, A), A0 ).

Proof: We begin with proposal round T . Let (b, A) ∈ Z be given. Multiplying the objective
function through by q, we need to show that if (rT , sT , gT , xT ) solves the round T proposer’s
problem when the state is (b, A), (rT , gT , xT ) solves the problem

                       max(r,g,x) q[u(w(1 − r), g; A) + δEv1 (x, A0 )] + B(r, g, x; b)
                                                                                            ,          (35)
                                    s.t.   B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]

and sT = vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) − δEv1 (xT , A0 ). Recall that the round T proposer’s
problem is:
                      max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) − (q − 1) s + δEv1 (x, A)
                    (r,g,x,s)

                         s.t. u(w(1 − r), g; A) + s + δEv1 (x, A) ≥ vT +1 (b, A),

                                B(r, g, x; b) ≥ (q − 1)s, s ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x].

It is easy to see that sT = vT +1 (b, A) − δEv1 (xT , A0 ) − u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A), for if this were not the
case it would follow from the definition of vT +1 (b, A) that sT > 0 and we could create a preferred
proposal by just reducing sT . It follows that we can write the proposer’s payoﬀ as

                       q [u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) + δEv1 (xT , A0 )] + B(rT , gT , xT ; b).

                                                      33
    Now suppose that (rT , gT , xT ) does not solve problem (35). Let (r0 , g 0 , x0 ) solve problem (35)
and s0 = vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) − δEv1 (x0 , A0 ). Then, the proposer’s payoﬀ under the
proposal (r0 , g 0 , x0 , s0 ) is q [u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) + δEv1 (x0 , A0 )] + B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b). By construction, the
incentive constraint is satisfied and, by definition of vT +1 (b, A), s0 ≥ 0. Moreover, x0 ∈ [x, x].
Finally, note that

       B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b) − (q − 1)s0   = (q − 1)[u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) + δEv1 (x0 , A0 )] + B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b)

                                              −(q − 1)vT +1 (b, A) ≥ 0

where the last inequality follows from the fact that (r0 , g 0 , x0 ) solves problem (35) and the definition
of vT +1 (b, A). It follows that (r0 , g 0 , x0 , s0 ) is feasible for the proposer’s problem and yields a higher
payoﬀ than (rT , gT , xT , sT ) - a contradiction.

    Now consider the round T − 1 proposer’s problem

                        max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) − (q − 1) s + δEv1 (x, A0 )
                       (r,g,x,s)

                              s.t. u(w(1 − r), g; A) + s + δEv1 (x, A0 ) ≥ vT (b, A),                                  (36)

                                    B(r, g, x; b) ≥ (q − 1)s, s ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x].

From what we know about the round T proposer’s problem,

                                                               B(rT , gT , xT ; b)
                     vT (b, A) = u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) +                           + δEv1 (xT , A0 ),
                                                                       n

where (rT , gT , xT ) solves problem (35).
    We need to show that if (rT −1 , sT −1 , gT −1 , xT −1 ) is the solution to the round T − 1 proposer’s
problem, (rT −1 , gT −1 , xT −1 ) solves problem (35) and

                        sT −1 = vT (b, A) − u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) − δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 ).

The result would follow from our earlier argument if we could show that

                        sT −1 = vT (b, A) − u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) − δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 ),

so suppose that sT −1 > vT (b, A) − u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) − δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 ). Then it must be the
case that sT −1 = 0, or we could obtain a preferred proposal by simply reducing sT −1 . It follows
that
                             vT (b, A) < u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 ).                             (37)

                                                             34
This implies that (rT −1 , gT −1 , xT −1 ) solves

                             max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) + δEv1 (x, A)
                            (r,g,x)

                                      s.t. B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x].

   Now consider the proposal (rT , gT , xT , B(rT ,gnT ,xT ;b) ). Clearly, this proposal satisfies all the
constraints of the proposer’s problem. The payoﬀ to the proposer under this policy is

             q[u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) + δEv1 (xT , A0 )] + B(rT , gT , xT ; b) − (q − 1)vT (b, A).

From (37), this payoﬀ is strictly larger than

                            q[u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) + δEv1 (xT , A)] + B(rT , xT , gT ; b)

                            −(q − 1)[u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A)].

The payoﬀ to the proposer under the optimal policy (rT −1 , gT −1 , xT −1 ) is

                  u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + B(rT −1 , xT −1 , gT −1 ; b) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A).

Thus, it must be the case that

                      u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + B(rT −1 , xT −1 , gT −1 ; b) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 )

                  > q[u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) + δEv1 (xT , A0 )] + B(rT , xT , gT ; b)

                      −(q − 1)[u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 )],

implying that

                     q[u(w(1 − rT −1 ), gT −1 ; A) + δEv1 (xT −1 , A0 )] + B(rT −1 , xT −1 , gT −1 ; b)

              > q[u(w(1 − rT ), gT ; A) + δEv1 (xT , A0 )] + B(rT , xT , gT ; b).

This contradicts the fact that (rT , gT , xT ) solves problem (35).
   Application of the same logic to proposal rounds τ = T − 2, ..., 1 implies the lemma.                          ¥

   The argument in the text together with Lemma A.1 implies that for any proposal round τ if
A > A∗ (b, x∗ )
                                                   ⎧                                                      ⎫
                                                   ⎪
                                                   ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                   ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +      B(r,g,x;b)
                                                                                  n        + δEv1 (x, A ) ⎪
                                                                                                          ⎬
                                                                                                          0
     (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) = arg max                                                                  ,
                                                   ⎪
                                                   ⎪                                                          ⎪
                                                                                                              ⎪
                                                   ⎩            B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]                ⎭


                                                        35
while if A ≤ A∗ (b, x∗ )

                               (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ).

Turning to the equilibrium transfers, if A ≤ A∗ (b, x∗ ) it follows that for all proposal rounds
τ = 1, ..., T − 1 we have that

                                                              B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ; b)
              vτ +1 (b, A) = u(w(1 − r∗ ), g ∗ (A); A) +                              + δEv1 (x∗ , A0 ).
                                                                         n

Thus, Lemma A.1 implies that the transfers to coalition members are given by:
                     ⎧
                     ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎨            B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x∗ ; b)/n τ = 1, ..., T − 1
         sτ (b, A) =                                                                   .
                     ⎪
                     ⎪
                     ⎩ vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − r∗ , g ∗ (A); A) − δEv1 (x∗ , A0 ) τ = T

If A > A∗ (b, x∗ ) it follows that for all proposal rounds τ = 1, ..., T − 1 we have that

                                                  B(r, g, x; b)
vτ +1 (b, A) = max{u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                          + δEv1 (x; A0 ) : B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]}
                                                       n
              = u(w(1 − rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A); A) + δEv1 (xτ (b, A), A0 ).

Thus, by Lemma A.1, sτ (b, A) = 0.              ¥

8.2     Properties of the equilibrium policy functions

We need to show that when A > A∗ (b, x∗ ) , the tax rate, public debt level and the level of the
public good depend positively on the value of the public good (A), the tax rate and level of public
debt depend positively on the current level of debt (b) and the level of the public good depends
negatively on b. From Proposition 1 we know that when A > A∗ (b, x∗ ), the equilibrium tax
rate-public good-public debt triple (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) solve

                                                               B(r,g,x;b)
                           max(r,g,x) u(w(1 − r), g; A) +          n        + δEv1 (x, A0 )
                                                                                              .
                                     s.t.    B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]

Moreover, from the discussion in the text, (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) is implicitly defined by
equations (14), (15) and (16).

Lemma A.2: Let b ∈ [x, x] and let A0 , A1 ∈ [A, A] be such that A∗ (b, x∗ ) < A0 < A1 . Then, it
is the case that gτ (b, A0 ) < gτ (b, A1 ) and rτ (b, A0 ) < rτ (b, A1 ). Moreover, it is also the case that
xτ (b, A0 ) ≤ xτ (b, A1 ) with strict inequality if xτ (b, A0 ) < x.

                                                         36
Proof: We begin by showing that gτ (b, A0 ) < gτ (b, A1 ). Let ϕ(A0 ; b, A) be the value of the
objective function for the problem when the state is A0 and the policies are those that are optimal
given state (b, A); that is,

                                                          B(rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A); b)
ϕ(A0 ; b, A) = u(w(1−rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A); A0 )+                                                +δEv1 (xτ (b, A), A0 ).
                                                                           n

Then, we have that ϕ(A0 ; b, A0 ) > ϕ(A0 ; b, A1 ) and ϕ(A1 ; b, A1 ) > ϕ(A1 ; b, A0 ) (the strict inequal-
ity follows from the fact that the problem has a unique solution).
    Moreover, using the definition of the indirect utility function u(w(1 − r), g; A) (see equation
(1)) and letting ∆A = A1 − A0 , we can write ϕ(A0 ; b, A0 ) = ϕ(A1 ; b, A0 ) − ∆Agτ (b, A0 ) and
ϕ(A0 ; b, A1 ) = ϕ(A1 ; b, A1 ) − ∆Agτ (b, A1 ). Since ϕ(A0 ; b, A0 ) > ϕ(A0 ; b, A1 ), this means that
ϕ(A1 ; b, A0 ) − ∆Agτ (b, A0 ) > ϕ(A1 ; b, A1 ) − ∆Agτ (b, A1 ), and hence

                          ∆A[gτ (b, A0 ) − gτ (b, A1 )] < ϕ(A1 ; b, A0 ) − ϕ(A1 ; b, A1 ) < 0.

Since ∆A > 0, this implies that gτ (b, A0 ) < gτ (b, A1 ) as required.
    We next show that rτ (b, A0 ) < rτ (b, A1 ). Suppose to the contrary that rτ (b, A0 ) ≥ rτ (b, A1 ).
Then the first order condition for x and the concavity of v1 imply that xτ (b, A0 ) ≥ xτ (b, A1 ). But
then it follows that

                B(rτ (b, A0 ), gτ (b, A0 ), xτ (b, A0 ); b) > B(rτ (b, A1 ), gτ (b, A1 ), xτ (b, A1 ); b) = 0

which is a contradiction.
    Finally, we show that xτ (b, A0 ) ≤ xτ (b, A1 ) with strict inequality if xτ (b, A0 ) < x. This follows
immediately from the first order condition for x and the concavity of v1 given that rτ (b, A0 ) <
rτ (b, A1 ).        ¥

Lemma A.3: Let b0 , b1 ∈ [x, x] be such that b0 < b1 and let A ∈ [A, A] be such that A∗ (b0 , x∗ ) < A.
Then, it is the case that rτ (b0 , A) < rτ (b1 , A) and gτ (b0 , A) > gτ (b1 , A). Moreover, it is also the
case that xτ (b0 , A) ≤ xτ (b1 , A) with strict inequality if xτ (b0 , A) < x.

Proof: We first show that rτ (b0 , A) < rτ (b1 , A). Suppose to the contrary that rτ (b0 , A) ≥
rτ (b1 , A). Then the first order conditions for g and x and the concavity of v1 imply that gτ (b0 , A) ≤
gτ (b1 , A) and xτ (b0 , A) ≥ xτ (b1 , A). But then it follows that

               B(rτ (b0 , A), gτ (b0 , A), xτ (b0 , A); b0 ) > B(rτ (b1 , A), gτ (b1 , A), xτ (b1 , A); b1 ) = 0


                                                              37
which is a contradiction.
    The fact that gτ (b0 , A) > gτ (b1 , A) follows immediately from the first order condition for g
and the fact that rτ (b0 , A) < rτ (b1 , A). In addition, the fact that xτ (b0 , A) ≤ xτ (b1 , A) with strict
inequality if xτ (b0 , A) < x follows immediately from the first order condition for x, the concavity
of v1 and the fact that rτ (b0 , A) < rτ (b1 , A).                ¥

8.3     Proof of Proposition 2

Step 1: Let F denote the set of all real valued functions v(·, ·) defined over the compact set
        £    ¤
[x, x] × A, A . Let F ∗ be the subset of these functions that are continuous and concave in x for
                           ∗
                               )−pg ∗ (A)
all A. For any z ∈ [ R(r         ρ        , x]   and v ∈ F ∗ consider the maximization problem

                                                                       B(r,g,x;b)
                          max(r,g,x) u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                   n        + δEv(x, A0 )
                                                                                                    .
                                                                   ∗         ∗
                          s.t. B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, r ≥ r , g ≤ g (A) & x ∈ [z, x]

For all µ > 0, let
                                                             x
                                 Xzµ (v) = arg max{            + δEv(x, A0 ) : x ∈ [z, x]}
                                                         x   µ
and let xµz (v) be the largest element of the compact set Xzµ (v). Notice that xµz (v) is non-increasing
in µ.
    Suppose that (r, g, x) is a solution to the maximization problem. It is straightforward to show
that (i) if A ≤ A∗ (b, xnz (v)) then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and x ∈ Xzn (v) ∩ {x : B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) ≥ 0};
(ii) if A ∈ (A∗ (b, xnz (v)), A∗ (b, xqz (v))] then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) = 0; and (iii)
if A > A∗ (b, xqz (v)) (r, g, x) is uniquely defined and the budget constraint is binding. Moreover,
r > r∗ and g < g ∗ (A). Note that in all cases the tax rate and public good level are uniquely
defined.
                                 ∗
                                     )−pg ∗ (A)
Step 2: For any z ∈ [ R(r              ρ        , x],   define the operator Tz : F ∗ → F as follows:
                                            ⎧                                                               ⎫
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎪                                B(r,g,x;b)                     ⎪
                                                                                                            ⎪
                                            ⎨       u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                   + δEv(x, A )  0   ⎬
                                                                                 n
              Tz (v)(b, A) = max
                                  (r,g,x) ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                          ⎪ ⎩ B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, g ≤ g ∗ (A), r ≥ r∗ & x ∈ [z, x] ⎪
                                                                                                  ⎭

It can be verified that Tz (v) ∈ F ∗ and that Tz is a contraction. Thus, there exists a unique
fixed point vz (b, A) which is continuous and concave in b for all A. This fixed point satisfies the




                                                                38
functional equation
                                   ⎧                                                                     ⎫
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                              B(r,g,x;b)                             ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                   ⎨     u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                   + δEvz (x, A )    0       ⎬
                                                                      n
               vz (b, A) = max                                                                               .
                            (r,g,x) ⎪                                                     ⎪
                                   ⎩ B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, r ≥ r∗ , g ≤ g ∗ (A) & x ∈ [z, x] ⎪
                                    ⎪                                                     ⎭

Let (b, A) be given and let (r, g, x) denote an optimal policy. By Step 1, we have that (i) if
A ≤ A∗ (b, xnz (vz )) then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and x ∈ Xzn (vz ) ∩ {x : B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) ≥ 0}; (ii)
if A ∈ (A∗ (b, xnz (vz )), A∗ (b, xqz (vz ))] then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) = 0; and (iii)
if A > A∗ (b, xqz (vz )) (r, g, x) is uniquely defined and the budget constraint is binding. Moreover,
r > r∗ and g < g ∗ (A). Again, in all cases the tax rate and public good level is uniquely defined.
Let these be given by (rz (b, A), gz (b, A)) - these are also continuous functions on the state space.
                               ∗     ∗
Step 3: For any z ∈ [ R(r )−pg  ρ
                                     (A)
                                         , x], the expected value function Evz (·, A) is strictly concave
          ©                                    ª
on the set b ∈ [x, x] : A∗ (b, xqz (vz )) < A .

Proof: It suﬃces to show that for any v ∈ F ∗ , the function ETz (v)(·, A) is strictly concave on
the set {b ∈ [x, x] : A∗ (b, xqz (v)) < A}. Since Tz (v) ∈ F ∗ , we know already that the function
Tz (v)(·, A) is concave for all A. We now show that for all A, the function Tz (v)(·, A) is strictly
concave on {b ∈ [x, x] : A∗ (b, xqz (v)) < A}. In this case, the budget constraint is strictly binding
and gz (b, A) < g ∗ (A), rz (b, A) > r∗ . We can therefore write:
                                         ⎧                                                               ⎫
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪                                                               ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                         ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r,g,x;b) + δEv (x, A0 )                 ⎬
                                                                   n
               Tz (v)(b, A) = max
                                 (r,g,x) ⎪
                                         ⎪                                                               ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                         ⎩       B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [z, x]                          ⎭

Take two points b1 and b2 in the set {b ∈ [x, x] : A∗ (b, xqz (v)) < A} and assume that b1 < b2 . Let λ
be a point in the interval [0, 1]. Define (ri , gi , xi ) to be the optimal policies associated with (bi , A)
for i = 1, 2 (as noted above these are unique). Let bλ = λb1 + (1 − λ) b2 , rλ = λr1 + (1 − λ) r2 ,
gλ = λg1 + (1 − λ) g2 and xλ = λx1 + (1 − λ) x2 . Since v (x, A0 ) + x/n is weakly concave in x,
u(w(1 − r), g; A) + [R(r) − pg]/n is strictly concave in (r, g), and (r1 , g1 , x1 ) 6= (r2 , g2 , x2 ), we have
that:
                                                    ⎡                                                ⎤
                                             ⎢                u(w(1 − r1 ), g1 ; A)                  ⎥
 λTz (v)(b1 , A) + (1 − λ)Tz (v)(b2 , A) = λ ⎢
                                             ⎣
                                                                                                     ⎥
                                                                                                     ⎦
                                                        + B(r1 ,gn1 ,x1 ;b1 ) + δEv (x1 , A0 )
                                                             ⎡                                                   ⎤
                                                           ⎢            u(w(1 − r2 ), g2 ; A)                    ⎥
                                                  +(1 − λ) ⎢
                                                           ⎣
                                                                                                                 ⎥
                                                                                                                 ⎦
                                                                 + B(r2 ,gn2 ,x2 ;b2 ) + δEv (x2 , A0 )


                                                        39
                                                                                                     B(rλ , gλ , xλ ; bλ )
                                                             < u(w(1 − rλ ), gλ ; A) +                                     + δEv (xλ , A0 )
                                                                                                             n

Since R(r) is concave in r, we have that B(rλ , gλ , xλ ; bλ ) > 0 and, in addition, xλ ∈ [z, x].
Therefore:

                                           B(rλ , gλ , xλ ; bλ )
                   u(w(1 − rλ ), gλ ; A) +                       + δEv (xλ , A0 )
                           ⎧                         n                           ⎫
                           ⎪
                           ⎪                                                     ⎪
                           ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +    B(r,g,x;b
                                                         n
                                                             λ )
                                                                 + δEv (x, A ) ⎪
                                                                             0   ⎬
                 ≤ max                                                             = Tz (v)(bλ , A).
                   (r,g,x) ⎪
                           ⎪                                                     ⎪
                                                                                 ⎪
                           ⎩         B(r, g, x; bλ ) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [z, x]            ⎭

We conclude that λTz (v)(b1 , A) + (1 − λ)Tz (v)(b2 , A) < Tz (v)(bλ , A) as required.

   Now take any two points b1 and b2 in the set {b ∈ [x, x] : A∗ (b, xqz (v)) < A} and assume that
b1 < b2 . Then, we have that

         λETz (v)(b1 , A) + (1 − λ)ETz (v)(b2 , A)
           Z A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))                       Z A
       = λ{                   Tz (v)(b1 , A)dG(A) +                                             Tz (v)(b1 , A)dG(A)}
                     A                                                      A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))
                      Z         A∗ (b2 ,xqz (v))                                      Z     A
             +(1 − λ){                               Tz (v)(b2 , A)dG(A) +                                 Tz (v)(b2 , A)dG(A)}
                              A                                                         A∗ (b2 ,xqz (v))
             Z   A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))
       =                            [λTz (v)(b1 , A) + (1 − λ)Tz (v)(b2 , A)]dG(A)
              A
                 Z   A
             +                       [λTz (v)(b1 , A) + (1 − λ)Tz (v)(b2 , A)]dG(A)
                  A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))
             Z   A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))                                    Z    A
       <                            Tz (v)(bλ , A)dG(A) +                                   Tz (v)(bλ , A)dG(A) = ETz (v)(bλ , A)
              A                                                          A∗ (b1 ,xqz (v))



                                      ∗
                                          )−pg ∗ (A)
Step 4: For any z ∈ [ R(r                   ρ        , x],   let

                                                        x                       R(r∗ ) − pg ∗ (A)
                         M (z) = arg max{                 + δEvz (x, A) : x ∈ [                   , x]}.
                                                        q                               ρ
                                          ∗
                                              )−pg ∗ (A)
Then there exists z ∗ ∈ [ R(r                   ρ        , x]   such that z ∗ ∈ M (z ∗ ).
Proof: The result follows from Kakutani’s Fixed Point Theorem if M (z) is non-empty, upper
hemi-continuous, and convex and compact-valued. We have:

Claim: M (z) is non-empty, upper hemi-continuous, and convex and compact-valued.




                                                                          40
Proof: Let Fz denote the set of all bounded and continuous real valued functions ϕ(·, ·, ·) defined
                          ∗     ∗                    £    ¤
over the compact set [ R(r )−pg
                             ρ
                                  (A)
                                      , x] × [x, x] × A, A . Define the operator:
                                     ⎧                                                                ⎫
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎪                            B(r,g,x;b)                          ⎪
                                                                                                      ⎪
                                     ⎨     u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                 + δEϕ(z, x, A0 )       ⎬
                                                                      n
            Ψ(ϕ)(z, b, A) = max
                              (r,g,x) ⎪                                                    ⎪
                                     ⎩ B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, g ≤ g ∗ (A), r ≥ r∗ & x ∈ [z, x] ⎪
                                      ⎪                                                    ⎭

It is easy to verify that Ψ maps Fz into itself and is a contraction. Thus, it has a unique fix-
                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                          )−pg ∗ (A)
point ϕ∗ = Ψ(ϕ∗ ) which belongs to Fz . Now note that for any z ∈ [ R(r                     ρ        , x],   vz (b, A) =
ϕ∗ (z, b, A). To see this, note that for any given z, ϕ∗ (z, b, A) ∈ F ∗ , so we can define Tz (ϕ∗ (z, b, A)).
The definition of ϕ∗ , however, implies Tz (ϕ∗ (z, b, A)) = ϕ∗ (z, b, A). Since Tz has a unique fixpoint,
it must be that vz (b, A) = ϕ∗ (z, b, A).
   Given this, we conclude that vz (b, A) is continuous in z and the Theorem of the Maximum
then implies that M (z) is non-empty, upper hemi-continuous, and compact-valued. Convexity of
M (z) follows from the fact that Evz (x, A) is weakly concave.                 ¥

Step 5: Let z ∗ be such that z ∗ ∈ M (z ∗ ). Then, xqz∗ (vz∗ ) = z ∗ .

Proof: By definition, xqz ∗ (vz ∗ ) is the largest element in the set Xzq∗ (vz∗ ). By construction, z ∗
belongs to the set

                                          x                         R(r∗ ) − pg ∗ (A)
                   M (z ∗ ) = arg max{      + δEvz ∗ (x, A) : x ∈ [                   , x]}.
                                          q                                 ρ

Since z ∗ obviously satisfies the constraint that x ≥ z ∗ , it must be the case that z ∗ ∈ Xzq∗ (vz∗ ). If
z ∗ 6= xqz∗ (vz∗ ), then it must be the case that z ∗ < xqz∗ (vz∗ ) and that

                         xqz∗ (vz∗ )                            z∗
                                     + δEvz∗ (xqz∗ (vz∗ ), A) =    + δEvz∗ (z ∗ , A).
                              q                                 q

This implies that the expected value function Evz∗ (·, A) is linear on the interval [z ∗ , xqz∗ (vz∗ )].
However, we know that
                                                          R(r∗ ) − pg ∗ (A)
                                    xqz∗ (vz∗ ) > z ∗ ≥
                                                                  ρ
which implies that pg ∗ (A) + ρxqz∗ (vz∗ ) > R(r∗ ), and hence that A∗ (xqz∗ (vz∗ ), xqz∗ (vz∗ )) < A. By
continuity, therefore, there must exist an interval [x0 , xqz∗ (vz∗ )] ⊂ [z ∗ , xqz∗ (vz∗ )] such that for all
x in this interval A∗ (x, xqz ∗ (vz ∗ )) < A. But by Step 3, the expected value function Evz∗ (·, A) is
strictly concave on the interval [x0 , xqz∗ (vz∗ )] - a contradiction.




                                                      41
Step 6: Let z ∗ be such that z ∗ ∈ M (z ∗ ). Then, the function vz ∗ (·, A) is diﬀerentiable for all b
such that A 6= A∗ (b, z ∗ ). Moreover:
                                 ⎧
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎪     1−rz∗ (b,A)
                  ∂vz∗ (b, A) ⎨ −( 1−rz∗ (b,A)(1+ε) )( n ) if A > A (b, z )
                                                      1+ρ              ∗ ∗
                               =                                            .
                       ∂x        ⎪
                                 ⎪
                                 ⎩           1+ρ
                                         −( n )               ∗     ∗
                                                      if A < A (b, z )

Proof: Let A ∈ [A, A] and let xo be given. By Step 5, we know that xqz∗ (vz∗ ) = z ∗ which
immediately implies that xnz∗ (vz∗ ) = z ∗ . Suppose first that A < A∗ (xo , z ∗ ). Then, we have that
in a neighborhood of xo that

                                                        B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), z ∗ ; x)
             vz∗ (x, A) = u(w(1 − r∗ ), g ∗ (A); A) +                            + δEvz∗ (z ∗ , A0 ).
                                                                   n

Thus, it is immediate that the value function vz∗ (x, A) is diﬀerentiable at xo and that

                                          ∂vz∗ (xo , A)      1+ρ
                                                        = −(     ).
                                              ∂x              n

   Now suppose that A > A∗ (xo , z ∗ ). Then, we know that the budget constraint is binding, and
that the constraints r ≥ r∗ and g ≤ g ∗ (A) are not binding. Thus, we have that in a neighborhood
of xo that
                                   ⎧                                                       ⎫
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                   ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +      B(r,g,y;x)
                                                                  n        + δEvz∗ (y, A ) ⎪
                                                                                           ⎬
                                                                                           0
               vz∗ (x, A) = max                                                                    .
                             (r,g,y) ⎪
                                     ⎪                                                         ⎪
                                                                                               ⎪
                                   ⎩            B(r, g, y; x) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [z ∗ , x]              ⎭

Define the function
                                     R(rz∗ (xo , A)) + xz∗ (xo , A) − (1 + ρ)x
                            g(x) =
                                                         p
and let

                                            B(rz∗ (xo , A), g(x), xz∗ (xo , A); x)
η(x) = u(w(1 − rz ∗ (xo , A)), g(x); A) +                                          + δEvz∗ (xz∗ (xo , A), A0 ) .
                                                              n

Notice that (rz∗ (xo , A), g(x), xz∗ (xo , A)) is a feasible policy when the initial debt level is x so that
in a neighborhood of xo we have that vz∗ (x, A) ≥ η(x). Moreover, η(x) is twice continuously
diﬀerentiable with derivatives

                                         η 0 (x) = −αAg(x)α−1 ( 1+ρ
                                                                 p )

                                η00 (x) = −(1 − α)αAg(x)α−2 ( 1+ρ 2
                                                               p ) <0




                                                     42
The second derivative property implies that η(x) is strictly concave. It follows from Theorem
                                                                                                          ∂vz∗ (xo ,A)
4.10 of Stokey and Lucas (1989) that vz∗ (x, A) is diﬀerentiable at xo with derivative                        ∂x         =
η0 (xo ) = −αAgz∗ (xo , A)α−1 ( 1+ρ
                                 p ). To complete the proof note that (rz (xo , A), gz (xo , A)) must
                                                                         ∗            ∗


solve the problem:                 ⎧                                                  ⎫
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                         B(r,g,xz∗ (xo ,A);xo )   ⎪
                                                                                      ⎪
                                   ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +                              ⎬
                                                                      n
                           max                                                            ,
                           (r,g)   ⎪
                                   ⎪                                                  ⎪
                                                                                      ⎪
                                   ⎩       B(r, g, xz∗ (xo , A); xo ) ≥ 0             ⎭

which implies that αnAgz∗ (xo , A)α−1 = p[ 1−r1−r  z∗ (xo ,A)
                                               z∗ (xo ,A)(1+ε)
                                                               ]. Thus, we have that

                            ∂vz∗ (xo , A)         1 − rz∗ (xo , A)         1+ρ
                                          = −[                          ](     ).
                                ∂x             1 − rz ∗ (xo , A)(1 + ε)     n

Step 7: Let z ∗ be such that z ∗ ∈ M (z ∗ ). Then, the following constitutes an equilibrium. For
each proposal round τ

                    (rτ (b, A), gτ (b, A), xτ (b, A)) = (rz ∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz ∗ (b, A));

for proposal rounds τ = 1, ..., T − 1

                            sτ (b, A) = B(rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A); b)/n;

and for proposal round T

         sT (b; A) = vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − rz∗ (b, A)), gz∗ (b, A); A) − δEvz ∗ (xz∗ (b, A), A0 );

where                                  ⎧                                                       ⎫
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                       ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +      B(r,x,g;b)
                                                                      n        + δEvz∗ (x, A ) ⎪
                                                                                              0⎬
               vT +1 (b, A) = max                                                                     .
                              (r,g,x) ⎪
                                      ⎪                                                           ⎪
                                                                                                  ⎪
                                       ⎩         s.t. B(r, x, g; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x]              ⎭

Proof: Given these proposals, the legislators’ round one value function is given by vz ∗ (b, A). This
follows from the fact that

                                                                  B(rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A); b)
        v1 (b, A) = u(w(1 − rz ∗ (b, A)), gz∗ (b, A); A) +
                                                                                     n
                       +δEvz∗ (xz ∗ (b, A), A0 ) = vz ∗ (b, A).

Similarly, the round τ = 2, ..., T legislators’ value function vτ (b, A) is given by vz∗ (b, A). It follows
from Steps 3 and 4 that the value function vz∗ (b, A) has the properties required for an equilibrium



                                                        43
to be well-behaved. Thus, we need only show: (i) that for proposal rounds τ = 1, .., T − 1 the
proposal
                                                          B(rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A); b)
                   (rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A),                                            )
                                                                             n
solves the problem

                     max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) − (q − 1) s + δEvz∗ (x; A0 )
                   (r,g,x,s)

                          s.t. u(w(1 − r), g; A) + s + δEvz∗ (x; A0 ) ≥ vz∗ (b; A),

                                   B(r, g, x; b) ≥ (q − 1)s, s ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x],

and (ii) that for proposal round T the proposal

(rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A), vT +1 (b, A) − u(w(1 − rz ∗ (b, A)), gz∗ (b, A); A) − δEvz∗ (xz∗ (b, A), A0 ))

solves the problem

                     max u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r, g, x; b) − (q − 1) s + δEvz∗ (x; A0 )
                   (r,g,x,s)

                         s.t. u(w(1 − r), g; A) + s + δEvz ∗ (x; A0 ) ≥ vT +1 (b, A),

                                   B(r, g, x; b) ≥ (q − 1)s, s ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x],

We show only (i) - the argument for (ii) being analogous.
    Consider some proposal round τ = 1, ..., T − 1. Let (b, A) be given. To simplify notation, let

                                                                   B(rz∗ (b, A), gz ∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A); b)
            r, gb, x
           (b      b, sb) = (rz∗ (b, A), gz∗ (b, A), xz∗ (b, A),                                             ).
                                                                                       n

                                                r, gb, x
It is clear from the argument in the text that (b      b) solves the problem

                                                             B(r,g,x;b)
                               max u(w(1 − r), g; A) +           q        + δEvz∗ (x; A0 )
                               (r,g,x)

                                         s.t. B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [x, x],

                               r), gb; A)−δEvz∗ (b
and that sb = vz∗ (b, A)−u(w(1−b                 x; A0 ). Suppose that (b
                                                                        r, gb, x
                                                                               b, sb) does not solve the
round τ proposer’s problem. Then there exist some (r0 , g 0 , x0 , s0 ) which achieves a higher value of
the proposer’s objective function. We know that s0 ≥ vz∗ (b; A)−u(w(1−r0 ), g 0 ; A)−δEvz∗ (x0 ; A0 ).
Thus, we have that the value of the proposer’s objective function satisfies

                         u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) + B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b) − (q − 1) s0 + δEvz∗ (x0 ; A0 )

                    ≤ q[u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) + δEvz∗ (x0 ; A0 )] + B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b).

                                                           44
But since B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b) ≥ 0, we know that

                               q[u(w(1 − r0 ), g 0 ; A) + δEvz∗ (x0 ; A0 )] + B(r0 , g 0 , x0 ; b)

                                                            x; A0 )] + B(b
                          ≤ q[u(w(1 − rb), gb; A) + δEvz ∗ (b            r, gb, x
                                                                                b; b).

But the right hand side of the inequality is the value of the proposer’s objective function under
                     b, sb). This therefore contradicts the assumption that (r0 , g 0 , x0 , s0 ) achieves a
              r, gb, x
the proposal (b
higher value for the proposer’s problem.               ¥

8.4      Proof of Proposition 3

Let {rτ0 (b, A), gτ0 (b, A), x0τ (b, A), s0τ (b, A)}Tτ =1 and {rτ1 (b, A), gτ1 (b, A), x1τ (b, A), s1τ (b, A)}Tτ =1 be
two equilibria with associated round one value functions v0 (b, A) and v 1 (b, A). Let x∗0 and x∗1 be
the debt levels chosen in the BAU regimes of the two equilibria and suppose that x∗0 ≤ x∗1 . We will
demonstrate that it must be the case that x∗0 = x∗1 . To do this, we will show that the assumption
that x∗0 < x∗1 results in a contradiction.
    As in the proof of Proposition 2, define the operator Tz : F ∗ → F as follows:
                                   ⎧                                                                 ⎫
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪                                                                 ⎪
                                                                                                     ⎪
                                   ⎨   u(w(1 − r), g; A) + B(r,g,x;b)
                                                                  n     + δEv(x, A0 )                ⎬
            Tz (v)(b, A) = max                                                                           .
                           (r,g,x) ⎪
                                   ⎪                                                                 ⎪
                                                                                                     ⎪
                                   ⎩ B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, g ≤ g ∗ (A), r ≥ r∗ & x ∈ [z, x]             ⎭

We know that Tz (v) ∈ F ∗ and that Tz is a contraction. Moreover, for i ∈ {0, 1}, we have that
Tx∗i (v i ) = vi .
    Now let v ∈ F ∗ be such that for all b, v(·, A) is diﬀerentiable at b for almost all A and for each
                                                 ­ ®∞
i ∈ {0, 1} consider the sequence of functions vki k=1 defined inductively as follows: v1i = Tx∗i (v),
      i
                                                                   ­ ®∞
and vk+1   = Tx∗i (vki ). Notice that since Tzi is a contraction, vki k=1 converges to vi . We now
establish the following result:

Claim: Let ρ0 ∈ (0, ρ). Then, for all k and for any x ∈ [x∗1 , x] we have that
                                                                          x∗ −x∗
                                   ∂v1 (x, A)         ∂vk0 (x − 1+ρ
                                                                 1
                                                                   0 , A)
                                                                    0

                                −E( k         ) > −E(                     ).
                                       ∂b                      ∂b
Proof: The proof proceeds via induction. Consider first the claim for k = 1. Recall from Step 1
of the proof of Proposition 2 that if (r, g, x) is a solution to the problem

                                                             B(r,g,x;b)
                              max u(w(1 − r), g; A) +            n        + δEv(x, A0 )
                                                                                            ,
                            s.t. B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0, g ≤ g ∗ (A), r ≥ r∗ , x ∈ [z, x]


                                                           45
then: (i) if A ≤ A∗ (b, xnz (v)) then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and x ∈ Xzn (v) ∩ {x : B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) ≥ 0};
(ii) if A ∈ (A∗ (b, xnz (v)), A∗ (b, xqz (v))] then (r, g) = (r∗ , g ∗ (A)) and B(r∗ , g ∗ (A), x; b) = 0; and
(iii) if A > A∗ (b, xqz (v)) (r, g, x) is uniquely defined, the budget constraint is binding, r > r∗ and
g < g ∗ (A). Denote the solution in case (iii) as (rz (b, A; v), gz (b, A; v), xz (b, A; v)).
    It follows from this that, if A ≤ A∗ (b, xnz (v))
                                                            B(r∗ ), g ∗ (A), xnz (v); b)
          Tz (v)(b, A) = u(w(1 − r∗ ), g ∗ (A); A) +                                     + δEv(xnz (v), A0 )
                                                                         n
and
                                                   ∂Tz (v)(b, A)   1+ρ
                                               −                 =     .
                                                        ∂b          n
If A ∈ (A∗ (b, xnz (v)), A∗ (b, xqz (v))], then

             Tz (v)(b, A) = u(w(1 − r∗ ), g ∗ (A); A) + δEv(pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)b − R(r∗ ), A0 )

and, since v is diﬀerentiable,
                        ∂Tz (v)(b, A)
                    −                 = −δEv 0 (pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)b − R(r∗ ), A0 )(1 + ρ).
                             ∂b
Notice for future reference that in this range, x ∈ (xnz (v), xqz (v)] and hence
                                                                                   1+ρ 1+ρ
                     −δEv 0 (pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)b − R(r∗ ), A0 )(1 + ρ) ∈ (            ,    ].
                                                                                    n   q
If A > A∗ (b, xqz (v)) then
                                          ⎧                                                       ⎫
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎪                                                       ⎪
                                          ⎨ u(w(1 − r), g; A) +       B(r,g,x;b)
                                                                          n        + δEv (x, A0 ) ⎪
                                                                                                  ⎬
                 Tz (v)(b, A) = max                                                                            (38)
                                   (r,g,x) ⎪
                                           ⎪                                                      ⎪
                                                                                                  ⎪
                                          ⎩             B(r, g, x; b) ≥ 0 & x ∈ [z, x]            ⎭

and
                                 ∂Tz (v)(b, A)        1 − rz (b, A; v)
                             −                 =                            (1 + ρ).
                                      ∂b         n(1 − rz (b, A; v)(1 + ε))
Since rz (b, A; v) > r∗ , in this range we have that
                                               ∂Tz (v)(b, A)   (1 + ρ)
                                           −                 >         .
                                                    ∂b            q
Combining all this and using the fact that Tz (v)(b, ·) is continuous, we have that:
              ∂Tz (v)(b, A)
      −nδE(                 ) = G(A∗ (b, xnz (v)))
                   ∂b
                                   Z A∗ (b,xqz (v))
                                                       ∂v(pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)b − R(r∗ ), A0 )
                                −n                  E[                                       ]dG(A)
                                    A∗ (b,xnz (v))
                                                                         ∂b
                                  Z A
                                                     1 − rz (b, A; v)
                                +               [                         ]dG(A).
                                    ∗    q
                                   A (b,xz (v))   1 − rz (b, A; v)(1 + ε)

                                                           46
                                                                                                           x∗   ∗
                                                                                                            1 −x0
    Applying this to the problem at hand, let x ∈ [x∗1 , x] and f (x) = x −                                 1+ρ0 .   Then, to prove
the claim for k = 1, we need to show that
                                              R A∗ (x,xqx∗1 (v))              ∗
                                                                                  (A)+(1+ρ)x−R(r∗ ),A0 )
                 G(A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (v))) − n      A∗ (x,xn  (v))      E[ ∂v(pg             ∂b               ]dG(A)
                                                      x∗ 1
                                        RA                       1−rx∗ (x,A;v)
                                    +                    [             1
                                          A∗ (x,xqx∗ (v)) 1−rx∗ (x,A;v)(1+ε)
                                                                             ]dG(A)
                                                   1               1

                                              RA  ∗
                                                    (f (x),xqx∗ (v))                  ∗
                                                                                          (A)+(1+ρ)f (x)−R(r∗ ),A0 )
          > G(A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (v))) − n       A∗ (f (x),xn
                                                             0
                                                             (v))      E[ ∂v(pg                  ∂b                  ]dG(A)
                                                          x∗ 0
                                    RA                        1−rx∗ (f (x),A;v)
                                +                      [               0
                                    A∗ (f (x),xqx∗ (v)) 1−rx∗ (f (x),A;v)(1+ε)
                                                                               ]dG(A).
                                                   0               0


It is straightforward to verify that the following four conditions are suﬃcient for this inequality
to hold: (i) A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (v)) < A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (v)), (ii) A∗ (x, xqx∗ (v)) < A∗ (f (x), xqx∗ (v)), (iii) for all
                                                                                          1                      0

A ∈ (A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (v)), A∗ (x, xqx∗ (v))]
                                      1


             ∂v(pg (A) + (1 + ρ)x − R(r∗ ), A0 )
                    ∗
                                                      ∂v(pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)f (x) − R(r∗ ), A0 )
        −E                                       ≥ −E                                           ,
                            ∂b                                          ∂b

and (iv) for all A ∈ (A∗ (f (x), xqx∗ (v)), A]
                                          0


                               1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)          1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)
                                                          ≤                           .
                            1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)(1 + ε)   1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)(1 + ε)

    We will now show that these four conditions are satisfied. We begin with condition (i). If it
were not satisfied, then A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (v)) ≥ A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (v)) which is equivalent to xnx∗1 (v)−(1+ρ)x ≥
xnx∗0 (v) − (1 + ρ)f (x). Thus,

                        xnx∗0 (v) ≤ xnx∗1 (v) − (1 + ρ)[x − f (x)]
                                                       1+ρ ∗
                                 = xnx∗1 (v) −               (x − x∗0 ) < xnx∗1 (v) − (x∗1 − x∗0 )
                                                       1 + ρ0 1
which implies that xnx∗1 (v) − xnx∗0 (v) > x∗1 − x∗0 . Given the definition of xnx∗1 (v), this requires that
xnx∗1 (v) > x∗1 . This in turn implies that

                                                       ∂v(xnx∗1 (v), A0 )             1
                                               −δE                                =
                                                                 ∂b                   n
and hence that xnx∗0 (v) = xnx∗1 (v) - a contradiction.
    Condition (ii) can be established in the same way and condition (iii) follows directly from the
assumption that v(·, A) is concave. This leaves condition (iv). From the first order conditions
associated with problem (38) (see (14), (15) and (16)), we have that
                1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)            ∂v(xx∗1 (x, A; v), A0 )
                                       ≥ −δnE                                                  (= if xx∗1 (x, A; v) < x)
             1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)(1 + ε)                  ∂b

                                                                 47
and that
          1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)            ∂v(xx∗0 (f (x), A; v), A0 )
                                     ≥ −δnE                             (= if xx∗0 (f (x), A; v) < x).
       1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)(1 + ε)                    ∂b
Suppose that
                                 1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)          1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)
                                                            >                           .
                              1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)(1 + ε)   1 − rx∗1 (x, A; v)(1 + ε)
Then this implies that rx∗0 (f (x), A; v) > rx∗1 (x, A; v), gx∗0 (f (x), A; v) < gx∗1 (x, A; v), and xx∗0 (f (x), A; v) ≥
xx∗1 (x, A; v). Thus, we have that

   pgx∗0 (f (x), A; v) + (1 + ρ)f (x) = R(rx∗0 (f (x), A; v)) + xx∗0 (f (x), A; v)

                                                  > R(rx∗1 (x, A; v)) + xx∗1 (x, A; v) = pgx∗1 (x, A; v) + (1 + ρ)x

                                                          1+ρ    ∗
This means that (1 + ρ)[x − f (x)] =                      1+ρ0 (x1         − x∗0 ) < 0, which is a contradiction.
    Now assume the claim is true for 1, ...., k and consider it for k + 1. We have that
            ∂Tx∗i (vki )(b, A)
   −nδE(                       ) = G(A∗ (b, xnx∗i (vki )))
                   ∂b
                                      Z A∗ (b,xq ∗ (vki ))
                                                 x
                                                  i          ∂v i (pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)b − R(r∗ ), A0 )
                                   −n                      E[ k                                       ]dG(A)
                                       A∗ (b,xn∗ (vk i ))                       ∂b
                                                               x
                                                                i
                                                  Z   A                            1 − rx∗i (b, A; vki )
                                          +                                 [                                ]dG(A).
                                                  A∗ (b,xqx∗ (vk
                                                               i ))             1 − rx∗i (b, A; vki )(1 + ε)
                                                               i

Thus, we need to show that
                                                  R A∗ (x,xqx∗1 (vk1 ))                 1
                                                                                      ∂vk (pg ∗ (A)+(1+ρ)x−R(r∗ ),A0 )
                G(A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (vk1 ))) − n           A∗ (x,xn    1 ))
                                                                (vk
                                                                                 E[                   ∂b               ]dG(A)
                                                             x∗    1
                                         RA                                             1
                                                                            1−rx∗ (x,A;vk )
                                     +    A∗ (x,xqx∗ (vk
                                                       1 ))            [ 1−r
                                                                       1
                                                                           1 )(1+ε)
                                                                     (x,A;vk
                                                                                                 ]dG(A)
                                                                 x∗1
                                                   1
                                                            q
                                                   ∗
                                                      R
                                               A (f (x),xx∗ (vk )) 0
                                                                          ∂vk 0
                                                                                (pg ∗ (A)+(1+ρ)f (x)−R(r∗ ),A0 )
         > G(A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (vk0 ))) − n     A∗ (f (x),xn
                                                              0
                                                               (v 0 ))                E[     ∂b                           ]dG(A)
                                                           x∗0
                                                                 k

                                     R
                                     A                          1−rx∗ (f (x),A;vk ) 0

                                 +   A∗ (f (x),xqx∗ (vk
                                                      0 ))             [
                                                                       0
                                                           1−rx∗ (f (x),A;vk    0 )(1+ε)            ]dG(A)
                                                  0                0


Following the same approach as above, for this inequality to hold, the following four conditions
are suﬃcient: (i) A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (vk1 )) < A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (vk0 )), (ii) A∗ (x, xqx∗ (vk1 )) < A∗ (f (x), xqx∗ (vk0 )), (iii)
                                                                                                      1                         0

for all A ∈ (A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (vk0 )), A∗ (x, xqx∗ (vk1 ))]
                                                           1


            ∂vk1 (pg ∗ (A)   + (1 + ρ)x − R(r ), A0 )      ∗
                                                          ∂v0 (pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)f (x) − R(r∗ ), A0 )
       −E                                             ≥ −E k                                          ,
                                 ∂b                                           ∂b
and (iv) for all A ∈ (A∗ (f (x), xqx∗ (vk0 )), A]
                                              0


                                1 − r (f (x), A; vk0 )
                                         x∗
                                          0
                                                                  1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )
                                                  0          ≤                              .
                             1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk )(1 + ε)   1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )(1 + ε)

                                                                                48
   We will again show that these four conditions are satisfied. We begin with condition (i). If
it were not satisfied, then it must be the case that A∗ (x, xnx∗1 (vk1 )) ≥ A∗ (f (x), xnx∗0 (vk0 )) which is
equivalent to xnx∗1 (vk1 ) − (1 + ρ)x ≥ xnx∗0 (vk0 ) − (1 + ρ)f (x). This implies that

                                                       1+ρ ∗
                       xnx∗0 (vk0 ) ≤ xnx∗1 (vk1 ) −         [x − x∗0 ] < xnx∗1 (vk1 ) − [x∗1 − x∗0 ].                               (39)
                                                       1 + ρ0 1

Thus, we know by the induction step that

                                   ∂vk1 (xnx∗1 (vk1 ), A0 )           ∂vk0 (xnx∗0 (vk0 ), A0 )        1
                            −δE                               > −δE                              ≥      .
                                             ∂b                                 ∂b                    n

This implies that xnx∗1 (vk1 ) = x∗1 which in turn, together with (39), implies that xnx∗0 (vk0 ) < x∗0 which
is a contradiction.
   We can use similar logic to conclude that condition (ii) is satisfied. Condition (iii) follows
immediately from the induction step since we have that

              pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)x − R(r∗ ) − [x∗1 − x∗0 ] > pg ∗ (A) + (1 + ρ)f (x) − R(r∗ ).

This leaves condition (iv). Suppose to the contrary that for some A

                              1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 )         1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )
                                                0          >
                           1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk )(1 + ε)   1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )(1 + ε)

Again, from the first order conditions associated with problem (38) we have that

            1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )            ∂vk1 (xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ), A0 )
                                      ≥ −δnE                                            (= if xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) < x)
         1 − rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )(1 + ε)                     ∂b

and that

      1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 )          ∂v 0 (xx∗ (f (x), A; vk0 ), A0 )
                        0          ≥ −δnE k 0                                             (= if xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) < x).
   1 − rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk )(1 + ε)                     ∂b

If xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) < x these first order conditions imply that

                             ∂vk1 (xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ), A0 )       ∂v 0 (xx∗ (f (x), A; vk0 ), A0 )
                   −δnE                                    < −δnE k 0                             .
                                          ∂b                                   ∂b
                                                                                   1                               0
                                                                                 ∂vk (x,A)                       ∂vk (f (x),A)
We know by the induction step that for any x ≥ x∗1 , −δnE(                          ∂x     )     > −δnE(              ∂x       ).   Thus,
it must be the case that

                                                                                                     x∗1 − x∗0
                      xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) > f (xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )) = xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) −
                                                                                                      1 + ρ0



                                                               49
In addition, we know that rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) > rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) and that gx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) < gx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ).
But this means that

           pgx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) + (1 + ρ)f (x) = xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) + R(rx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ))
                                                                                                                  x∗1 − x∗0
                                                         > xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) + R(rx∗1 (x, A; vk1 )) −
                                                                                                                   1 + ρ0
                                                                                                        x∗1 − x∗0
                                                         = pgx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) + (1 + ρ)x −                        .
                                                                                                         1 + ρ0
                                                           x∗   ∗
                                                            1 −x0
This in turn implies that (1+ρ)[x−f (x)] <                  1+ρ0      which is a contradiction. If xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) = x,
then it must be the case that xx∗1 (x, A; vk1 ) ≤ xx∗0 (f (x), A; vk0 ) and the same contradiction arises.
¥

   To complete the proof, observe that for i ∈ {0, 1} the function E(v i (·, A)) is concave and
                           ­             ®
diﬀerentiable. In addition, E(vki (·, A)) is a sequence of concave and diﬀerentiable functions such
that for all x limk→∞ E(vki (x, A)) = E(v i (x, A)). Thus, by Theorem 25.7 of Rockafellar (1970),
                                 i
                             dE(vk (x,A))         dE(v i (x,A))
we know that limk→∞              dx           =       dx        .   It follows that for any x ∈ [x∗1 , x]
              ∂v 1 (x, A)                              ∂vk1 (x, A)
      −δnE(               ) =          lim −δnE(                   )
                   ∂b                 k→∞                   ∂b
                                                                      (x∗   ∗
                                                                        1 −x0 )                                   (x∗   ∗
                                                                                                                    1 −x0 )
                                                       ∂vk0 (x −        1+ρ0 , A)                     ∂v 0 (x −     1+ρ0 , A)
                                 ≥     lim −δnE(                                    ) = −δnE(                                   ).
                                      k→∞                             ∂b                                          ∂b
                                                     ∂v 1 (x∗
                                                            1 ,A)                ∂v 0 (x∗
                                                                                        0 ,A)         n
By equation (22), we have that −δnE(                      ∂b      )   = −δnE(         ∂x      )   =   q.   Thus, it follows that
                                      (x∗   ∗
                                        1 −x0 )
                        ∂v 0 (x∗1 −     1+ρ0 , A)                      ∂v1 (x∗1 , A)           ∂v 0 (x∗0 , A)
               −δnE(                                  ) ≤ −δnE(                      ) = −δnE(                ).
                                      ∂b                                    ∂b                       ∂b
                                     x∗   ∗
                                      1 −x0
But this implies that      x∗1   −    1+ρ0    ≤ x∗0 , which contradicts the fact that x∗1 > x∗0 .
    It follows that x∗0 = x∗1 . This, in turn, implies that v 0 = v 1 and hence that {rτ0 (b, A), gτ0 (b, A),
x0τ (b, A), s0τ (b, A)}Tτ =1 equals {rτ1 (b, A), gτ1 (b, A), x1τ (b, A), s1τ (b, A)}Tτ =1 .                ¥

8.5     Proof of Proposition 4

It is easy to prove that the transition function H(b, x) has the Feller Property and that it is
monotonic in b (see Ch. 12.4 in Stokey, Lucas and Prescott (1989) for definitions). By Theorem
12.12 in Stokey, Lucas and Prescott (1989), therefore, the result follows if the following “mixing
condition” is satisfied:

Mixing Condition: There exists an ² > 0 and m ≥ 1, such that H m (x, x∗ ) ≥ ² and 1 −
H m (x, x∗ ) ≥ ² where the function H m (b, x) is defined inductively by H 1 (b, x) = H(b, x) and
             R
H m (b, x) = z H(z, x)dH m−1 (b, z).

                                                                 50
   Intuitively, this condition requires that if we start out with the highest level of debt x, then we
will end up at x∗ with probability greater than ² after m periods, while if we start out with the
lowest level of debt x, we will end up above x∗ with probability greater than ² in m periods. For
any b ∈ [x, x] and A ∈ [A, A] define the sequence hφm (b, A)i as follows: φ0 (b, A) = b, φm+1 (b, A) =
x1 (φm (b, A), A). Thus, φm (b, A) is the level of debt if the debt level were b at time 0 and the shock
was A in periods 1 through m. Recall that, by assumption, there exists some positive constant
ξ > 0, such that for any pair of realizations satisfying A < A0 , the diﬀerence G(A0 )−G(A) is at least
as big as ξ(A0 − A). This implies that for any b ∈ [x, x], H m (b, φm (b, A + λ)) − H m (b, φm (b, A)) ≥
ξ m λm for all λ such that 0 < λ < A − A. Using this observation, we can prove:

Claim 1: For m suﬃciently large, H m (x, x∗ ) > 0.

Proof: It suﬃces to show that for m suﬃciently large A∗ (φm (x, A), x∗ ) > A. Then, for any such
m, by continuity there is a λm small enough such that A∗ (φm (x, A + λm ), x∗ ) > A. It then follows
that
                  Z                                       Z
  m     ∗                        ∗       m−1
H (x, x ) =               H(z, x )dH           (x, z) =           G(A∗ (z, x∗ ))dH m−1 (x, z)
                      z                                   z
                  Z       φm (x,A+λm )
             ≥                           G(A∗ (z, x∗ ))dH m−1 (x, z)
                   φm (x,A)
                                                       £                                                      ¤
             ≥    G(A∗ (φm (x, A          + λm ), x∗ )) H m−1 (x, φm−1 (x, A + λm )) − H m−1 (x, φm−1 (x, A))

             ≥ G(A∗ (φm (x, A + λm ), x∗ )) (ξλm )m−1 > 0.

   Suppose, to the contrary, that for all m we have that A∗ (φm (x, A), x∗ ) ≤ A. Then, it must
be the case that the sequence hφm (x, A)i is decreasing. To see this note that since r1 (b, A) is
increasing in A we have that
                                                          Z   A
                    1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)                                 1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)
                                              <                    (                                )dG(A).
                 1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)(1 + ε)                 A        1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)(1 + ε)

But equations (15) and (20) imply that:
                                                              Z    A
                 1 − r1 (φk−1 (x, A), A)                                      1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)
                                             =                         (                                )dG(A).   (40)
              1 − r1 (φk−1 (x, A), A)(1 + ε)                  A            1 − r1 (φk (x, A), A)(1 + ε)

Since r1 (b, A) is increasing in b and A, this implies φk−1 (x, A) > φk (x, A).
   We can therefore assume without loss of generality that φm (x, A) converges to some finite
β ≥ x. We now prove that this yields a contradiction. Taking the limit as m → ∞, continuity of



                                                                   51
r1 (·, A) would imply limk→∞ r1 (φk (x, A), A) = r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A) for all A. Using condition (40):
                                                Z   A
                  1 − r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A)                        1 − r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A)
                                            =           (                                )dG(A)
               1 − r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A)(1 + ε)         A       1 − r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A)(1 + ε)

which is impossible since r1 (φ∞ (x, A), A) is strictly increasing in A. We conclude therefore that
for m suﬃciently large A∗ (φm (x, A), x∗ ) > A, which yields the result.             ¥

   Next, we can establish:

Claim 2: For all m ≥ 2, 1 − H m (x, x∗ ) ≥ G(A∗ (x, x∗ ))G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))m−2 [1 − G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))].

Proof: With probability G(A∗ (x, x∗ )) the level of debt chosen in period 1 is x∗ when the initial
level of debt is x; so with probability G(A∗ (x, x∗ ))G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))m−2 the level of debt is x∗ for the
first m − 1 periods. Given this, the probability that the level of debt is larger than x∗ in period
m is at least G(A∗ (x, x∗ ))G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))m−2 [1 − G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))].         ¥

   These two Claims imply that the Mixing Condition is satisfied if q < n. To see this, choose m
suﬃciently large so that H m (x, x∗ ) > 0. This is always possible by Claim 1. Now let

                    ©                                                                       ª
             ² = min G(A∗ (x, x∗ ))G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))m−2 [1 − G(A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ))] ; H m (x, x∗ )

                                                                           ¡    ¢
Assuming that q < n, we know from the definition of x∗ that A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) ∈ A, A (see equation
(22)) and A∗ (x, x∗ ) > A∗ (x∗ , x∗ ) > A. Thus, ² > 0 and the condition is satisfied.
   If q = n, then the Mixing Condition does not hold, but the proposition remains true. Equation
(22) implies that x∗ = x. Since A∗ (x, x) ≥ A, we know that when the initial debt level is x, then the
level of debt never changes and hence the Mixing Condition is violated. However, the distribution
that puts point mass on x is an invariant distribution. Moreover, by Claim 1, we know that there
exists a ² > 0 and a m such that for any initial b, the probability that x = x in the next m periods
is at least ². So the probability that x is never equal to x in the next j ·m periods is not larger than
       j                                                                                          j
(1 − ²) . We conclude that the probability that x is never equal to x, is zero: limj→∞ (1 − ²) = 0.
Thus, the sequence of debt distributions hψt (x)i converges to a unique invariant distribution as
claimed.      ¥




                                                        52
