NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTING FOR ASYMMETRIC INFORMATION USING 'UNUSED OBSERVABLES' IN INSURANCE MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.K. ANNUITY MARKET
Amy Finkelstein
James Poterba
Working Paper 12112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12112
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

We thank Jeff Brown, Edmund Cannon, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Keith Crocker, Richard Disney, Liran
Einav, Carl Emmerson, Michael Orszag, Casey Rothschild, Ian Tonks, Michael Wadsworth, Jonathan
Zinman, and an anonymous referee for helpful discussions, Hui Shan for outstanding research assistance
and the National Institute of Aging and the National Science Foundation (Poterba) for financial support.
We are particularly grateful to the generous and patient employees at the firm that provided the data
underlying our analysis. Poterba is a trustee of the College Retirement Equity Fund (CREF) and of
the TIAA-CREF mutual funds, which sell retirement products including annuities. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2006 by Amy Finkelstein and James Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Testing for Asymmetric Information Using 'Unused Observables' in Insurance Markets: Evidence
from the U.K. Annuity Market
Amy Finkelstein and James Poterba
NBER Working Paper No. 12112
March 2006, Revised July 2013
JEL No. D82,G22
ABSTRACT
This paper tests for asymmetric information in the U.K. annuity market of the 1990s by trying to identify
'unused observables,' attributes of individual insurance buyers that are correlated both with subsequent
claims experience and with insurance demand but that insurance companies did not use to set insurance
prices. Unlike the widely-used positive correlation test for asymmetric information, which searches
for a positive correlation between insurance demand and risk experience, the unused observables test is
not confounded by heterogeneity in individual preference parameters that may affect insurance demand.
We identify residential location as an unused observable in the U.K. annuity market of this period,
and show that this variable was correlated both with annuity demand and with prospective mortality.
Thus even though residential location was observed by all market participants, the decision not to
condition prices on it created the same types of market inefficiencies that arise when annuity buyers
have private information about mortality risk. Our findings raise interesting questions about how
insurance companies select the set of buyer attributes that they use in setting policy prices. In the decade
following the period that we study, U.K. insurance companies changed their pricing practices and
began to condition annuity prices on a buyer's postcode.
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-383B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
James Poterba
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
poterba@nber.org

Asymmetric information is widely recognized as hindering the efficient operation of insurance
markets, but whether it is present in specific markets remains a subject of active research. In recent years,
numerous studies have tested for asymmetric information in a variety of different insurance markets. This
work has been largely based on the "positive correlation" test described by Chiappori and Salanie (2000).
This test rejects the null hypothesis of symmetric information when there is a positive correlation between
insurance purchases and risk occurrence, conditional on the buyer characteristics that are used to set
insurance prices.
A limitation of the positive correlation test, noted by Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) and Chiappori
et al. (2006), is that it breaks down when individuals have private information about characteristics other
than risk type, such as risk preferences, and when these other characteristics affect insurance demand. A
number of studies, reviewed by Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry (2008) and by Einav, Finkelstein, and
Levin (2010), suggest that this type of preference heterogeneity plays an empirically important role in
many insurance markets.
This paper illustrates an alternative, and quite straightforward, test for asymmetric information that is
robust to the existence of preference heterogeneity in insurance demand. When some attributes of
insurance buyers that are correlated with insurance demand and subsequent risk experience are not used
to price insurance policies, then insurance buyers effectively have private information about their risk
type. This may occur even when insurance companies observe, or could observe, the relevant individual
characteristics, but choose not to use them in pricing. We refer to this situation as one of “asymmetrically
used” information to distinguish it from the more classic “asymmetric information” that results when
features of the contracting environment make it impossible for the insurer to observe risk-relevant
characteristics of consumers. Asymmetrically used information has similar implications for market
equilibrium and market efficiency as the more classic “asymmetric information.”
We test for asymmetrically used information by asking if we can identify individual characteristics
that are risk-relevant and correlated with insurance demand, but that are not used by insurance companies

1

in designing the contract menus facing individuals. We refer to this as the “unused observables” test.
Regulation can be one source of “asymmetric use” of information in insurance markets. When
insurance companies are prevented from using some individual characteristics in pricing insurance
policies, buyers who know these characteristics and their relationship to risk type can exploit this
information. In many insurance markets, however, asymmetrically used information occurs because
insurance companies voluntarily choose not to price on the basis of risk-related buyer information that
they collect, or could collect. We explore this ostensible puzzle in more detail below. We suggest that
concerns about regulatory response and consumer backlash may contribute to this behavior, but we stop
short of providing any evidence to support this conjecture.
We illustrate the use of the unused observables test in the retirement annuity market in the United
Kingdom in the 1990s. In the U.K., those who saved for retirement through tax-preferred savings
vehicles – the equivalent of IRA’s or 401(k)’s in the United States – were, until 2011, required to
purchase annuities. Even when annuitization was compulsory, annuity buyers nevertheless had
substantial flexibility with regard to their contract choice, and we test for whether asymmetric information
appears to affect these choices.
Understanding the nature of the information structure in retirement annuity markets is of substantial
interest in its own right. Annuity markets have attracted attention in light of Social Security reform
proposals in various countries to partly or fully replacing government-provided defined benefit, pay-asyou-go retirement systems with defined contribution systems in which individuals would accumulate
assets in individual accounts. Whether the government should require individuals to annuitize some or all
of their balance, and whether it should allow choice over the type of annuity product purchased, are two
important policy design issues. The relative attractiveness of these various options can depend critically
on the information structure in the private annuity market.
We implement the unused observables test with a data set containing information on the annuity
policies sold by a large U.K. insurance company in the late 1980s and the 1990s. During the time period
we study, the company collected information on the annuitant’s place of residence but did not use this

2

information to set prices. In this regard, the firm we study was following standard practice in the industry
at the time. We find that conditional on the insurance company’s risk classification, which is based on the
annuitant’s age and gender, an annuitant’s place of residence helps to predict future mortality
experience. In particular, summary measures describing the socio-economic status in the annuitant’s
postcode have such predictive power. Moreover, annuitants in higher socio-economic status residential
locations purchase larger annuities. These two findings lead us to conclude that place of residence is an
unused observable variable that, when not used in annuity pricing, gives rise to a market that operates as
though there was asymmetric information.
In Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), we applied the positive correlation test in U.K. annuity market,
using data from a different insurance company and for the time period 1981-1998. We rejected the null
of symmetric information. Implementing the unused observables test in the same market serves several
purposes. First, as we discuss in more detail below, the unused observables test is a more robust test of
asymmetric information than the positive correlation test. Second, the unused observables test may offer
some insight into the sources of private information about mortality risk. In our context, it suggests that
socio-economic status is one key source of mortality information that is not priced by insurance
companies. Finally, our current analysis raises interesting questions concerning why insurance companies
voluntarily forgo pricing on risk-relevant observable characteristics.
This paper is divided into six sections. The first describes previous work on asymmetric information,
in particular the widely-used positive correlation test. The second section explains the unused
observables test. We discuss its strengths and limitations relative to both the positive correlation test of
Chiappori and Salanie (2000) and the cost curve test of Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010). Section
three summarizes the data set on annuity policies that we analyze. Section four presents our key findings
and discusses their interpretation. The fifth section discusses why insurance companies might voluntarily
choose not to price on risk-relevant observable characteristics, and briefly describes more recent
developments in the U.K annuity market that have resulted in widespread use of postcode-based prices.
We suspect that political economy concerns are likely to play an important role in company decisions. A

3

brief conclusion considers the implications of our findings for equilibrium in other insurance markets.
1. Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets: The Positive Correlation Test
Most of the classic models of equilibrium with either adverse selection or moral hazard predict that
those who buy more insurance should be more likely to experience the insured risk (Cawley and
Philipson 1999, Chiappori and Salanie 2000).. With moral hazard, insurance coverage lowers the cost of
the insured outcome and thus increases the expected loss. With adverse selection, the insured knows
more about risk type ex-ante than the insurance company does, and, at given price, those who are a higher
risk type have more demand for insurance.
This insight underlies the most common test for asymmetric information in insurance markets: the
positive correlation test. This test estimates the correlation between the amount of insurance an individual
buys and his ex-post risk experience, conditional on the observable characteristics that are used in pricing
insurance policies. It is essential to condition on all the information that is used to set insurance prices.
Finding, for example, that smokers demand more life insurance than non-smokers, and that they also have
higher mortality risk, does not provide evidence of asymmetric information if insurance contracts are
priced differently for smokers and non-smokers. Results from the positive correlation test as well as the
unused observables test are always conditional on the risk classification that the insurance company
assigns to the individual.
The canonical positive correlation test involves estimating two reduced-form econometric models:
one for insurance coverage (C) and the other for risk of loss (L). For simplicity we present linear versions
of both models. The explanatory variables (X) in both equations are the set of variables that the insurance
company uses to place the buyer into a risk class. The estimating equations are:
(1a)

Ci = Xi * β + εi

and
(1b)

Li = Xi * γ + μi.

Under the null hypothesis of symmetric information, εi and μi should be uncorrelated. A statistically
significant positive correlation between the two rejects the null hypothesis and points to asymmetric

4

information.
Positive correlation tests have yielded a variety of findings in different insurance markets. Cohen and
Siegelman (2010) review this literature. In health insurance markets, the preponderance of evidence,
reviewed for example by Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000), suggests a positive correlation between insurance
coverage and risk occurrence, although there are important exceptions such as Cardon and Hendel (2001).
In other health-related markets, however, the findings are less supportive. Finkelstein and McGarry
(2006) find a negative correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence in long-term care
insurance, and Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008) present a similar finding for Medigap insurance. In the
automobile insurance market, Chiappori and Salanie (2000), Dionne et al. (2001), and Chiappori et al.
(2006) find that insurance coverage and risk occurrence are uncorrelated, while Cohen (2005) finds a
positive correlation.
A striking – and potentially revealing – difference emerges when the positive correlation test is
applied in life insurance and annuity markets, two markets that insure opposite mortality risks.
In the life insurance market, Cawley and Philipson (1999) and McCarthy and Mitchell (2010) find no
evidence of a positive correlation between insurance purchase and the risk of dying soon. However, in
the annuity market, Finkelstein and Poterba (2002, 2004) and McCarthy and Mitchell (2010) find a
positive correlation between annuity demand and the risk of long life. One possible explanation for these
different findings is that insurance demand is determined not only by private information about risk type
but also by heterogeneity in risk tolerance. All else equal, more risk-averse individuals are likely to
demand more annuity coverage and more life insurance. Wealthier individuals might also demand more
insurance of both types. However, risk aversion and wealth are likely to be negatively correlated with the
risk of dying early, and positively correlated with the risk of living a long time, since more risk averse and
wealthier individuals may invest more in life-extending activities. Cutler, Finkelstein and McGarry
(2008) provide evidence consistent with this explanation. 1

1

Survival bias is another potential explanation for the absence of finding a positive correlation in life insurance. He
(2009) revisits the Cawley and Philipson (1999) life insurance study but restricts attention to potential new life

5

As the foregoing discussion illustrates, when individuals have different tastes for insurance, the
correlation between εi and μi in equations (1a) and (1b) can no longer be attributed only to unobserved
differences in risk of loss. When individuals have private information about their risk type (Z1) and they
also exhibit different degrees of risk aversion (Z2), the residuals from (1a) and (1b) can be written
(2a)

εi = Z1,i*π1 + Z2,i*π2 + ήi

and
(2b)

μi = Z1,i*ρ1 + Z2,i*ρ2 +νi.

The logic of the positive correlation test assumes that private information risk type (Z1) is positively
correlated with both insurance coverage and the risk of loss (π1 > 0 and ρ1 > 0). If risk aversion (Z2) is
also positively correlated with coverage, but it is negatively correlated with risk of loss (π2 > 0 and ρ2 < 0)
then the correlation between εi and μi may be negative or zero. In this case, the positive correlation test
would fail to reject the null hypothesis of symmetric information even in the presence of private
information about risk type.
This example illustrates how unobserved heterogeneity in individual preferences can lead to Type II
errors in applications of the positive correlation test. De Meza and Webb (2001), Jullien, Salanie, and
Salanie (2007), Chiappori et al. (2006) and others develop equilibrium models that illustrate how
preference-based selection may offset risk-based selection, making insurance coverage and risk
occurrence uncorrelated or even negatively correlated (so-called “advantageous” or “propitious”
selection). Einav and Finkelstein (2011) illustrate graphically the nature of equilibrium with adverse and
advantageous selection, illustrating how advantageous selection creates over-insurance relative to the
efficient allocation, in contrast to the classic under-insurance created by adverse selection.
Several empirical studies suggest the practical importance of preference heterogeneity in insurance

insurance buyers. She finds a positive correlation between life insurance and mortality, and argues that the
difference between her results and those in earlier studies is that her analysis avoids survival bias. She notes that
those who have private information that they are high mortality buy life insurance and have an elevated risk of early
death, which means that they are under-represented in cross sectional samples. This is an interesting insight that
bears further exploration in other contexts.

6

markets. Davidoff and Welke’s (2005) analysis of the reverse annuity mortgage market, Fang, Keane and
Silverman’s (2008) study of the Medigap market, and Finkelstein and McGarry’s (2006) study of the
long-term care insurance market provide evidence that unobserved preferences for insurance are
negatively correlated with unobserved risk type. In contrast, Cohen and Einav’s (2007) study of auto
insurance and Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf’s (2010) analysis of the U.K. annuity market suggest that
unobserved preferences for contracts are positively correlated with risk-selection related demand, thus
reinforcing the positive correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence created by private
information about risk type.
2. Testing for Asymmetric Information Using Unused Observables
In a symmetric information environment, when it is costless for an insurance company to observe
buyer attributes and condition the price of insurance policies on these attributes, insurance contracts
should be conditioned on any buyer characteristics that are correlated with both demand for insurance
coverage and risk of loss. Finding a buyer characteristic that is either unknown to or unused by the
insurer, and that is correlated both with demand for insurance coverage and with ex-post risk of loss,
implies that the insurance market operates as if there were asymmetric information. The “as if” statement
is important, because even if there are no technical barriers to the insurer observing some buyer attributes,
if insurers do not condition policy prices on this information, the efficiency attributes of the market
equilibrium will resemble those of a market in which sellers are prevented from observing buyer type.
The unused observables test that we implement involves a straightforward search for observable
buyer attributes that are both demand-related and correlated with risk of loss. This test can be formalized
using the foregoing notation in which X denotes the attributes that are used to assign a potential insurance
buyer to a risk class, C denotes insurance coverage and L denotes risk of loss. W, a candidate unused
observable variable, could be an element of either Z1 (risk type) or Z2 (risk preference). The estimating
equations for the unused observable test are:
(3a)

Ci = Xi * β + Wi * α + εi’

and

7

(3b)

Li = Xi * γ + Wi * δ + μi’.

Rejecting {α = 0, δ = 0} is tantamount to rejecting the null hypothesis of symmetric information,
regardless of the signs of α and δ. By investigating several candidate W variables, we can also learn
something about the nature of private information in the insurance market.
Implementation of the unused observables test requires individual data on (i) insurance coverage, (ii)
ex-post risk experience, (iii) the characteristics used by insurance companies in pricing insurance, and (iv)
at least one individual characteristic that is not used in setting prices. The positive correlation test
requires the first three types of data, and the settings in which it has been applied often provide
opportunities for collecting the fourth. Household surveys, for example, have been used to implement the
positive correlation test in various insurance markets. Such surveys often include information on
individual attributes such as wealth, parental health history, seat belt use, and occupation, most of which
are not used to condition insurance prices. These attributes vary in the extent to which they could be
collected by the insurance company, and in the cost that would be involved in verifying the reports.
Proprietary data that insurance companies have provided to researchers studying insurance makers, which
have often been used in positive correlation tests, sometimes include information that companies have not
used in pricing. For example, a policyholder’s address is almost always collected and used for billing
purposes, but it is not always used in setting prices. In addition, in some cases insurance company data
may be supplemented with survey information that contain unused observables. For example, Hemenway
(1990) conducted an in-person survey of seat belt use and insurance purchases among rental car drivers,
and Ivaldi (1996) supplemented a French data set on automobile insurance with a survey of the insured’s
smoking behavior. Neither variable is used in pricing the respective insurance products.
The unused observables test thus overcomes a limitation of the positive correlation test when
there is unobserved preference heterogeneity. An important drawback of the unused observables test,
however, is that it is one-sided. Failure to find individual characteristics that are not used in pricing, but
that are correlated with risk of loss and insurance demand, may simply reflect a lack of sufficiently rich
data, rather than the absence of asymmetric information. Another limitation is that, like the positive

8

correlation test, the unused observables test does not distinguish between adverse selection and moral
hazard. We discuss below how it is sometimes possible to use supplementary information to do so.
The “cost curve” test for selection developed by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) is robust to
the presence of preference heterogeneity and it is unaffected by the presence, or absence, of moral hazard.
However, it imposes a substantially higher data hurdle than either the positive correlation or the unused
observables test. In particular, while all three tests require that the econometrician observe insurance
coverage and ex-post claims (or other measures of expected costs) among individuals who are offered the
same set of insurance contracts, the cost curve test also requires variation in the price of insurance
coverage that is uncorrelated with insurance demand. Einav and Finkelstein (2011) provide a graphical
illustration of the relationship between these tests.
3. Place of Residence as an Unused Observable in the United Kingdom Annuity Market
We apply the unused observables test to the United Kingdom’s compulsory annuity market in the
1990s. Annuities pay a pre-specified payment stream to their beneficiaries, the annuitants, for as long as
they are alive thereby providing a way of spreading an accumulated stock of resources over a lifetime of
uncertain length and thus insuring against the risk of outliving one’s resources. From the perspective of
an insurance company, a higher risk annuitant is one who has a higher chance of a long life.
3.1 Insurance Company Data and Descriptive Statistics
During our sample period, 1988 through 1998, retirees who had accumulated savings in tax-preferred
retirement saving accounts in the United Kingdom were required to annuitize a large portion of their
accumulated balance. They could, however, choose among a number of annuity options that offered
different amounts of insurance. There were no restrictions on the characteristics that U.K. insurance
companies could use in pricing annuities in this market. Ainslie (2000) reports that in the U.K. in the
1990s, the vast majority of annuities, including all of the ones sold by the company that provided data for
this study, were priced solely on the basis of the annuitant’s gender and age at the time of purchase. This
is no longer the case, and the annuity market changed substantially during the most recent decade, as we
explain below. To apply the unused observables test for our sample period, we need data on the

9

characteristics used in pricing -- gender and age -- as well as another characteristic that is related to both
survival prospects and annuity demand.
We obtained data from one of the largest U.K. annuity sellers. These data were also used by Einav,
Finkelstein and Schrimpf (2010) to analyze the welfare cost of asymmetric information in the U.K.
annuity market. The data set includes information on all of the company’s compulsory annuities that
were in force in 1998 and that were sold between January 1, 1988 and December 31, 1998. We observe
the annuitant’s date of death if he died over the six-year period between January 1, 1998 and February 29,
2004. We also observe detailed information on the type of annuity purchased, and the three
characteristics of the annuitant that are used in pricing the annuity: the date of purchase, the annuitant’s
date of birth, and the annuitant’s gender. Finally, we observe a characteristic not used in pricing: the
individual’s post code, which indicates his place of residence.
For analytical tractability, we restrict our sample in several ways. We focus on the approximately
sixty percent of the sample firm’s annuities that insure a single life. The mortality experience of the single
life annuitant provides a convenient ex-post measure of risk type; measuring the risk type of a joint life
policy which insures multiple lives is less straightforward. We also restrict the sample to the
approximately eighty percent of annuitants who hold only one annuity policy, thereby avoiding the
complexity of modeling the total annuity stream for individuals who hold multiple policies. We restrict
attention to the approximately ninety percent of policies sold in England or Wales because we cannot map
postcodes in Scotland into the same type of geographic unit that we can for England and Wales. Finally,
we exclude annuitants who purchased annuities before age 50, and limit our sample to those who
purchased annuities with guarantee periods of five or ten years. These exclusions affect less than one
percent of our sample. Our final sample consists of 52,824 annuitants.
Table 1 presents summary information on our data sample. The average age at annuity purchase is
62, and 59 percent of the purchasers are male. Our sample characteristics appear to match the
characteristics of the broader market, described by Murthi et al. (1999), and of other individual firms in
the market, such as the one studied in Finkelstein and Poterba (2004). The table also presents summary

10

information on annuity product characteristics that we will discuss below.
3.2 Residential Location as an Unused Observable
Each postcode - which encompasses about forty people - lies wholly within a ward. A ward consists
of about 9,000 residents. Our sample includes annuitants from 49,123 unique postcodes and 8,941 unique
wards, out of a possible 1.24 million postcodes and 9,527 wards in England and Wales. We link the
annuitant’s ward to ward-level data on socio-economic characteristics from the 1991 U.K. Census. The
public use version of the U.K. Census does not contain postcode-level data.
Two measures of ward-level socio-economic status are available in the U.K census: educational
attainment and occupation. Educational attainment is reported as the percent of the ward population aged
18 and over that is “qualified,” which requires an educational credential above the level of the A-level
standard, the equivalent of a good high school degree in the United States. Table 2 provides summary
statistics on educational attainment. We report two sets of summary statistics, one weighting each ward
by its population, and the other weighting each ward by the number of policies from that ward in our
sample. The average person in England and Wales comes from a ward in which about 13 percent of
individuals are qualified. The average annuitant in our sample, however, comes from a ward in which
about 16 percent of individuals are qualified.
The ward-level census data also report the percent of employed people in each ward in different
“social classes,” which are roughly occupational categories. We compare three groups: professional and
managerial (social classes I and II), skilled manual or non manual (social class III), and partly skilled or
unskilled (social classes IV and V). Table 2 shows that the average person in England and Wales lives in
a ward in which about 32 percent of the employed individuals are in professional and managerial
occupations, 44 percent in skilled manual or non-manual occupations, and 22 percent are in partly
skilled or unskilled occupations. A small "omitted" group is in the armed forces or in another setting that
is difficult to classify. The average annuitant in our sample is drawn from a higher social class ward than
the average individual in the population. This is consistent with Banks and Emmerson’s (1999) findings
on annuitants in the U.K. Family Resources Survey.

11

Census data provide a number of other measures of the attributes of each ward’s population. One is a
variable on the percent of persons in the ward having a “long-term illness, health problem, or handicap
which limits his/her daily activities or the work he/she can do.” The average person in England and
Wales comes from a ward in which about 12 percent of the population reports having a long-term illness;
our average annuitant lives in one in which about 11 percent of the population reports such illness. We
investigate whether this ward characteristic helps to predict annuitant survival, since it represents a
variable that is not directly related to socio-economic status but that, if it is known by annuitants but not
the insurance company, may provide annuitants with private information about their mortality prospects.
Characteristics of the ward population convey some predictive information about the characteristics
of a randomly drawn individual within the ward, but substantially less information than knowing the
individual’s own characteristics. We calibrate the difference in information by computing the ratio of the
variance of an average characteristic across wards to the variance of the characteristic in the population.
This ratio is 0.11 for long-term illness, 0.23 for education qualification, 0.26 for an indicator variable for
membership in social class I or II, 0.14 for an indicator for social class III, and 0.21 for an indicator for
Social Class IV or V. These ratios suggest that using ward-level means to proxy for an individual’s
private information is likely to understate the actual degree of asymmetric information in insurance
markets. Our estimates of the informational value of the characteristics of an annuitant’s ward are also
likely to understate the information potentially available to insurers, who observe postcodes rather than
wards and could correspondingly have more detailed information on their insurance buyers, particularly if
they invested in private information collection efforts that provided more finely graded data than are
available in the public-use census.
4. Results of the Unused Observables Test in the U.K. Annuity Market
We test whether the socio-economic characteristics of the annuitant’s ward help to predict the
annuitant’s survival probability, conditional on the other characteristics that are used in annuity pricing,
and then explore the analogous conditional relationship between socio-economic characteristics and
annuity demand.

12

4.1 Geographic Location and Annuitant Survival Rates
We begin by estimating a modified version of equation (3b), which assumes a linear relationship
between risk of loss and the unused observable. In the annuity context, the “risk of loss” is the risk of
survival; this is more appropriately estimated by a proportional hazard model of the length of time the
annuitant lives after purchasing an annuity:
(4)

λ (t , x i , β , λ 0 ) = exp( x i′ β )λ 0 (t )

λ (t , xi , β , λ0 ) denotes a hazard function for the probability that an annuitant with characteristics x i dies t
periods after 1998, conditional on living until t. Following Cox (1972, 1975), we estimate a continuoustime, semi-parametric, partial likelihood proportional hazard model. This allows us to estimate the

β coefficients without making parametric assumptions about the form of the baseline hazard λ 0 (t ) . The
Cox model readily handles the left truncation and right censoring in our data. In our earlier study of
another company’s annuitant data, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), we obtained very similar results using
the Cox model and alternative models that allow for a discrete rather than continuous non-parametric
baseline hazard as in Han and Hausman (1990). The main covariates of interest are socio-economic
status measures of the annuitant’s ward and the annuitant characteristics that are used in pricing.
Table 3 presents our findings. The first column includes as covariates only the annuitant
characteristics used in pricing. The only coefficient shown is for the indicator variable identifying male
annuitants; mortality hazards are higher for males. The other covariates, single year- and age-specific
indicator variables, are not reported to conserve space, but their coefficients display sensible patterns,
such as a rising mortality hazard with age. The second and third columns add ward-level SES measures
to the basic specification. Conditional on the characteristics that are used in pricing, the socioeconomic
status of the annuitant’s ward is statistically significantly and positively correlated with annuitant
survival. Column (2) indicates that annuitants from wards in which more individuals are educationally
qualified have a statistically significantly lower mortality hazard. Column (3) indicates that those from
wards with a greater proportion in managerial and professional occupations (social class I and II) have a

13

statistically significantly lower mortality hazard than both those in wards with a greater proportion in
skilled occupations (social class III) and those in our reference category, partly skilled or unskilled
occupations (social class IV and V). Finally, column (4) indicates that annuitants from wards in which a
greater proportion of the population suffer from long-term illness have a statistically significantly higher
mortality hazard.
To illustrate the substantive importance of the findings in Table 3, we use the estimate of the baseline
hazard and the hazard model coefficients to compute the implied impact of a change in ward
characteristics on the 5-year annuitant mortality rate. Table 4 shows the results. We estimate, for example,
that a 65 year old male annuitant who purchases a policy in 1994 in a ward with the average proportion of
qualified individuals and survives until 1998 has a 10.7 percent chance of dying within the next five
years. The same individual from a ward in which the proportion educationally qualified is one standard
deviation above the national average has only a 9.7 percent chance of dying. Similarly, a 65 year old male
has only a 9.3 percent chance of dying if he is from a ward in which the fraction of the population from
managerial and professional occupations is one standard deviation above average.
Survival differences of this magnitude can affect the expected present discounted value of an annuity
payout stream. We illustrate this by computing how much annual annuity payments would change if
insurance companies adjusted prices in an actuarially fair way to account for the relationship we find
between ward-level socio-economic status and annuitant mortality. Our calculation ignores any demand
response to such price changes. The actuarially fair annual payment from an annuity depends on the
characteristics of the annuity, the annuitant mortality table used, and the interest rate. We focus on a
nominal annuity with no guaranteed payments. Since we can only estimate mortality over a six year span
using our data, for this illustrative calculation we use the annuitant mortality tables for the compulsory
annuity market described in Finkelstein and Poterba (2002) for our baseline mortality hazard. We
consider a 65 year old who purchases an annuity on January 1, 1998, and discount future annuity
payments using the zero-coupon yield curve of nominal U.K. Treasury securities.
The mortality differences associated with the coefficient estimates in Table 3 imply that if annuity

14

payments were adjusted in an actuarially fair manner based on the proportion of the ward that is
educationally qualified, eleven percent of male 65 year old annuitants and four percent of 65-year-old
female annuitants would experience a payout change of at least five percent. If payments were adjusted
based on the proportion of the ward in the managerial and professional class, about 17 percent of men and
eight percent of women would experience a change in annuity payments of five percent of more.
4.2 Place of Residence as Predictor of Product Selection
The second component of the unused observables test requires examining whether annuitant ward
characteristics are correlated with the choice of annuity contract, conditional on the annuitant
characteristics used in pricing. In the spirit of equation (3a), we relate insurance purchases and ward
characteristics as follows:
(5)

Ciw = α*Xi + β*WARDw + εiw.

In this equation, Ciw denotes the type of insurance purchased by annuitant i in ward w, and Xi denotes the
annuitant characteristics that are used in pricing. As before, Xi consists of indicator variables for
annuitant’s gender, age at time of purchase, and year of annuity purchase. Our coefficient of interest is β,
which is related to the conditional correlation between a ward-level characteristic and insurance demand.
The payouts from the annuity contracts in our dataset can be are characterized by three features: the
initial annual annuity payment, the tilt of the annuity payment stream over time, and the length of the
annuity guarantee period. We displayed summary statistics in Table 1 for these product characteristics for
the annuities in our sample. These summary statistics show that 90 percent of the annuities in our sample
pay a constant nominal payment stream; the rest provide a payment stream that increases in nominal
terms over time. About 82 percent percent of the annuitants choose guaranteed annuities. During the
guarantee period, the insurance company will continue to make payments to the annuitant’s estate, even if
the annuitant dies. Annuitants are allowed to select guarantee periods of up to 10 years; almost 90
percent of guaranteed annuities in our data set have five year guarantees.
To estimate equation (5), we stratify our sample of annuity contracts into sub-samples that vary on
only one contract dimension, such as the amount of initial payout. We then look at the relationship

15

between ward-level SES and that contract feature. Specifically, we restrict our analysis to the 90 percent
of our sample policies that provide constant nominal payments, and stratify these constant nominal
annuities into three samples: those with no guarantee, those with 5-year guarantees and those with 10-year
guarantees. Within each of these three sub samples, we examine the relationship between ward-level SES
and the log of the initial annual annuity payment. We use a log transformation because of the skewness in
the distribution of initial payments.
Table 5 reports the results. The three different panels report results using different ward-level
characteristics as right hand side variables. The table thus presents results from twelve separate
regressions. Across all dependent variables (columns) and all ward-level measures (panels), the results
suggest that individuals in wards of higher socio-economic status or better health are likely to purchase
annuities with larger initial payments.
One concern with these results is that our sample of policies is left-truncated, since the annuitant must
survive from the date of policy purchase until 1998. While such left-truncation is easily handled in the
hazard model analysis in Table 3, it may bias the linear regression analysis in Table 5. We verified that
our results are robust to limiting the sample to the subsample of policies, about 13 percent, sold in 1998.
The left truncation problem does not apply to those policies, and the basic findings for this subsample are
similar to those for the full sample.
While statistically significant, the magnitude of the relationship between ward-level characteristics
and annuity characteristic is modest. A one-standard deviation, or 8.1 percentage point, increase in the
proportion of the annuitant’s ward that is educationally qualified is associated with only a 0.13 to 0.22
percent increase in initial annuity payment. Results using the other ward-level measures are similarly
small in magnitude. Even if the substantive magnitude of the coefficients is modest, the qualitative
finding that ward-level SES attributes are correlated with insurance demand, taken in conjunction with
our earlier finding of a link between these characteristics and survival rates, constitutes a rejection of the
null hypothesis of symmetric information.

16

4.3 Interpretation
Our findings provide some information about the form of the private information in annuity
markets. The correlation between ward-level socio-economic status (SES) and annuity demand suggests
that some of the asymmetric information is related to SES. This may reflect “active” adverse selection as
prospective annuity buyers recognize that their socio-economic status may affect their survival prospects.
It could also reflect “passive” or “preference-based” selection if socio-economic status affects demand for
insurance for reasons other than its effect on longevity risk, for example because it is correlated with risk
aversion. It is also possible that the findings reflect differences in the degree to which annuitization
promotes investments in life-lengthening activities across different groups. Regardless of which effect is
operating, there are still adverse efficiency consequences from the asymmetric information.
Our finding that the share of the annuitant’s ward reporting long-term illness is also related to the
annuitant’s insurance purchase seems to offer some support for traditional “active” selection, since longterm illness is less likely to be a marker for preferences for insurance than for risk type. However, wardlevel health and socio-economic characteristics are highly correlated, which makes it difficult to
determine the relative importance of these various selection factors.
A related question is whether the positive correlation between insurance demand and annuitant
survival found in earlier studies can be explained by the unused observables we have identified, or
whether other unobservable factors underlie selection. We investigate this by replicating the previous
positive correlation finding in the current data set. Following Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), we estimate
a proportional hazard model of length of time lived after purchasing an annuity, as in equation (4). The
covariates of interest are the three annuity product characteristics that affect the quantity of insurance in
the annuity contract: initial annual annuity payment, length of guarantee period, and degree of
backloading. We control for annuitant characteristics used in annuity pricing and for payment frequency.
The first column of Table 6 presents the results of this replication exercise. We find evidence of
positive correlation: annuitants who purchase guaranteed policies, which offer lower payouts than nonguaranteed annuities in the state of the world in which the annuitant survives, display higher mortality

17

rates, i.e. are lower risk from the insurance company’s perspective, than annuitants who do not purchase
guarantees. Those who choose larger initial annuity policies have a lower mortality risk, i.e. are higher
risk. There is a statistically insignificant finding that annuitants who purchase constant nominal annuities
exhibit higher mortality rates than individuals who purchase more back-loaded ones.
The remaining columns of Table 6 add controls for characteristics of the annuitant’s ward to the
analysis in the first column. The results in columns (2) through (4) indicate that the addition of ward-level
characteristics does not fully attenuate the positive correlation between dimensions of the insurance
contract that provide additional coverage and ex-post risk type. This suggests that there are additional
unobserved annuitant characteristics that we have not measured that affect selection in this market.
4.4 Moral Hazard vs. Selection
The unused observables test, like the positive correlation test, is a test for asymmetric information.
Without additional information, rejecting the null hypothesis of symmetric information does not offer
evidence on the question of whether asymmetric information results from moral hazard or from selection.
In some cases, such additional information may be available. For example, when a researcher has
evidence suggesting that an unused observable variable is correlated with risk-of-loss even among
individuals who have identical insurance coverage, then finding that individuals with certain values of the
unused observable select more insurance coverage supports the presence of selection based on ex ante
private information rather than of moral hazard based on ex post private information. In contrast, the
positive correlation test cannot distinguish between selection and moral hazard.
Since our empirical findings suggest that socioeconomic status (SES) is related to mortality risk and
annuity demand, the central question concerns whether SES is correlated with mortality risk even in the
absence of any induced differences in individual behavior that may be associated with interpersonal
differences in insurance coverage. If it is, then SES represents a source of ex ante private information for
would-be annuity buyers. A substantial body of evidence, surveyed for example by Cutler, Deaton, and
Lleras-Muney (2006) and Meara, Richards, and Cutler (2008), documents the positive relationship
between SES and survival. Examples of studies that support this pattern are Attanasio and

18

Analysts differ on why SES is correlated with survival rates, but our reading of the available evidence
suggests that differential annuity coverage is unlikely to be a primary factor. In the U.S., where the
private annuity market is small and annuitized income comes predominantly from employer-provided
defined benefit pension plans and the public Social Security system, Brown and Finkelstein (2008) show
that a larger proportion of wealth is annuitized for lower than for higher SES individuals. Annuityinduced moral hazard effects would therefore operate to offset the observed positive correlation between
survival rates and SES, rather than to reinforce it. In the U.K., there is evidence that the positive
relationship between SES and longevity also exists among pre-retirement individuals who are not
receiving any annuitized payments. Data from the Office of National Statistics (1997) show that
cumulative survival probabilities in the U.K. for men below age 55 are higher for men in higher social
classes, even though men at these ages are not likely to be enrolled in any annuity-type schemes.
In light of this external evidence, we interpret our finding of a link between a ward’s socio-economic
characteristics and annuitant product choice as supporting the presence of selection. We do not rule out
the potential presence of moral hazard as well. Further work on the distinction between selection and
moral hazard is a high priority, since the two have very different implications for public policy.
5. Insurance Company Behavior and the Rise of Postcode-Based Annuity Pricing
Our empirical results suggest that U.K. insurance companies in the 1990s were not using all of the
publicly available information that was related to mortality risk and annuity demand in pricing annuities.
This raises the interesting question of why these firms were not taking advantage of the opportunity to
price on an observable risk factor. Similar questions arise in many other insurance markets. For example,
for automobile insurance, Carter (2005) reports that, in the United States, most insurers use simple pricing
formulae based on a driver’s age and place of residence. In the French automobile insurance market,
Ivaldi (1996) finds a difference between automobile accident rates for smokers and non-smokers that is as
large as the difference between men and women, yet insurance is not priced on the basis of smoking
status. Brown and Finkelstein (2007) found that at the time of their study, premiums in the U.S. long-term
care insurance market were constant across place and gender, even though these attributes predict

19

substantial differences in expected nursing home utilization and cost. In early 2013, Stern (2013) reports,
Genworth, the largest seller of long-term care insurance in the United States, introduced differential
pricing for men and women, Many other long term care insurers were expected to follow suit.
5.1 Profit-Maximizing Conditioning on Buyer Attributes
In general, one would expect insurers to use a risk-related characteristic of the insured in pricing
whenever the costs of collecting the information and differentiating policy prices on the basis of it is less
than the incremental profitability of using the variable in differentiating prices. Regulation may alter this
calculus. In many U.S. states, for example, regulators restrict the characteristics that may be used in
pricing automobile insurance. In such cases, it is relatively uninteresting to test the null hypothesis of
symmetric information. The key question is the extent of asymmetric information created by such
regulations and the magnitude of the associated efficiency effects.
The more interesting cases, like those from the U.K. annuity market, the U.S. long-term care
insurance market, and the French automobile insurance market, involve information on individual
characteristics that insurance companies could collect and use in setting prices, but that they choose not to
use. The puzzle of unexploited information is particularly acute for variables such as gender and
geography that are collected by default. Although there may be some cost to processing this information
and determining how to set characteristic-based prices, it seems unlikely that costs of information
acquisition can explain the limited use of such data.
We can offer four potential explanations -- there are surely others -- for why insurance companies
choose not to use information that they collect, or could collect at low cost, in pricing insurance. We
view one of these explanations, which focuses on political economy concerns, as the most likely to
feature in the explanation.
First, insurance companies may choose not to use easily available, relevant information in pricing if
such information is not quantitatively important in improving the prediction of loss outcomes. While this
may explain why some buyer characteristics are not used in pricing, our estimates suggest that this
explanation does not apply for annuities. The association between ward-level SES and annuitant

20

mortality is large enough to translate into non-trivial changes in payouts for a substantial fraction of
annuity buyers. Presumably the relationship between annuitant SES, a variable which is not currently
measured but which could be collected, and annuitant mortality is even larger. There are large disparities
based on non-priced attributes in other markets, too. For example, Brown and Finkelstein (2007)
document that the unisex pricing of long-term care insurance generates gender-based effective load
differentials valued at nearly half of the policy cost. In this market, insurance companies appear to
choose not to condition prices on individual attributes that could materially affect prices.
Second, the predictive content of characteristics such as place of residence may be limited because
such characteristics might be subject to change in response to characteristic-based pricing. For a
sufficiently large difference in the cost of an insurance policy across different locations, a potential buyer
might seek to represent himself as resident in one location, when in fact he resided elsewhere. While this
might explain why place of residence was not used in pricing annuities, since a buyer could establish a
sham residence, it seems unlikely to be a general answer to the lack of characteristic-based pricing. There
are some difficult to change attributes, such as educational attainment and gender, that appear to be
correlated with the risk of loss in many insurance markets, but are not used in pricing. These attributes are
also likely to be verifiable by the insurance company at modest cost.
Third, using a previously-unexploited buyer characteristic for pricing may involve considerable upfront investment to determine the appropriate pricing structure, and competitors may copy the pricing rule
without incurring the initial costs. These issues were faced by U.K. insurers as they developed the
“impaired life” annuity market shortly after the end of our sample period. Cannon and Tonks (2011)
describe the growth of this market. Firms in this market offer substantial discounts to smokers and other
individuals who are likely to be in poor health. The initial pricing of these impaired life products
involved both considerable investment in actuarial analysis and product development. One of the
developers of impaired life products analyzed a database of medical records from life insurance sales
around the world to try to predict the relationship between various medical conditions and annuitant
mortality. Another impaired life annuity seller contracted with one of the U.K. health authorities for their

21

data on the mortality of individuals in nursing homes and hospitals and then devoted considerable
resources to analyzing these data to derive relationships between mortality and health conditions.
The firms that introduced impaired life annuities seem to have been concerned about pricing errors,
but not about other firms free-riding on their pricing decisions without paying the costs of determining the
appropriate pricing structure. Insurance executives told us that one of the incentives to enter this market
early was to build up statistical experience that can be used to refine subsequent pricing. Early entrants
gain an informational advantage relative to later-entering competitors, because new rivals can observe the
new policy’s pricing structure but not the innovator’s sales practices and underwriting rules. Potential
imitators will not know the criteria that the initial entrant uses to deny coverage to some applicants, and
this can be a key determinant of profitability. Firms that emulate the innovator by introducing policies
with similar pricing would likely attract some potential buyers who were denied policies by the innovator,
and would therefore have a less attractive risk pool than that of the innovator.
While the risk of emulation may not be a primary factor discouraging the use of additional
information in annuity pricing, changing practices at other insurers is likely to reduce the profitability of
any policy pricing innovation. If the innovator’s rivals ultimately adopt pricing rules that condition on the
newly-exploited individual characteristics, the result may simply be an equilibrium in which all firms
incur more up-front costs in pricing insurance policies. The gain in profitability in such a setting may be
much smaller than the gain to a monopoly insurer using new information in pricing.
Finally, we consider the political economy issues surrounding the use of new individual
characteristics for insurance pricing. Introducing more refined pricing distinctions can have large public
relations costs for individual firms and for the insurance industry and trigger regulatory changes to ban
the use of such information in pricing. Insurance firms contemplating more refined pricing may be
concerned about the direct costs of negative publicity, as well as by the prospect of triggering new
regulatory initiatives in the largely unregulated annuity market. Mohl (2005) describes the adverse public
reaction to proposals to use more variables describing a driver’s lifestyle in pricing automobile insurance
in U.S. states.

22

The behavior of large and small firms provides some support for these political economy concerns.
Adverse publicity and fear of future regulation should have less impact on small firms or new entrants
who do not internalize the costs of increased regulation or lost good will to the same extent that large
existing firms do. Consistent with this, Ainslie (2000) reports that impaired life annuities were introduced
to the U.K. market by new, start-up companies formed expressly for the purpose of offering the impaired
annuity products to individuals in observably poor health. Incumbent firms did not follow suit, until,
about five years after the introduction of these products, the impaired life market had grown to the point
where the cream skimming of good risks by the impaired life companies created pressure on the existing
companies to expand their pricing system. By that point, the political economy costs of offering impaired
life annuities had presumably declined as the public had become accustomed to such products.
5.2 The Rise of Postcode Pricing
While postcode pricing was not used for annuities during the sample period we consider, in the fifteen
years since the end of our sample, it has become standard practice in the U.K. annuity market. When
firms initially proposed such pricing rules, in 2003, they faced negative public reaction, illustrated by
newspaper stories on “Postcode Prejudice” (Sunday Times, July 13 2003), and “Postcode Peril”
(Manchester Evening News July 7, 2003). Yet at least one firm chose to proceed in the face of such
public concern: in 2007, Legal and General adopted postcode-based payouts. By offering higher payouts
to those in relatively poor and unhealthy locations, the firm saw an opportunity to expand market share
while still earning an acceptable return on these policies because of the higher average mortality risk of
the insured population. Within a few years of this development, postcode pricing had become the norm,
as other insurance firms saw that the consumer reaction to these products was in fact modest, and as
competitive forces dictated matching the favorable payouts offered in some locations by firms that used
postcode information.
U.K. insurance companies in many cases created several pricing categories to which postcodes were
assigned. Lander (2008), for example, reports that when Norwich Union, a large annuity provider, began
to condition its annuity prices on a buyer's postcode, marital status, and tobacco use, smoking habits, it

23

classified postcodes into nine distinct pricing bands. De (2011) collected data on annuities that were
offered to residents in of the Bristol metropolitan area, and found that most insurers offered a relatively
small number (often less than ten) of different postcode-based prices. There was variation across insurers
in the relative prices in different postcodes. Actuaries describing the shift to using postcodes noted that
this evolution of the annuity market was natural, since other markets, such as those for auto and
homeowner's insurance, already use location-based prices. Burrows (2010) illustrates the differences in
the annual annuity payment to a 65-year-old man purchasing a £100,000 policy at the start of 2010. A
resident of London would receive payouts 4.28 percent smaller than those of someone residing in
Glasgow or Birmingham, cities with a higher population share in lower SES, and less healthy, categories.
Cities such as Bristol (2.14 percent) and Cardiff (3.04 percent) were also lower than Glasgow, but not by
as much as London.
One factor some commentators identified as facilitating the introduction of postcode-based prices,
noted for example in Lander (2008), was the increasing availability of detailed data on health and
mortality. Insurance companies used such publicly-available data, along with their own policy
experience, to determine prices for location-specific policies. This suggests that the challenges of pricing
based on observed attributes may be a potential barrier to the introduction of these products.
As the U.K. annuity market has become more segmented since the time period of our analysis, with
both enhanced annuities for those with medical conditions that might result in shorter-than-average life
expectancy as well as postcode pricing, the choice set confronting potential annuity buyers has expanded.
Cumbo (2012) reports on a study by MGM Advantage, a financial adviser, which compares annuity
purchases by retirees who worked with a financial adviser and those who did not. The former group was
much more likely to purchase an enhanced annuity, which offers a higher payout. For those without a
financial adviser, MGM estimates that only two percent of retirees purchased an enhanced product, even
though seventy percent of those over 55 had a medical condition that would qualify them for such a
product. The differences between enhanced and standard annuities are substantially larger than those for
annuities sold to different postcodes. For Cardiff in 2012, for example, Cumbo (2012) reports that a

24

healthy annuitant would receive £6223 per year when buying a £100,000 policy, while a smoker would
receive £7162, 15 percent more. An annuity buyer with stage one cancer -- someone with localized
cancer who had received treatment such as chemotherapy in the last six months -- would receive a payout
of £7677, 23 percent higher than the healthy buyer. These substantial payout disparities underscore the
role that buyer-specific information can play in annuity pricing.
The U.K.'s adoption of postcode pricing does not provide definitive evidence on the factors that lead
insurance companies to alter the information set that they use for pricing, but it does offer some guidance.
When the costs of processing and underwriting based on a given type of information decline, that
information is more likely to be used. It is more difficult to determine how firms assess the consumer and
regulatory consequences of new pricing rules, since anything that creates greater heterogeneity in prices is
likely to be criticized on distributional grounds. This is an important topic for future analysis.
6. Conclusion
This paper tests for asymmetric information in the U.K. annuity market by implementing an unused
observables test involving the annuitant’s place of residence. This variable was clearly observed by the
company and by outside data analysts, but it was not used by insurance companies in pricing annuities in
the 1990s. It is used today, confirming our conclusion that it contained relevant information about future
mortality risks.
The unused observable test rejects the null of symmetric information if a characteristic of the
individual that is not priced by the insurance company is correlated with both insurance coverage and risk
occurrence. This offers a more robust approach to testing for asymmetric information than the widelyused positive correlation test. However, the test is one-sided: failure to detect asymmetric information
using the unused observable test may simply reflect a lack of sufficiently rich data on potential unused
observables, rather than the absence of asymmetric information
We show that in the U.K annuity market of the 1990s, the socio-economic characteristics of an
annuitant’s geographic location were correlated with both his survival probability and his annuity contract
choice. This provides evidence of asymmetric information in the market. As postcodes have become a

25

standard pricing variable more recently, the extent of such private information has declined. Our findings
provide some insight into the nature of individuals’ private information in the period we study, suggesting
that at least part of their private information consisted of information about their socio-economic status.
Our findings have implications beyond the operation of annuity markets. There is no a priori reason to
expect socio-economic selection to operate in the same direction in all insurance markets, and empirical
evidence suggests that it does not. In the annuity market, our findings suggest that socio-economic
selection draws longer-lived, and therefore higher risk, individuals into the market. It therefore reinforces
any selection based directly on private information about risk type. In the life insurance market, Banks
and Tanner (1999) find that selection based on socio-economic status also appears to draw longer-lived
individuals into the market. Such individuals, however, are low-risk life insurance buyers. Socioeconomic selection may help more generally in explaining differences across insurance markets in the
correlations between risk of loss and the quantity of insurance purchased.
A complete understanding of the limited use in pricing of available or collectible risk-related
information on insurance buyers remains an open issue. Our reading of the available evidence suggests
that the political economy of insurance regulation may play an important role in determining the pricing
function. Studying the history of characteristic-based pricing of insurance policies, and the evolution of
such pricing in various markets, may offer further insights into how insurance companies decide which
variables to use in setting prices. Comparing insuring prices in states with elected and appointed
insurance commissioners, for example, might offer insights on the role of endogenous regulation in
affecting pricing behavior. These issues are left for future study.

26

References
Ainslie, Ross. 2000. “Annuity and Insurance Products for Impaired Lives.” Presented to the Staple Inn
Actuarial Society, May 9.
Attanasio, Orazio and Carl Emmerson. 2001. Differential Mortality in the U.K. Institute for Fiscal Studies
working paper W01/16. http://www.ifs.org.uk/wps/wp0116.pdf
Attanasio, Orazio and Hilary Hoynes. 2000. “Differential Mortality and Wealth Accumulation,” Journal
of Human Resources 35: 1-29.
Association of British Insurers. 1999. Insurance Statistics Year Book. London: ABI.
Banks, James, and Carl Emmerson, 1999. “U.K. Annuitants.” IFS Briefing Note. London: Institute for
Fiscal Studies.
Banks, James and Sarah Tanner. 1999. “Household Savings in the UK.” IFS Reports, R62. London.
Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2007. “Why is the Market for Long-Term Care Insurance So
Small?” Journal of Public Economics. 91: 1967 – 1991.
Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid
and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market,” American Economic Review 98: 1083-1102.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia Mitchell, James Poterba and Mark Warshawsky. 2001. The Role of Annuity
Markets in Financing Retirement. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Burrows, Billy. 2010. "Money Talk: How to Avoid the Annuities Postcode Trap," BBC News, 6
January. Accessed at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/8441314.stm (January 27 2013).
Cannon, Edmund and Ian Tonks. 2011. "Compulsory and Voluntary Annuities Markets in the UK,"

in O. Mitchell, J. Piggott and N. Takayama, eds., Securing Lifelong Retirement Income:
Global Annuity Markets and Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 171-194.
Cardon, James and Igal Hendel. 2001. “Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence from the
National Medical Expenditure Survey.” RAND Journal of Economics 32: 408-27.

27

Carter, Adrienne. 2005. “Telling the Risky from the Reliable.” Business Week August 1, 57.
Cawley, John and Tomas Philipson. 1999. “An Empirical Examination of Information Barriers to Trade
in Insurance.” American Economic Review 89: 827-846.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre. 2000. “Econometric Models of Insurance under Asymmetric Information.” In G.
Dionne, ed. Handbook of Insurance Economics. London: Kluwer. 365-394.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre and Bernard Salanie. 2000. “Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 108: 56-78.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie. 2006. “Asymmetric
Information in Insurance: General Testable Implications.” RAND Journal of Economics 37: 783798.
Cohen, Alma. 2005. “Asymmetric Information and Learning in the Automobile Insurance Market.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 87: 197-207.
Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav. 2007. “Estimating Preferences from Deductible Choice.” American
Economic Review 97: 745-788.
Cohen, Alma and Peter Siegelman. 2010. “Testing for adverse selection in insurance markets.” Journal of
Risk and Insurance 77(1): 39-84.
Cox, David. 1972. “Regression Models and Life-tables (with discussion).” Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Series B 34: 1987-220.
Cox, David. 1975. “Partial Likelihood.” Biometrika 62: 269-276.
Cumbo, Josephine. 2012. "Pension Savers Missing Out on Enhanced Annuities." Financial Times (May
4). Accessed on line at http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/71715054-9433-11e1-bb4700144feab49a.html#axzz2JDMbBpJ2 on January 27, 2013.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The Determinants of Mortality.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20: 97-120.
Cutler, David, Amy Finkelstein and Kathleen McGarry. 2008. “Preference Heterogeneity and Insurance
Markets: Explaining a Puzzle.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings. 98 (May),

28

157-162.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. “The Anatomy of Health Insurance.” In A. J. Culyer and J.
P. Newhouse, eds., The Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1A. Amsterdam: North
Holland. 563-643.
Davidoff, Thomas and Gerd Welke. 2004. “Selection and Moral Hazard in the Reverse Mortgage
Market.” Unpublished mimeo, University of California – Berkeley.
De, Rahul. 2011. "Annuity Market in the U.K." M.Sc. thesis, University of Bristol.
de Meza, David and David Webb. 2001. “Advantageous Selection in Insurance Markets.” RAND Journal
of Economics. 32: 249-262.
Dionne, Georges, Christian Gourieroux and Charles Vanasse. 2001. “Testing for Evidence of Adverse
Selection in the Automobile Insurance Market: A Comment.” Journal of Political Economy 109:
444-451.
Einav, Liran and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
Pictures.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25: 115-138.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Mark Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using
Variation in Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125: 877-921.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. "Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of
Insurance Markets." Annual Review of Economics 2: 311-336.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein and Paul Schrimpf. 2010. “Optimal Mandates and the Welfare Cost of
Asymmetric Information: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market” Econometrica 78: 10311092.
Fang, Hanming, Michael Keane, and Dan Silverman. 2008. “Sources of Advantageous Selection:
Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market.” Journal of Political Economy 116, 303-350.
Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry. 2006. “Multiple Dimensions of Private Information: Evidence
from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review 96: 938 – 958.

29

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2002. “Selection Effects in the Market for Individual Annuities:
New Evidence from the United Kingdom.” Economic Journal 112, 28-50.
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2004. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder
Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market.” Journal of Political Economy 112, 183-208.
Han, Aaron and Jerry Hausman. 1990. “Flexible Parametric Estimation of Duration and Competing Risk
Models.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 5:1-28.
He, Daifeng. 2009. “The Life Insurance Market: Asymmetric Information Revisited.” Journal of Public
Economics 93: 1090-1097.
Hemenway, David. 1990. “Propitious Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105: 1063-1069.
Ivaldi, Marc. 1996. “Sinistralité des Jeunes Conducteurs Novices, Incitations a la Sécurité Routière et
Tarifications de l’Assurance Automobile.” Toulouse, IDEI Report.
Jullien, Bruno, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie. 2007. “Screening Risk-Averse Agents Under
Moral Hazard: Single Crossing and the CARA Case,” Economic Theory 30: 151 – 169.
Lander, Edward. 2008. "Post Code Annuity Pricing is Double-Edged, Actuaries Say." New Model
Adviser (online, June 25). Accessed on January 27, 2013 at http://citywire.co.uk/new-modeladviser/post-code-annuity-pricing-is-double-edged-actuaries-say/a306568/2
McCarthy, David and Olivia Mitchell. 2010. “International Adverse Selection in Life Insurance and
Annuities.” In S. Tuljapurkar, N. Ogawa, and A. Gautheir, eds., Riding the Age Wave: Responses
to Aging in Industrial Societies. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Meara, Ellen R., Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler. 2008. "The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in
Mortality and Life Expectancy by Education, 1981-2000," Health Affairs 27, 350-360.
Menchik, Paul. 1993. “Economic Status as a Determinant of Mortality Among Black and White Older
Men: Does Poverty Kill?,” Population Studies 47: 427-436.
Murthi, Mamta, J. Michael Orszag, and Peter Orszag. 1999. The Charge Ratio on Individual Accounts:
Lessons for the U.K. Experience. Birkbeck College, University of London Working Paper 99-2.
Office for National Statistics. 1997. Health Inequalities. London: The Stationary Office Limited.

30

Stern, Linda. 2013. "Your Finance: Do You Need Long-Term Care Coverage?" Newsday (June 20).
Accessed June 24 2013 at http://www.newsday.com/business/your-finance-do-you-need-longterm-care-coverage-1.5531605

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics on Annuitant Population at Sample Firm
Number of policies
Number (%) of annuitants who die within sample period
Number (%) of annuitants who are male
Average age at purchase
Number (%) of policies that are constant nominal payout
Number (%) of policies that have guarantees
Mean initial payment (£)
Median initial payment
Standard deviation of initial payment (£)
Average premium

52,824
5,592 (10.6%)
31,329 (59.3%)
62.2
47,370 (89.7%)
43,259 (81.9%)
1,819
901
3,682
19,550

Note: The sample consists of single life compulsory annuities sold between 1988 and 1998 that were still in force in
1998. The text describes further sample restrictions. Mortality experience covers the period January 1 1998 through
February 29, 2004. Policies that do not have constant nominal payouts have payouts that increase over time in
nominal terms. Policies with guarantees continue to make payments to annuitant estate if the annuitant dies during
the guarantee period. Premium and initial payment are converted to £1998 using annual values of the Retail Prices
Index (RPI).

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Ward-Level Socio-Economic Status and Health Status
Population-weighted
Annuitant-weighted
Social Economic Status Measure
Average
Std. Dev
Average Std. Dev.
Qualified
13.4%
8.00
15.9%
8.15
Social Class: Professional and Managerial (I & II)
31.6
12.13
36.1
12.13
Social Class: Skilled (III)
43.6
6.95
41.7
7.48
Social Class: Partly Skilled or Unskilled (IV & V)
21.6
8.03
19.4
2.47
Presence of Long-term illness
12.1
3.44
11.4
3.12

Note: Based on ward-level statistics from 1991 UK census. Population-weighted estimates are constructed
weighting each ward by its population; annuitant-weighted estimates are constructed weighting each ward by the
number of policies the sample firm has in that ward. The omitted social class, which consists of those in the armed
forces, receiving annuity payments through government schemes, and “unknown,” accounts for 3 percent (2.8
percent) of the population-weighted (annuitant-weighted) sample.

32

Table 3: Hazard Models Relating Annuitant Mortality Experience to Annuitant Gender and Ward-Level
SES Characteristics
Education Occupation
Illness
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Male
Percentage of Ward that is Educationally
Qualified

0.638***
(0.0349)

0.629***
(0.0347)

0.628***
(0.0348)

-0.0150***
(0.0017)

Percentage of Ward in Professional or
Managerial Occupations (Social Class I & II)

-0.0118***
(0.0017)

Percentage of Ward in Skilled Occupations
(Social Class III)

-0.0029
(0.0027)

Percentage of Ward with Long Term Illness

0.636***
(0.0347)

0.0248***
(0.0043)

Note: Coefficients are from Cox Proportional Hazard Model of time lived since 1998 (see equation 4). N = 52,824.
In addition to the covariates shown in the table, all regressions contain indicator variables for age at purchase and
year of purchase. Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the ward level are in parentheses. In column
3, the omitted category is percentage of ward in partly skilled or unskilled occupations (Social Class IV or V). ***,
**, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent level respectively.

Table 4: The Effect of Varying Ward Characteristics on Implied Five-Year Mortality Rates for
Annuitants
Fraction of Ward Qualified
Fraction of Ward in Social
Fraction of Ward with
Class I or II
Long-Term Illness
Average
One Std Dev
Average
One Std Dev
Average One Std Dev
Above Average
Above Average
Below Average
Male
10.7
9.7
10.7
9.3
10.9
10.2
Female
4.3
3.7
4.3
3.7
4.2
3.8

Notes: Table reports the post-1998 5-year cumulative mortality probability of an individual who purchased an
annuity at age 65 in 1994, conditional on having survived until 1998. Cumulative mortality probabilities are derived
from the coefficient estimates in Table 3 and the corresponding estimate of the baseline hazard (not reported). For
the change in the proportion of the ward in Social Class I or II, the individuals are moved to Social Class IV or V.

33

Table 5: Ward SES Characteristics and Quantity of Insurance Purchased
Dependent Variable: Log Initial Payment
Policies with No
Guarantee

Policies with 5Year Guarantee

Policies with 10Year Guarantee

[N=7,964]
0.0223***
(0.0017)

[N=35,042]
0.0271***
(0.0011)

[N=4,366]
0.0160***
(0.0022)

Percentage of Ward in
Professional or Managerial
Occupation (Social Class I & II)

0.0154***
(0.0018)

0.0201***
(0.0013)

0.0103***
(0.0022)

Percentage of Ward in Skilled
Occupations (Social Class III)

-0.0012
(0.0029)

-0.0010
(0.0020)

-0.0054
(0.0035)

Percentage of Ward with LongTerm Illness
Mean Dependent Variable
(£1998)

-0.0373***
(0.0046)

-0.0438***
(0.0029)

-0.0284***
(0.0052)

6.63

6.30

7.23

Percentage of Ward that is
Educationally Qualified

Note: The table reports OLS estimates of equation (5) on the sample of policies with constant nominal payouts.
Different columns report results using different dependent variables; they are all measured in constant, 1998 £’s.
Different panels report results using different ward characteristics on the right hand side. Each cell (defined by a
column and a panel) reports a coefficient from a different regression. In addition to the covariates shown in the
table, all regressions include indicator variables for age and year of purchase and for gender of annuitant. In panel B,
omitted category is partly or unskilled social class (Social Class IV or V). Standard errors, heteroscedasticity-robust
and clustered at the ward level to allow for within-ward correlation in the error term, are shown in parentheses. ***,
**, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively.

34

TABLE 6 – Hazard Model Related Mortality to Annuity Policy Characteristics and Ward Characteristics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Male
0.630*** 0.621***
0.628***
0.620***
(0.0355) (0.0354)
(0.0354)
(0.0355)
Constant Nominal Indicator

0.047
(0.049)

0.048
(0.049)

0.045
(0.049)

0.050
(0.049)

Guarantee Indicator

0.083**
(0.0391)

0.076*
(0.0400)

0.079**
(0.0400)

0.076*
(0.0400)

-0.013***
(0.0040)

-0.009
(0.0058)

-0.012**
(0.0059)

-0.009
(0.0058)

Initial Payment (£1,000)
Percentage of Ward that is Educationally
Qualified
Percentage of Ward with Long Term Illness

-0.014***
(0.0018)
0.024***
(0.0043)

Social Class (Omitted Category = % of Ward in Partly or Unskilled Occupations)
Percentage of Ward in Professional or
Managerial Occupation (Social Class I & II)

-0.011***
(0.0017)

Percentage of Ward in Skilled Occupations
(Social Class III)

-0.003
(0.0027)

Note: Coefficients are from Cox Proportional Hazard Model of time lived since 1998 (see equation 4). N = 52,824.
In addition to the covariates shown in the table, all regressions contain individual dummies for age at purchase and
year of purchase (1988-1998) and frequency of annuity payments. Standard errors are in parentheses. They are
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors and are clustered at the ward level to allow for within-ward correlation in
the error term. ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent level respectively.
Reference category for “constant nominal indicator” is a more backloaded annuity. In column 4, the omitted
category is Social Class IV & V (partially skilled or unskilled occupation).

35

