                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EXPLORING LINKS BETWEEN INNOVATION AND
               DIFFUSION: ADOPTION OF NOx CONTROL TECHNOLOGIES
                        AT U.S. COAL-FIRED POWER PLANTS

                                              David Popp

                                        Working Paper 12119
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12119


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2006




The author thanks Wayne Gray, Nat Keohane, Erin Mansur, Geoffrey Rothwell, and seminar participants
at Yale University, the National Bureau of Economic Research Environmental Economics Program, the
University of Ottawa, the Association for Policy Analysis and Management, the University of California
Energy Institute, and the University of Maryland for helpful comments. Neelaskhi Medhi, Jacob Brower and
Yonghong Wu provided excellent research assistance. Financial support provided by DOE grant
DE-FG02-ER63467. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exploring Links Between Innovation and Diffusion: Adoption of NOx Control Technologies at
U.S. Coal-Fired Power Plants
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 12119
March 2006
JEL No. L94, O31, O33, Q53, Q55

                                           ABSTRACT

While many studies have looked at innovation and adoption of technologies separately, the two
processes are linked. Advances (and expected advances) in a single technology should affect both
its adoption rate and the adoption of alternative technologies. Moreover, advances made abroad may
affect adoption differently than improvements developed domestically. This paper combines
plant-level data on U.S. coal-fired electric power plants with patent data pertaining to NOx pollution
control techniques to study these links. I show that technological advances, particularly those made
abroad, are important for the adoption of newer post-combustion treatment technologies, but have
little effect on the adoption of older combustion modification techniques. Moreover, I provide
evidence that adaptive R&D by U.S. firms is necessary before foreign innovations are adopted in the
U.S. Expectations of future technological advances delay adoption. Nonetheless, as in other studies
of environmental technologies, the effect of other explanatory variables is dominated by the effect
of environmental regulations, demonstrating that the mere presence of environmental technologies
is not enough to encourage its usage.

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
Center for Policy Research
The Maxwell School
Syracuse University
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
        In recent years, economists have paid increasing attention to the links between

environmental policy and technological change. More stringent environmental regulation can be

expected to both increase levels of innovation directed at environmentally-friendly technology

and encourage increased adoption of such technologies. While many studies have looked at

environmental innovation or diffusion separately, these processes are clearly linked – adoption of

a new technology cannot take place until innovation has taken place. This paper explores

linkages between available technologies and adoption of one of two air pollution control

technologies by coal-fired electric power plants, considering both the availability of technologies

developed at home and abroad, as well as expectations about future technological progress.

        The diffusion of a new technology is a gradual, dynamic process. New technologies are

not adopted en masse. Rather, adoption usually begins with a few early adopters, followed by a

more rapid period of adoption, with the rate of adoption leveling off once most potential users

have adopted the technology. This process generates the well-known S-shaped diffusion curve.1

Early attempts to explain this process focused on the spread of information (epidemic models,

such as Griliches 1957) and differences among firms (probit models, such as David 1969).

        Recent models combine these explanations while adding potential strategic decisions of

firms.2 Karshenas and Stoneman (1993) discuss three potential dynamic interactions. The rank

effect derives from probit models – potential adopters are ranked by their gross benefits, and

those with the greatest benefits go first. Stock and order effects relate to the cumulative number

of adopters. Both deal with strategic interactions – those who adopt faster face less competition

and receive first mover advantages. As a result, early adopters gain greater net benefits than later

adopters. For example, both Karshenas and Stoneman (1993) and Kerr and Newell (2003) find

1
 See, for example, Karshenas and Stoneman (1995).
2
 Examples include Hannan and McDowell (1984), Rose and Joskow (1990), Karshenas and Stoneman (1993), and
Kerr and Newell (2003).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                         2


that the percentage of firms already adopting the technology negatively affects the probability of

adoption, which they attribute to these first-mover advantages.

        These explanations, however, ignore a potential benefit of waiting. Those that adopt later

receive the benefit of technological advances and may adopt technologies superior to those

chosen by early adopters (see, for example, Rosenberg 1976). While previous models implicitly

consider such advantages (such as through falling costs, which are often modeled as quality-

adjusted), few empirical studies of diffusion consider the potential benefits of improved

technology.3 One exception is Weiss (1994), who uses survey data to show that expectations of

more rapid technological change to come delay adoption. In contrast, this paper uses publicly-

available patent data to measure technological progress.                 As such, the methodology used

potentially allows the study of technological progress and diffusion across a wide range of

technologies.

        This paper uses patent data to examine the role that technological advances play in the

adoption of technologies designed to reduce nitrogen dioxide (NOX) emissions at coal-fired

electric power plants in the United States. This adoption decision is of interest for several

reasons. Most importantly, unlike most other pollutants, U.S. NOX regulations have historically

lagged behind those of other nations, particularly Japan and Germany. As a result, the path of

innovations in each country differed (Popp 2006). To meet the more stringent regulations in

Japan and Germany, post-combustion emissions treatment techniques were developed.                             In

contrast, innovations in the U.S. focused on modifications to the combustion process. Such

modifications are cheaper, but do not reduce emissions as well as post-combustion treatment.

Thus, combustion modifications are more useful when NOX regulations are less stringent. Over


3
 Examples of theoretical models including technological expectations include Balcer and Lippman (1984), Ireland
and Stoneman (1986), Tsur et al. (1990), and Lissoni (2000).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                            3


time, as NOX emission rules have been tightened in the U.S., more U.S. plants have adopted

post-treatment techniques.

         As a result, the study of NOX abatement technology choices allows us to examine how

changes in the available knowledge, developed both at home and abroad, affect the adoption

decision. In particular, I ask whether firms take advantage of foreign technologies directly, or

must first perform additional research to adopt these technologies to domestic markets. For

example, Popp (2006) shows that patents granted in the U.S. for post-combustion treatment by

Japanese and German inventors increased when strict NOX regulations were enacted in those

countries in the 1970s and 1980s. Despite the ready availability of these technologies, there is a

similar spike in patents from U.S. inventors once U.S. regulations catch up in the 1990s.

However, Popp (2006) also shows that these U.S. patents are much more likely to cite earlier

foreign patents than are U.S. patents for other air pollution control technologies, even after

controlling for differences among the number of foreign and domestic patents available.4 This

suggests that domestic R&D was needed, but that the foreign patents served as an important

building block for this R&D. This paper extends that work by asking whether this additional

R&D was necessary for adoption to take place.

         Another advantage of using the adoption of technology by coal-fired electric power

plants is that many operate in regulated markets, and most serve dedicated areas with little

competition. Furthermore, the choice to adopt environmental technology is driven by regulatory

pressures (Gray and Shadbegian 1998, Kerr and Newell 2003, Snyder et al. 2003). The benefit

that firms receive from adopting an environmental technology is increased compliance with

regulation. For these reasons, strategic considerations, such as first-mover advantages, are less

4
 Unlike the post-combustion treatment of NOX, there was significant inventive activity in the U.S. for most new
abatement technologies, as other U.S. environmental regulations tended to be as strong, if not stronger, than those in
foreign nations.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                          4


important here than for other technologies. Thus, we can study the links between technological

advances and adoption in isolation, without concern for the more strategic stock and order effects

often considered in the literature. Doing so avoids potential multicollinearity problems between

the knowledge stocks of previous patents and stocks of previously installed capacity.

         The lessons from this research should be of interest to a wide range of economists. For

environmental economists, the links between environmental policy and technological change

have become important research areas.5                For long-term problems such as climate change,

understanding the potential role that technology will play as part of any policy solution is

important. Moreover, since climate change is a global problem, understanding the flow of

environmental technologies across nations is important.6 For economists studying technological

diffusion more generally, the paper offers new empirical methodologies designed to explicitly

model the benefits of delaying adoption in return for the opportunity to adopt a better technology

in the future. It also addresses potential links between domestic R&D and knowledge spillovers.

For example, both Cohen and Levinthal (1989) and Griffith, Redding, and van Reenen (2003)

find positive links between R&D and the ability of firms to absorb knowledge spillovers.

However, these papers focus more generally on the ability of firms to absorb knowledge

spillovers, rather than on the decision to adopt new technology. Thus, this paper adds to the

discussion on the absorptive capacity of R&D by addressing one specific avenue in which

knowledge may be absorbed, via the adoption of foreign technologies.




5
  Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins (2003) provide a review.
6
  One paper that addresses this question is Lanjouw and Mody (1996). They find that many environmental patents
in developing countries come from foreign inventors, and that those patents that are granted to domestic inventors in
developing countries typically represent smaller inventive steps, such as modifying a technique to fit local
conditions. However, they look at aggregate patent data, and do not directly address the decision to adopt the
technologies in question.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                          5


I. NOX Regulations and Technology

         NOX emissions are produced by the combustion of fossil fuels, when nitrogen contained

in the fuel combines with oxygen during the combustion process. NOX emissions can be reduced

either by making modifications to the combustion process or by using post-combustion control

techniques. This section reviews major legislative efforts to combat NOX emissions from power

plants, as well as the technologies used to do so.



A. Regulations7

         In the United States, NOX is one of six criteria pollutants regulated by the Clean Air Acts

(CAA). However, NOX emissions were primarily seen as a local issue until the 1990 Clean Air

Act. NOX emissions results in two major environmental problems – the formation of ground-

level ozone and acid rain. As such, U.S. NOX regulations have focused on areas where these two

problems are primary concerns – California (ozone) and the eastern United States (acid rain).

For NOX, the 1970 CAA established a limit of 0.7 lbs/mmBtu of NOX for power plants. The

1977 CAA tightened the standard slightly, lowering the limit to 0.5-0.6 lbs/mmBtu.8 In addition,

removal of at least 65% of NOX emissions was required.

         It was not until the 1990s that NOX regulations were strengthened, and even then the

focus was on regions of primary concern. The 1990 CAA established the Ozone Transport

Commission (OTC), designed to address the regional problem of acid rain in the eastern U.S.

The resulting plan, implemented in phases, called for reductions in affected eastern states to 0.2

lb/mmBtu beginning in May 1999, and reductions to 0.15 lb/mmBtu by May of 2003, and

7
  Information in this section comes from a series of publications on emission standards published by the
International Energy Agency Clean Coal Centre: Vernon (1988), Soud (1991), McConville (1997), and Sloss
(2003).
8
  Different limits applied depending on the type of coal burnt. The higher 0.6 limit applied to bituminous coal,
which is most commonly used at U.S. coal-fired electric plants.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                       6


allowed trading of NOX emission permits across plants in the region.9 The 1998 NOX SIP Call

expanded NOX reductions to 22 eastern states, and required that emissions reductions be in place

by 2004. At the national level, the 1990 CAA tightened emission standards to as low as 0.4-0.46

lb/mmBtu by 2000.10 Unlike previous legislation, these reductions applied to both new and

existing plants.

        In comparison, stringent NOX regulations have existed elsewhere as far back as the

1970s. Japanese NOX regulations have been stricter than the U.S. since the 1974 amendments to

the Air Pollution Control Law. Those amendments set a standard of 0.5 lbs/mmBtu, making

Japan’s NOX standard nearly 30% stricter than the limits in place in the U.S. at the time. These

regulations were tightened further in 1987, with a new limit of just 0.33 lbs/mmBtu. Moreover,

unlike in the U.S., where older plants are grandfathered from new emission standards, these

standards apply to both new and existing plants. Finally, Germany did not set specific limits for

NOX emissions from power plants until June 1, 1983. However, once put in place, its regulations

were stricter than either Japan or the U.S, limiting emissions to just 0.16 lbs/mmBtu.



B. Technologies to Reduce NOX Emissions

        NOX emissions can be controlled via modifications to the combustion process or by

treatment of flue gas after combustion. The primary post-combustion techniques are selective

catalytic reduction (SCR) and selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR). In both processes, an

ammonia-based reagent is injected into the flue gas stream. A chemical reaction between the



9
  Affected states are Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, and the District of Columbia.
10
   This regulation was phased in, with slightly higher standards between 1996 and 1999. Also, note that the
requirements vary by plant. The standards presented apply to tangentially-fired boilers and dry bottom wall-fired
boilers respectively. These are the most common boiler types in the U.S.. Other boilers are allowed more NOX
emissions.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                      7


NOX gases and the reagent produce nitrogen and water. SCR uses a catalyst to produce this

reaction, allowing it to work at lower temperatures than SNCR technology. SCR has a higher

capital cost than SNCR, but can reduce emissions by as much as 80-90%, compared to just 30-

40% reduction from SNCR technologies (Wu 2002, Afonso et al., 2000). As such, SCR is the

technology of choice for plants facing tight NOX emissions restrictions, such as in Germany and

Japan.

         The complexity of retrofitting SCR on an existing plant depends on both the level of

reduction required and the quality of the coal burned. For example, higher flue gas sulfur and

ash loadings make retrofitting more difficult in Germany than Japan (Frey 1995). This also

suggests that innovations in one country need not apply to plants elsewhere.

         In contrast to post-combustion techniques, combustion modification techniques are less

costly, as they do not require add-on equipment. Rather, they involve changing the combustion

process to reduce the amount of NOX formed by combustion. Typically, such modifications

work by adjusting the mix of air and fuel used in combustion, which reduces the peak flame

temperature and results in lower NOX formation. Commonly used techniques include low-NOX

burners and overfire air, in which combustion air is separated into primary and secondary flows.

These techniques reduce emissions by 30-40% from uncontrolled levels (Wu 2002, Afonso et al.

2000). Other techniques used include flue gas recirculation, in which some of the flue gas is

recirculated and mixed with combustion air, and fuel staging techniques such as reburning,

which use a secondary fuel directed at a section of the furnace to burn remaining waste gases. In

addition, different combustion techniques can be combined to achieve greater reductions (Wu

2002, Afonso et al. 2000).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                               8


II. Estimating the Determinants of Adoption

         To consider the effect of knowledge on the adoption decision, we consider a coal-fired

electric plant, i, facing NOx emission regulations. In each period t, the plant must decide whether

or not to install one of two pollution abatement equipments: combustion modification (CM) or

post-combustion emission treatment (PT). Its gross profits in any given year τ, denoted giτ, are a

function of the level of regulation at time τ, Ri(τ), a vector of fixed firm characteristics Ci, and a

vector of time-varying firm characteristics Xi(τ). In addition, the effectiveness of any pollution

abatement equipment installed depends on the quality of the technology at the time in which it

was installed (period t). I use Kj(t) to represent the quality of technology at time t for technology

j, where j = CM or PT. The present value of installing technology j at time t is then:

(1)
                        ∞
                                {                                  }
         Gi , j (t ) = ∫ g i , j C i , X i ( τ ), Ri (τ ), K j (t ) e −r (τ −t ) dτ
                       t


         Following Karshenas and Stoneman (1993), define the net present value of adoption as

Zi,j(t), where

(2)                                      Zi,j(t) = Gi,j(t) – Pj(t)

Here, Pj(t) represents the price of technology j at time t.

         For simplicity, consider first the decision to adopt a technology for which there is no

substitute. Adoption is profitable11 if:

(3)                                      Zi,j(t) = Gi,j(t) – Pj(t) ≥ 0




11
  Note that the model need not imply that a plant operate in an unregulated environment where only profit
maximization matters. While many plants operate in regulated environments, all that matters here is that the plant
adopts a technology if it perceives it will be better off with the technology than without. In practice, different
regulatory environments could be included as part of the variable R. However, regressions including the status of
deregulation for the plants included in this paper found that regulatory status did not affect the adoption decision.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                                9

At the same time, adoption must meet the arbitrage condition. This states that not only is

adoption profitable today, but that it is not more profitable to postpone adoption until some

future date. Formally, this is expressed as:

                                             ∂Z i , j (t )e − rt
(4)                          yi , j (t ) =                         ≤0
                                                     ∂t

         To derive an expression for y, first define p(t) as the expected change in price over time,

r(t) the expected change in regulations over time, and k(t) as the expected change in the

knowledge stock over time.12 Taking derivatives yields

                                                                   ∞
(5)                yi , j (t ) = rP(t ) − p(t ) − g (t ) + ∫ g (τ ) ⋅ {k (t ) + r (t )}e −r (τ −t ) dτ
                                                                   t


From (3) and (5), we observe that adoption is a function of firm characteristics, current and

expected regulations and knowledge, and current and expected prices for the technology in

question. At any given time, some firms will find adoption profitable, while others will not.

Over time, we expect that adoption will become more desirable, even if other firm characteristics

remain the same, as technological advances improve the profitability of the technology. Thus,

firms for which adoption is most desirable will adopt first, while additional firms adopt as the

benefits of adoption rise. In the adoption literature, this is known as the rank effect (Karshenas

and Stoneman 1993). In these models, firm heterogeneity leads to a distribution of expected

return from adopting the new technology. From this, I define the hazard function, hi,j(t), which

captures the conditional probability that firm i will adopt technology j in time t, given that it has

not previously adopted the technology, as

(6)                         hi,j(t) = f{Ci, Xi(t), Ri(t), ri(t), Kj(t), kj(t), Pj(t), pj(t)}

         This approach, while similar to other models in the adoption literature, differs in that I

12
  For simplicity, we assume that expectations for future firm characteristics are the same as current characteristics.
That is, firms do not anticipate future changes in operations or revenues.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                           10

explicitly model the possibility of technological improvements. As in other models, only firms

above a threshold great enough to justify the costs of adoption will choose to adopt the

technology at any given time. Over time, the technology gets cheaper, and its quality improves,

so that more firms cross the adoption threshold. However, this decrease is typically modeled

exogenously.13 In the empirical work that follows, I use instrumental variables to control for the

endogenous links between innovation and regulation.14

         Now, consider a plant that can choose between either of the two technology options. In

addition to the profitability and no arbitrage conditions (equations (3) and (5)), it must also be

the case that it is more profitable to adopt technology j than the competing technology, l. For

example, using data on the adoption of multiple machine tool technologies, Stoneman and Kwon

(1994) and Stoneman and Toivanen (1997) find significant cross-technology effects – changes in

the price of one technology affect adoption rates for both technologies. In addition, since a plant

may decide against investment in technology j if it anticipates major advances in the competing

technology, the arbitrage condition should include expectations for both technologies. From

equation (6), note that only prices and knowledge are technology-specific. Thus, to know

whether technology j is more profitable than technology l, we must also consider knowledge and

prices for technology l. When faced with competing technologies the adoption decision is:

13
   Ireland and Stoneman (1986) provide a theoretical example of such a model. They consider both supply and
demand of a new technology, and consider how adoption changes when expectations over future prices occur.
However, costs fall exogenously over time, and improvements in the quality of technology are only considered
implicitly, by assuming prices to be quality-adjusted. Similarly, Tsur et al. (1990) use the possibility of learning by
using to model the evolution of technology. Modeling technological progress via learning by using leads to opposite
conclusions about timing. If experience is necessary to improve the technology, firms may find it beneficial to
adopt technologies that result in short-term losses in hopes of long-term benefits. Here, firms may decide to
postpone adopting beneficial technologies if future benefits, due to technological progress, will be even greater.
14
   As noted earlier, models of adoption often explore stock effects and order effects, in addition to rank effects. Both
are related to the cumulative number of adopters in an industry. Both address strategic advantages early adopters
receive. Given that most electric plants face little competition, and many operate as natural monopolies in a
regulated market, such strategic effects are likely to be unimportant in this study. However, for other applications,
the model can be generalized to include stock and order effects by including variables relating to the number of
adopters, as in Karshenas and Stoneman (1993).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                     11

(7)            hi,j(t) = f{Ci, Xi(t), Ri(t), ri(t), Kj(t), kj(t), Pj(t), pj(t), Kl(t), kl(t), Pl(t), pl(t)}



A. An Econometric Model

       Empirical studies of technology adoption have traditionally used one of two approaches.

The epidemic model of diffusion proposes that information is the primary factor limiting

diffusion. Adoption is slow at first, as few people (or firms) know about the technology.

However, as more people adopt the technology, knowledge of the technology spreads quickly,

leading to a period of rapid adoption. Economists often use the analogy of a contagious disease

to describe this period of adoption – the more people “infected” by the technology, the more

likely that others will also be “infected”. Eventually, few potential adopters remain, as nearly

everyone has adopted the technology, so that the rate of adoption levels off again. Using this

framework, Griliches (1957) noted that the rate of diffusion is at least partially determined by

economic factors, such as the expected rate of return for adoption. Other work using the

epidemic model, such as Mansfield (1968), Davies (1979), and Oster (1982), typically focus on

firm characteristics, such as firm size, to explain variations in the rate of diffusion. The second

approach to studying diffusion is the probit model (David 1969), which focuses on heterogeneity

among firms. These models are the basis for the rank effects described above.

       Recent work on diffusion use duration models to combine features of both of these earlier

methods (e.g. Hannan and McDowell 1984, Rose and Joskow 1990, Karshenas and Stoneman

1993, Kerr and Newell 2003, Snyder et al. 2003). These models begin with the hazard function,

which can be written as:

                                              f (t , Xt , β )
(8)                     h(t , Xt , β ) =
                                           1 − F (t , Xt , β )
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                          12

Here, f is the continuous probability function of a random variable (such as the time to adoption),

F is the cumulative probability function of this variable, Xt is a vector of explanatory variables, β

is the vector of parameters to be estimated, and t represents time. Thus, like the probit model,

adoption depends on individual firm characteristics captured by Xt. By separating the hazard

function into two parts, Karshenas and Stoneman (1993) combine features of the epidemic model

with the hazard model by including a baseline hazard function, h0(t), that does not vary by firm.

Combining the baseline hazard function with a hazard model that varies by firm characteristics

yields a hazard function to be estimated of the form:

(9)                        h(t,Xt,β) = h0(t)exp(Xt′β).

         To estimate equation (9), the baseline hazard h0 must be specified. Various specifications

have been used in the adoption literature.               Among the most common are the exponential,

Weibull, and Gompertz distributions. The exponential distribution assumes the baseline hazard

is constant over time, whereas the others assume that the baseline hazard is a function of time.

Thus, the exponential distribution assumes that learning effects are insignificant. In the results

that follow, the exponential distribution is used.15

         Once the baseline hazard is specified, estimation of equation (9) is completed using

duration data techniques.16 Of particular importance is that, since not every observation ends in

a decision to adopt, the data are censored. That is, we either observe that a plant adopts the

technology, and thus leaves the data, or survives through the data period without adopting. We

15
   I also estimated models using the Weibull and Gompertz distributions. Both the signs and magnitudes of the
knowledge variables change dramatically (and have unrealistic magnitudes) under these specifications, and the
models do not always converge, suggesting that collinearity between the stocks, which grow over time, and the
baseline hazard is a problem when the baseline hazard is a function of time. The results for variables other than
knowledge are unchanged, and remain unchanged even if the knowledge stocks are omitted. Given that the
technologies discussed have been well-known for some time, the assumption that learning effects are small seems
reasonable. The key assumption of such a model is that the remaining explanatory variables capture any time-
varying incentives to adopt. In similar work, Kerr and Newell (2003) find learning effects to be insignificant for the
adoption of isomerization technologies by oil refineries during the U.S. phasedown of leaded gasoline.
16
   For an introduction to duration data see Cox and Oakes (1985), Kiefer (1988), and Lancaster (1990).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                        13

do not know, however, whether the plant will choose to adopt at some future point. Thus, the

likelihood function used considers both adopters (denoted by α) and non adopters (denoted by 1-

α) as follows:

(10)                       L(β) = f (t ; X, β )α (1 − F (t ; X, β ))1−α

A plant contributes to the likelihood function in each year prior to adoption via 1-α, and during

the year of adoption through α. After a plant adopts, it is dropped from the data.

        Equation (7) suggests the variables to include in Xt. However, some modifications are

necessary due to data constraints.             Most importantly, the data set used does not contain

information on the cost of technology, so that Pj is not observed directly. Instead, as I discuss in

section III, the costs of NOX control technologies are plant specific. Thus, plant characteristics

help to control for variations in cost. Moreover, I assume that cost changes over time result from

changes in technology, so that the effects of cost changes over time are picked up by the

knowledge variables. Finally, since expectations of future knowledge are not observed, I use the

current growth rate in knowledge as a proxy.17



III. Data

A. Constructing the Knowledge Stocks

        The main contribution of this paper is to add knowledge stocks to the traditional

empirical models of technology adoption. To construct these stocks, I use counts of patents

granted in the United States. Economists have found that patents, sorted by their date of

application, provide a good indicator of R&D activity (see, for example, Griliches 1990). Unlike

17
  While other work including expectations, such as Karshenas and Stoneman (1993) use the change between current
and future variables to proxy for expectations, doing so here is not possible without removing the last year of data
from the regressions. Since much of the adoption of NOX combustion treatment technologies occurs at the end of
the sample, this is undesirable.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                           14

R&D data, patent counts are available in highly aggregated form. This makes it possible to

distinguish between advances in combustion modification and post-combustion techniques. In

addition, historical records of patent data are available for longer periods than R&D data, making

it possible to construct a complete history of the development of these technologies. Popp

(2005) discusses the advantages and disadvantages of using patent data when studying

environmental technologies.18

         When patents are granted, they are given technology classifications and subclassifications

by various patent offices. These classifications can be used to identify patents pertaining to each

of the technologies described in section I. Relevant patents were identified using the European

Classification System (ECLA).19 Using esp@cenet, the EPO’s on-line database, I obtained a list

of all patent numbers in relevant technology classes granted in the U.S. since 1920. I construct

separate list of patents for combustion modification technologies and post-combustion treatment

technologies.20 Appendix B lists the technology classifications used and their definitions. I

merged these patent numbers with additional data from Delphion’s on-line database and the U.S.

Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) website to obtain descriptive data on these patents, such

as the country of origin and their application date. All patents assigned to U.S. inventors are


18
   Among the disadvantages, note that not all successful innovations are patented, as inventors may choose to forgo
patent protection to avoid disclosing proprietary information. Levin et al (1987) report significant differences in the
propensity to patent across industries. Fortunately, this is less problematic when studying the development of a
single technology than when using patents to study inventive activity across technologies, as the only assumption
needed is that the propensity to patent within the industry has remained similar. Moreover, note that the quality of
individual patents vary greatly. Thus, the results of this paper are best interpreted as the average effect of all
accumulated knowledge, rather than the effect of any specific invention.
19
   The ECLA is based upon the well-known International Patent Classification system (IPC), but provides additional
detail necessary to distinguish between the types of pollution controlled by various technologies. For example, IPC
classification B01D 53/86 includes catalytic processes for pollution control. ECLA class B01D 53/86F2 specifies
catalytic processes for reduction of NOX, and B01D 53/86B4 specifies catalytic processes for reduction of SO2.
Moreover, as new classifications are added, the European Patent Office (EPO) updates the ECLA of older patents in
its database. This is important, as classifications distinguishing pollution control techniques for specific pollutants
were not added until recently.
20
   The database can be found at http://ep.espacenet.com/search97cgi/s97is.dll?Action=FormGen&Template=ep/en/
home.hts
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                              15

considered domestic, and all others are considered foreign patents. Figure 1 shows U.S. and

foreign patent applications for each technology. Of particular importance, note that foreign post-

combustion treatment patents peak in the mid-1970s, after passage of NOX regulations in Japan,

and again in the mid 1980s, after passage of even more stringent NOX regulations in Germany.

         As is traditional in research using patent data, I sort patents by their application year.

Using the application year avoids differences in the length of time it takes to process a patent

application, which varies both over time and across inventors from different countries.

Moreover, the application year tends to corresponds with the date actual inventive activity (see,

for example, Griliches 1990). Because patents were only published in the U.S. upon grant until

2001, no public record exists of unsuccessful U.S. patent applications. Thus, the data only

include patent applications that were subsequently granted. Since many recent applications have

yet to be granted, data for later year are scaled to avoid truncation problems.21

         Using these patent data, I create separate stocks of knowledge for combustion

modification and post-combustion technologies. Within each field, I create separate stocks of

foreign and domestic patents.              I use a rate of decay, represented by β1, to capture the

obsolescence of older patent and a rate of diffusion, β2, to capture delays in the flow of

knowledge. Defining s as the number of years before the current year, the stock of knowledge at

time t for technology j is written as:

                                                 ∞
(11)                                  K j ,t =   ∑ e −β ( s) (1 − e −β ( s+1) ) PAT j ,t −s .
                                                         1             2

                                                 s =0




21
  I do this by first calculating the average grant lag for patents in the data set. Separate scales are created for foreign
and domestic patents. From this, I estimate the percentage of pending patents for each year, and augment the data
by this percentage. This scaling is only significant for patents from 2001 and 2002. However, as we will see below,
these patents receive little weight in the knowledge stocks, as their diffusion process is just beginning.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                             16

The rate of diffusion is multiplied by s+1 so that diffusion is not constrained to be zero in the

current period.        To check whether domestic R&D is needed before adopting foreign

technologies, I also create a stock of patents that interacts domestic patents with foreign

knowledge:

                                                 ∞
(12)                                K INT
                                      j ,t   =   ∑ e −β ( s) (1 − e −β ( s+1) ) PAT jUS,t −s ⋅ K Fj ,t −s−1 .
                                                         1               2

                                                 s =0


The base results presented below use a decay rate of 0.1, and a rate of diffusion of 0.25 for each

stock calculation.22 In previous work, I have used similar knowledge stocks to estimate the

effect of energy-saving technology on industrial energy consumption (Popp 2001) and to

estimate the effect of sulfur dioxide scrubber technology on coal-fired electric plants (Popp

2003).



B. Power Plant Data

         Data on individual power plants comes from the Energy Information Administration

(EIA), the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), and Compustat. I use the results of

an EIA survey of power plants, EIA Form 767, to get information on plant characteristics. This

survey includes data on fuel usage, electricity production, NOX emissions standards, and

pollution control equipment. The survey asks which techniques, if any, have been adopted to

reduce NOX emissions, and lists 11 possible technologies that may be used. Of these, nine

qualify as combustion modification, and two are post-combustion techniques (SCR and SNCR).

In addition to plant characteristics, several studies of diffusion suggest that financial


22
  These rates are consistent with others used in the R&D literature. For example, discussing the literature on an
appropriate lag structure for R&D capital, Griliches (1995) notes that previous studies suggest a structure peaking
between 3 and 5 years. The rates of decay and diffusion used in this paper provide a lag peaking after 4 years.
Appendix A presents sensitivity analysis with respect to the rates of decay and diffusion.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                       17

characteristics of the firm matter. As such, I augment the data from EIA Form 767 with financial

data on individual plants. FERC Form 1 provides this data for plants owned by regulated electric

utilities. EIA Form 412 provides financial data for municipal, federally-owned, and unregulated

entities. Finally, because of shifts in ownership due to deregulation, data from Compustat are

used to obtain financial data of the parent companies for plants owned by private corporations,

such as Entergy or Duke Energy Corporation. The final unit of analysis is individual boilers

within a plant. Each plant contains multiple boilers. These boilers are often of different vintages

and may face different regulations, so that adoption of pollution abatement equipment is not

uniform across boilers at a specific plant. The resulting data set includes observations for 996

coal-fired power plant boilers from 1990-2002.

       Table 1 provides descriptive data for the variables used in the regressions. Two dummy

variables indicate whether a boiler has either combustion modification or post-combustion

treatment technologies to reduce NOX emissions. Figure 2 shows the percentage of boilers with

each technology by year. The first panel shows overall trends, and the remaining panels separate

the data by states that are part of the OTC and NOX SIP call. Note that the percentage of boilers

with combustion modification technologies grows steadily over the period analyzed, from 16

percent in 1990 to 76 percent in 2002.           In comparison, no post-combustion treatment

technologies were adopted until 1992. Most adoption occurs in recent years, as a result of recent

increases in regulatory stringency. This does not simply represent a switch from one technology

to the other, as adoptions of combustion modification technologies also increase at this time. In

fact, about half of the post-combustion installations occur at boilers also using combustion

modification (Popp 2006).     Overall, fewer than 10 percent of boilers use post-combustion

treatment. Usage of post-combustion technologies is greatest in OTC states, where 23 percent of
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                          18

boilers use the technology by 2002. However, there is some adoption of post-combustion

technologies in other states, with 5 percent using post-combustion techniques in SIP states, and 2

percent in states that are neither OTC or SIP states.23

         Descriptive data for the knowledge stocks shows how the value of the stocks faced by

any firm varies throughout the sample period (1990-2002). While mean values of the stocks of

post-combustion patents are higher than for combustion modification, levels across technologies

are not directly comparable, as the number of patents depends on the number of relevant patent

classifications for each technology. Of greater importance is that foreign stocks are, on average,

larger than domestic stocks for post-combustion treatment, but smaller than domestic stocks for

combustion modification. Figure 3 presents the trends in these stocks over time. Finally, to

control for expectations of future knowledge stocks, I include a variable for the growth rate of

each stock, defined as (Kt – Kt-1)/Kt-1. Average growth rates range from 2.8 to 7.7 percent,

depending on the technology and source of the innovation.

         Of the other explanatory variables, perhaps most important are those variables measuring

regulatory levels.       Previous studies of diffusion of environmental technologies show that

regulatory stringency matters (Gray and Shadbegian 1998, Kerr and Newell 2003, Snyder et al.,

2003). Since NOX emissions technologies provide no benefit to the plant other than reducing

emissions, they are of little use unless a boiler is required to reduce NOX emissions. Moreover,

since post-combustion techniques reduce a greater percentage of emissions, but cost more than

combustion modification techniques, the technology chosen should vary depending on regulatory

stringency.

23
  Note that while most plants do install one of these techniques to comply with regulations, EPA rules allow utilities
additional options to comply with federal standards. First, a plant may average the emission rates of two or more
boilers. In the data, this most often appears as older vintage boilers being less likely to use any NOX reduction
techniques. Second, plants can apply for less stringent emission standards if the plant can demonstrate that it
wouldn’t meet the emissions limit using standard NOX reduction techniques (EIA, 1997).
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                              19

         Note that boilers may face regulations at federal, state, and local levels. Form 767

includes the level of the most stringent of these regulations.24 Because standards from various

jurisdictions vary in the units by which they are defined, I include dummy variables for the

presence of three types of regulations. Most common are regulations specifying a maximum

level of NOX emissions per million Btus of fuel burned (lbs/mmBTU). Nearly half of all boiler-

year observations in the sample face such a limit. Other regulation types include pounds per

hour of service (lb/hour) and parts per million of NOX at the stack (ppm at stack). Because each

regulation type has different levels, each regulation type enters the regression separately. In

addition, I create a dummy variable for boilers affected by either the OTC regulations or the

1998 NOX SIP call. In both cases, such boilers face the expectations of tighter regulations in the

future. Thus, boilers facing the need to install new abatement equipment now might invest in

better equipment in anticipation of forthcoming stringent regulations. In addition, recall that

OTC boilers face more stringent regulations during the summer months, beginning in 1999.25,26

         Boiler characteristics considered include details about the boiler and the plant owner’s

finances. Whereas many studies of diffusion include the price of a technology as an explanatory

variable, here costs vary by boiler. Boiler characteristics help to determine the cost of NOX

reduction strategies. For example, coals with higher sulfur content reduce the service life of

catalysts used in SCR units, making SCR more costly for boilers that use high-sulfur coal. As a

result, most SCR units worldwide have been used at boilers burning coal with less than two

percent sulfur content (Wu 2002). Costs also increase with boiler size. To control for the type of

24
   This is important, as it provides variation in the regulations faced by similar boilers in different jurisdictions at a
given point in time.
25
   The OTC standards only apply between May 1 and September 30. As such, they are not included as the standards
reported in the EIA Form 767 database. However, as these (typically) more stringent standards will be relevant for
the adoption decision of boilers, I replace the standard reported in the Form 767 database with the OTC standard if
the OTC standard is more stringent.
26
   While it was part of the OTC commission, Maryland did not join the agreement to reduce emissions until 2000.
As such, the OTC dummy equals 0 for Maryland in 1999.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                                20

boiler used, I include a dummy variable for boilers that use tangential firing.27 I also include

dummy variables for the boiler’s vintage. Vintage is defined based on the year in which the

boiler began service. The vintage dummies control both for the age of the boiler and for any

differences in the construction of boilers from a given era that might affect retrofit costs.28

         Much empirical work on diffusion suggests that firm size is an important influence.

Larger firms have better access to credit and are more likely to be able to afford larger, riskier

investments. As a measure of the plant owner’s finances, I use annual operating revenues of the

plant’s parent utility. After deregulation, ownership of some plants shifts to unregulated entities.

To control for this, I create a dummy variable equal to one if the plant owner’s information

comes from the Compustat database, which is the only database to include unregulated entities.

Because the other databases specifically report operating revenues for electricity generation,

while the Compustat database includes revenues from all sources of diversified companies, the

scale of revenues is different for plants in the Compustat database. Thus, I also interact the

Compustat dummy with revenues. Finally, since the exponential distribution of the hazard

assumes no other learning, it is important to control for any other learning that may take place.

An important source of learning is within-firm experience. Utilities that have experience with a

specific device at other plants may be more likely to install it elsewhere. To control for this, I

define utility experience as the total number of boilers owned by a utility using each technology

in the previous year.




27
   Most U.S. boilers use either tangential-fired or wall-fired boilers. Retrofit costs are higher for tangential-fired
boilers (Wu 2002).
28
   The vintage dummy variables are generally defined in five year intervals, with exceptions for the youngest and
oldest plants, as shown in Tables 2, 3, 5, & 6.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                         21


IV. Estimation

         Using the data described above, I proceed with estimation of the hazard function. I

estimate separate equations for adoption of each technology. To begin, define the following

variables. Ci is a vector of time-invariant boiler characteristics, Xi(t) is a vector of time-varying

boiler characteristics, di,r(t) is a dummy variable equal to one if a boiler has regulation type r at

time (t), Ri,r(t) is the level of regulation type r faced by plant i at time t. OTCi(t) and SIPi(t) are

dummy variables equal to one if the boiler is affected by OTC or SIP regulations. K(t) represents

the respective knowledge stocks for each technology, and k(t) is the growth in each knowledge

stock. The index s below represents the source of knowledge: domestic or foreign. HASCMi(t-1)

and HASPTi(t-1) are dummy variables equal to one if the boiler used the other technology option

in the previous year. These dummies control for the fact that adoption of post-combustion

treatment is less likely for a boiler that already has combustion modification (and vice versa).29

Using these variables, the two hazard functions are:

(13)              hi,CM(t) = f{Ci, Xi(t), di,r(t)Ri,r(t), dr(t), OTCi(t), SIPi(t), KSCM(t), kSCM(t),
                                KSPT(t), kSPT(t), HASPTii(t-1)}

(14)              hi,PT(t) = f{Ci, Xi(t), di,r(t)Ri,r(t), dr(t), OTCi(t), SIPi(t), KSPT(t), kSPT(t),
                                KSCM(t), kSCM(t), HASCMii(t-1)}

As in Kerr and Newell (2003), I normalize all continuous variables so that a one unit change in

the normalized variable is equivalent to a ten percent change from its mean value, so as to aid

interpretation of the effects on the hazard function.30 Because the regressions include repeated

observations on individual boilers, it is unlikely that the error terms are independently and

29
   Although combustion modification techniques do not achieve reductions necessary to meet the most stringent
regulations in isolation, a boiler with existing combustion modification techniques may choose to add a second
combustion modification technique. In combination, these technologies achieve emission reductions comparable to
post-combustion treatment techniques (Wu 2001).
30
   The normalization first divides each continuous variable by its mean, multiplies by 10, and then takes deviations
from the mean by subtracting 10. As in Kerr and Newell (2003), this results in normalized variables that have a
mean of 0. Note that because company experience is a count variable (with many zeros for post combustion
technology), it is not normalized in this fashion.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                        22

identically distributed. As such, robust standard errors are calculated using the Huber/White

correction.

        Before proceeding, two econometric issues need to be addressed. Most importantly, note

that the domestic knowledge stocks are likely endogenous, as they are influenced by the

stringency of U.S. NOX regulations.31 To control for this, I use a two-stage procedure. For

patents applied for between 1990 and 2002, I regress patent applications on federal NOX

emission standards, a dummy for the years in which OTC regulations are in force, lagged values

of the foreign knowledge stock, and a time trend. I then use the predicted values in place of

actual patent counts from 1990-2002 when constructing the stocks.

        Second, note that some boilers adopted combustion modification techniques before the

first year of data availability.         In fact, the first boiler to install combustion modification

techniques in the U.S. did so in 1974. Thus, the likelihood function must control for boilers that

adopt early (that is, that do not survive until 1990) (Cox and Oakes 1985). This adds an

additional term to the likelihood function used to estimate the hazard function for combustion

modification:

(15)                       L(β) = f (t ; X, β)α (1 − F (t ; X, β))1−α F (0; X, β) γ

        Here, α equals 1 for boilers that adopt in year t, conditional on not adopting before. γ

equals 1 for boilers that adopted combustion modification technologies before 1990, and 0

otherwise. Boilers that did not adopt before 1990 contribute to the likelihood function in each

year prior to adoption via 1-α, and during the year of adoption through α. Boilers that did adopt

prior to 1990 contribute through γ. After a boiler adopts, it is dropped from the data.32


31
   Note that Popp (2006) shows that the same is not true for foreign patents for NOX control technologies.
32
   The term F(0;X,β)γ is not needed for post-combustion technology, as the first adoption occurs in 1993. Thus, the
likelihood function described in equation (10) is used for post-combustion technology.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                        23




A. Adoption of Combustion Modification Techniques

       Tables 2 and 3 present regression results for combustion modification technology. The

tables present estimated coefficients from the maximum likelihood regression. To interpret these

coefficients, note that the effect of the hazard ratio for each coefficient is calculated as exp(β).

Table 2 begins with a naïve model, which assumes myopic adoption decisions and ignores the

availability of competing technology. This model, presented in column 1, ignores knowledge

stocks for post-combustion technology and growth in either technology’s knowledge stocks. In

column 2, I consider expectations by adding the growth of combustion modification technology

knowledge. Columns 3 and 4 consider the interaction between domestic and foreign knowledge,

as defined by equation (12), both with and without the growth variables.

       The results suggest that available knowledge has just a small effect on the adoption of

combustion modification techniques. In all cases, a likelihood ratio test of the joint significance

of the knowledge variables rejects the null hypothesis that these coefficients are zero. However,

the magnitude of the effect of knowledge is small. In the base model, both domestic and foreign

technologies have a statistically significant effect on adoption. However, these effects tend to

offset each other, so that the net effect of technology is near zero. While a 10 percent increase in

the stock of domestic knowledge raises the hazard rate by 51 percent, a 10 percent increase in the

stock of foreign knowledge lowers the hazard rate by 43 percent. As expected, expectations of

future technology advances, proxied by the growth rates of knowledge, negatively influence

adoption, although the effect is only significant for domestic knowledge, and only at the ten

percent level. The interaction terms (columns 3 & 4) are significantly positive, and the net effect

of both domestic knowledge is positive.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                             24

         Table 3 presents results that consider the availability of both technologies.                         Here,

however, one adjustment must be made. When including both foreign and domestic stocks of

each technology, multicollinearity is a problem. Thus, in Table 3, only a combined stock,

including both foreign and domestic patents, is used for each technology. Column 1 repeats the

naïve model with just the one knowledge stock. Here, knowledge has almost no effect on

adoption, as the coefficient is insignificant, and the increase in the hazard rate from a ten percent

increase in knowledge is just 1 percent. Adding expectations to the model in column 2, we get

the surprising result that expectations of future technological gains increase the hazard rate. In

addition, the level of knowledge now has a significant positive effect, with a ten percent increase

raising the probability of adoption by 12 percent. Column 3 considers stocks of both combustion

modification and post-combustion treatment. Here, the signs are the reverse of expectations:

increased knowledge for the competing technology encourages more adoption, while increased

combustion modification knowledge decreases adoption. However, the results of column 4

suggest these unexpected results come from a misspecified model. Most importantly, once both

technologies and expectations are considered, both the level and growth of the competing NOX

technology have a negative effect on adoption. In contrast, the level of combustion modification

knowledge has no effect on adoption. This suggests that combustion modification serves as a

“default” technology for firms that must adopt pollution control technology.                           Once better

alternatives are available, the likelihood of adopting combustion modification falls.33

         To help put these results in perspective, it is useful to consider the combined effect of

increases in knowledge during this time frame. Table 4 shows such calculations. The table

presents the average increase in the adoption probability resulting from new knowledge in each

33
 However, it is still the case that expectations of future growth in combustion modification technology increase
adoption. Since the level of technology itself does not affect adoption, this may suggest that expectations capture
expectations of other variables that might influence adoption.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                              25

year for both combustion modification and post combustion technologies.34 For combustion

modification technologies, note that the average net impact of knowledge ranges from just a

0.07% increase to a 3.26% decrease in the likelihood of adoption. In some models, particularly

those without the competing technology, knowledge does have a larger impact in the beginning

of the sample, at which time patent counts for these technologies were highest.

         Turing to other variables, the results are as expected. Moreover, the results for other

variables are consistent across specifications. By far the most important predictor of adoption is

regulatory stringency. Boilers subject to OTC or SIP regulations are twice as likely to adopt

combustion modification technology. Similarly, the presence of lb/mmBTU regulation increases

adoption by a factor of six.35 Note also the negative sign for regulatory levels – adoption is more

likely when fewer emissions are allowed. However, this effect is small. A ten percent more

stringent than average regulation never increases the likelihood of adoption by more than two

percent. That the simple presence of regulation is more important than the level is important

because combustion modification is of less use when regulations are very stringent. Thus, tighter

regulations need not induce additional adoption.

         Turning to boiler characteristics, boilers that already have post-combustion treatment are

seventy percent less likely to adopt combustion modification. This is not surprising, as post-

combustion treatment is both more effective and more expensive. Plants are unlikely to invest in

such technology if it is insufficient to meet regulatory hurdles.                        Company experience is

important. For each additional existing boiler with a combustion modification unit operated by

the utility, the likelihood of adoption at a different boiler increases by four percent. As for other


34
   The calculation is the average of exp(X(t)’β) – exp(X(t-1)’β ), where X is a vector of the relevant technology
variables in each model (including the growth rates), and β is the vector of coefficients.
35
   Results for other types of regulations are similar. Because these affect fewer boilers, they are omitted from the
table to conserve space.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                         26

characteristics, boiler size, sulfur content of coal, and the vintage dummies are significant.

Larger boilers are more likely to adopt combustion modification techniques. In addition, the

probability of adoption generally rises in later vintage years, although it is smallest for boilers

established sine 1996. As shown in the next section, these very new boilers make less use of

combustion modification because they instead install post combustion techniques, which are

state of the art at the time these newest boilers are built. Of particular importance is that all

financial variables are insignificant.     As I discuss with the results for post-combustion

techniques, it is unlikely that this result occurs because many utilities operate in regulated

markets, but rather because it is regulatory pressure that provides the initial impetus for adoption.

Once faced with regulation, plants do not have the option to delay option until conditions are

more favorably financially.



B. Adoption of Post-Combustion Treatment

       Tables 5 and 6 present the results of estimation for post-combustion treatment

technologies.   Once again, Table 5 ignores the availability of competing technology, but

considers both foreign and domestic sources of knowledge separately. Here, some interesting

patterns emerge. Domestic knowledge is insignificant in each model presented in Table 5, and

foreign knowledge is only significant in columns 2 and 4. However, except in column 1, the

joint effect of all knowledge variables is significant (although only at 7 percent in column 3). In

column 3, note that interaction term is strongly significant, and that the net effect of domestic

knowledge is positive in this model. Recall that NOX post-combustion techniques were first

developed and installed abroad. These results suggest that developments made abroad are

important to potential U.S. adopters, but that domestic R&D is necessary to adapt foreign
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                              27

innovations to the U.S. market. This is consistent with results in Popp (2006), which shows that

U.S. post-combustion patents are much more likely to cite foreign patents than other U.S.

pollution control patents, suggesting that these post-combustion patents primarily serve to build

upon foreign innovations. While similar results are also found in the more complete model in

column 4, multicollinearity is a problem. Although the net effect of knowledge is not much

greater for this model (as shown in Table 4), the magnitude of the individual coefficients varies

widely.

          Table 6 presents results for a single knowledge stock for each of the two competing

technologies.       Results are generally as expected, although the results are not as statically

significant as the combustion modification results, as the lower adoption rates result in less

variation in the data. Note also that the joint effect of knowledge is less significant when using

the combined knowledge stock, suggesting that the capturing the variation in the timing of

foreign and domestic knowledge, as in Table 5, is important. Referring to the likelihood ratio

tests at the bottom of Table 6, the joint effect of all knowledge variables is significant at the 10

percent level in columns 1, 2, and 4.36 The combined post-combustion stock increases adoption,

with a 10 percent increase from average levels increasing adoption by 60 percent. Moreover,

expectations of technological advances (column 2) delay adoption. As before, the sign on the

competing knowledge stock in column 3 is reverse of expectations, although insignificant.

However, this problem disappears in the completely specified model in column 4, which

considers both technological alternatives and expectations. Here, advances in post-combustion



36
  That the t-statistic on knowledge in column 1 suggests that the knowledge variable is significant at the five
percent level, while the likelihood ratio test suggests that it is only significant at the 10 percent level, results from
the robustness correction of the standard errors. Because the knowledge variables change over time, but not across
boilers, the robustness correction provides slightly overoptimistic standard errors for the knowledge variables.
In contrast, the log-likelihood statistics, and hence the likelihood ratio tests, are not affected by the robustness
correction.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                       28

technology increase adoption, and advances in combustion modification technology decrease

adoption.     Expected advances in either technology delay adoption, although the effect is

insignificant.

        Finally, note that, compared to combustion modification techniques, knowledge plays a

more important role for post combustion techniques, as shown in Table 4. In the naïve models

(column 1 in each table), technological progress increases adoption by 9 percent each year. This

percentage increases to over 20% in the more complete models.37 In contrast, new knowledge

only increased combustion modification adoption rates by less than one percent per year. The

importance of technological progress for the newer post-combustion technology, but not for the

more established combustion modification techniques, suggest that a competing technology must

evolve sufficiently before plants will choose it over a well-established technology.38

        Turning to other variables, note that once again the coefficients on other variables are

consistent across models. There are, however, several differences between technologies. First,

whether a boiler has or does not have existing combustion modification technologies has no

effect on the adoption of post-combustion control. Indeed, post-combustion techniques can be

paired with combustion modification techniques to increase effectiveness, which may be

necessary to meet strict emissions standards. Moreover, the costs of SCR systems are lower

when combined with combustion modification, as less catalyst is needed if the remaining NOX

concentrations to be removed are lower (Wu 2002). Thus, boilers that had previously installed

combustion modification (perhaps to comply with earlier, less stringent regulations) may still

choose to add a post-combustion device as regulations become stronger. This result suggests an

37
   While the percentage is even higher in the models including growth rates for foreign and domestic knowledge,
large changes in the magnitudes of key parameters in these models suggest multicollinearlity problems.
38
   Lissoni (2000) provides a theoretical model supporting such a conclusion. His paper presents both a theoretical
model and a case study of electronic color pre-press printing equipment that firms may choose older “intermediate”
technologies if new cutting edge technologies do not provide sufficient advantages.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                            29

important lesson for new technologies: to avoid lock-in when developing a new, otherwise

superior technology, it may be helpful to work with existing technologies, rather than simply

serving as a substitute.

         Note that by far the most important of the regulatory variables are the dummy variables

indicating boilers covered by OTC regulations. Boilers affected by OTC regulations are 25-40

times more likely to install post-combustion treatment, and boilers subject to the NOX SIP call

are generally about six times more likely to install post-combustion treatment. This reflects both

the increased stringency required in OTC states beginning in 1999, and expectations of future,

more stringent regulations, as OTC rules specified that NOX standards would be further tightened

in 2003, and the NOX SIP call included stringent regulations beginning in 2004. As a result of

the strong effect of these variables, the effect of other regulations is insignificant.39,40

         Finally, I consider the effect of other boiler characteristics. Company experience is

significant in half of the specifications. Additional experience with post combustion technology

within the parent utility increases the likelihood of adoption by 22 to 36%. Interestingly, the

vintage effects are non-linear. While the oldest boilers are less likely to adopt, the boilers most

likely to adopt post combustion technique are those brought on line during the 1970s or 1990s.

While the increase in the 1990s is likely attributable to technological change, it is more likely

that the increase for boilers from the 1970s stems from the lack of emissions equipment that

would have been in place on these boilers. As such, they may need more advanced technologies

to come into compliance with new NOX regulations. Unlike combustion modification, boilers



39
   Once again, results for other types of regulations are omitted to save space, as these affect few plants. The one
exception to insignificant results is a strong negative effect on “has lb/hour reg,” which is driven by the few boilers
(just 17, representing 157 observations) that have such regulations. Only one boiler adopts post combustion
technology while facing such regulations, and it is also affected by the NOX SIP call when it does.
40
   Other regulatory variables do have significant effects if the OTC and SIP dummy variables are dropped from the
model. Results available from the author by request.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                      30

that use tangential firing are less likely to adopt post-combustion treatment.                  Because of the

large installation costs of post-combustion treatment, the financial strength of plant owners is

also important. A 10 percent increase in revenue increases the hazard rate by about 4 percent.41

In comparison, recall that adoption of combustion modification techniques was not sensitive to

revenue.     Financial strength gives firms the option to invest in better technology, but all

regulated firms must invest in some technology. This is similar to results in Rose and Joskow

(1990), who find that firm size is more important for the adoption of more advanced supercritical

boilers than more conventional units.



V. Conclusions

        This paper examines the adoption of two separate NOX pollution control technologies by

boilers at coal-fired power plants: combustion modification and post-combustion treatment of

emissions. As in previous work on the adoption of environmental technologies, I find that

regulations are the driving force behind adoption. This paper extends the existing literature on

adoption by considering competing technologies and by considering the role of available

knowledge in the adoption decision.

        Of the two technologies considered, combustion modification is cheaper and more well-

established in the U.S. However, it is not as effective as reducing emissions as post-combustion

treatment. Because U.S. NOX regulations only recently caught up with countries such as Japan

and Germany, combustion modification has been the technique of choice in the U.S.                              In

comparison, much early innovation on post-combustion treatment was completed in Japan and

Germany. I find that, even after controlling for increased regulatory stringency over time,


41
  The negative interaction with the Compustat dummy simply controls for larger revenue levels of these plant
owners, who are large, diversified energy corporations, rather than dedicated electric utilities.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                         31

advances in post-combustion technology lead to increased likelihood of adoption. Moreover,

while advances from abroad are important, domestic R&D to adapt foreign innovations is

required. There is some evidence that expectations of future advances slow adoption, although

not all expectation variables are statistically significant. In comparison, because combustion

modification serves as a “default” technology, the state of its available knowledge has little

effect on adoption of combustion modification techniques.

         While the results linking adoption and technological progress should be of interest to a

wide range of economists, the paper also offers additional lessons specific to the field of

environmental economics. In particular, while much attention has been recently paid to links

between environmental policy and technological change, this study suggests two limitations to

the ability of technological change to act as a panacea. First, note that even when a more

advanced technology is available, it will not diffuse without regulatory incentives to do so. For

those concerned with environmental problems in developing problems, this suggests that

diffusion of environmental technology is not independent from the problem of diffusion of

environmental regulations themselves.42 Second, it suggests that technologies developed in one

country may not diffuse to additional countries without additional R&D to adopt the innovation

to local conditions. As this comes with opportunity costs, models that ignore this cost may

overstate the benefits of new technologies.




42
  One caveat is that, for climate change, emission reductions currently focus on reducing combustion of fossil fuels,
rather than cleaning emissions from a smokestack. As such, incentives for diffusion of these technologies exist via
savings in energy costs.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                   32


References

Afonso, Rui, Marika Tatsutani, T.J. Roskelley, and Praveen Amar (2000), “The Regulation of
      NOX Emissions from Coal-Fired Boilers: A Case Study,” in Environmental Regulation
      and Technology Innovation: Controlling Mercury Emissions from Coal-Fired Boilers,
      Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management, Boston, MA.
Balcer, Yves and Steven A. Lippman (1984), “Technological Expectations and Adoption of
       Improved Technology,” Journal of Economic Theory, 34(2), 292-318.
Cohen, Wesley M. and Daniel A. Levinthal (1989), “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of
       R&D,” The Economic Journal, 99, 569-596.
Cox, David R. and David Oakes (1985), Analysis of Survival Data, Chapman and Hall, London.
David, Paul A. (1969), Contribution to the Theory of Diffusion, Stanford Center for Research in
       Economic Growth, Memorandum #71, Stanford University.
Davies, Stephen W. (1979), The Diffusion of Process Innovations, Cambridge University Press,
       Cambridge, U.K.
Energy Information Administration (1997), The Effects of Title IV of the Clean Air Act
      Amendments of 1990 on Electric Utilities: An Update, DOE/EIA-0582(97), U.S.
      Department of Energy, Washington, DC.
Frey, H. Christopher (1995), “Engineering-Economic Evaluation of SCR NOX Control Systems
       for Coal-Fired Power Plants,” Proceedings of the American Power Conference, 57(2),
       1583-1588.
Griliches, Zvi, (1995), “R&D and productivity: econometric results and measurement issues,” in
       Paul L. Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the economics of innovation and technological
       change, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 52–89.
Gray, Wayne B. and Ronald J. Shadbegian (1998), “Environmental Regulation, Investment
      Timing, and Technology Choice,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 235-256.
Griliches, Zvi (1990), “Patent Statistics As Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of
       Economic Literature, 28(4), 1661-707.
Griliches, Zvi (1957), “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration of the Economics of Technological
       Change,” Econometrica, 25, 501-522.
Griffith, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John Van Reenen (2003), “R&D and Absorptive
        Capacity: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 105(1),
        99-118.
Hannan, Timothy H. and John M. McDowell (1984), “The Determinants of Technology
      Adoption: the Case of the Banking Firm,” RAND Journal of Economics, 15(3), 328-335.
Ireland, Norman, and Paul L. Stoneman (1986), “Technological Diffusion, Expectations, and
        Welfare,” Oxford Economic Papers, 38, 283-304.
Jaffe, B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “Technological change and the
        environment,” in K.G.Mäler & J. Vincent (Eds.), Handbook of Environmental
        Economics, (pp. 461-516). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                 33

Karshenas, Massoud and Paul L. Stoneman (1995), “Technological Diffusion,” in ,” in Paul L.
      Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the economics of innovation and technological change,
      Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 265-297..
Karshenas, Massoud and Paul L. Stoneman (1993), “Rank, Stock, Order, and Epidemic Effects
      in the Diffusion of New Process Technologies: An Empirical Model,” RAND Journal of
      Economics, 24(4), 503-528.
Kerr, Suzi and Richard G. Newell, (2003), “Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence
    from the U.S. Lead Phasedown,” Journal of Industrial Economics 51(3),317-343.
Kiefer, Nicholas (1988), “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions,” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 26, 646-679.
Lancaster, Tony (1990), The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data, Cambridge University
       Press, Cambridge, UK.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
      Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-71.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987),
       “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 783-820.
Lissoni, Francesco (2000), “Technological Expectations and the Diffusion of ‘Intermediate’
       Technologies,” Economics of Innovation and New Technologies, 9, 487-515.
Mansfield, Edwin (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation, W.W. Norton,
      New York.
McConville, Alessandra (1997), Emission standards handbook, London: IEA Coal Research.
Oster, Sharon (1982), “The Diffusion of Innovation Among Steel Firms: The Basic Oxygen
       Furnace,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), 45-56.
Popp, David (2006), “International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Control
      Technologies: The Effects of NOX and SO2 Regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany,”
      Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 51(1), January 2006, 46-71.
Popp, David (2005), “Lessons From Patents: Using Patents to Measure Technological Change in
       Environmental Models,” Ecological Economics, 54(2-3), 209-226.
Popp, David (2003), “Pollution Control Innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990,” Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management, 22(4), 641-660.
Popp, David (2001) “The Effect of New Technology on Energy Consumption,” Resource and
      Energy Economics, 23(3), 215-239.
Rose, Nancy L. and Paul L. Joskow (1990), “The Diffusion of New Technologies: Evidence
      From the Electric Utility Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 21(3), 354-373.
Rosenberg, Nathan (1976), “On Technological Expectations,” The Economic Journal, 86, 523-
      535.
Sloss, Lesley L. (2003), Trends in emission standards, London: IEA Coal Research.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                    34

Snyder, Lori D., Nolan H. Miller, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “The Effects of Environmental
       Regulation on Diffusion: The Case of Chlorine Manufacturing,” American Economic
       Review, 93(2), 431-435
Soud, Hermine N. (1991), Emission standards handbook: air pollutant standards for coal-fired
       power plants, London: IEA Coal Research.
Stoneman, Paul L. and Myung-Joong Kwon (1994), “The Diffusion of Multiple Process
      Technologies,” The Economic Journal, 104, 420-431.
Stoneman, Paul L. and Otto Toivanen (1997), “The Diffusion of Multiple Technologies: An
      Empirical Study,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 5, 1-17.
Vernon, Jan L. (1988), Emission standards for coal-fired plants: air pollutant control policies,
      London: IEA Coal Research.
Weiss, Allen M. (1994), “The Effects of Expectations on Technological Adoption: Some
       Empirical Evidence,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 42(4), 341-360.
Wu, Zhangfa (2002), NOX control for pulverized coal fired power stations, London: IEA Coal
      Research.
Wu, Zhangfa (2001), Air pollution control costs for coal-fired power stations, London: IEA Coal
      Research.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                                                         35


                                                         Figure 1 – NOX Pollution Control Patents by Year


                                      60



                                      50
  Number of Successful Applications




                                      40



                                      30



                                      20



                                      10



                                       0
                                       1970      1973    1976      1979     1982        1985     1988       1991      1994      1997       2000
                                                                                          Year

                                                          Combustion Modification: US                   Combustion Modification: Foreign
                                                          Post Combustion: US                           Post Combustion: Foreign




                                           The figure shows all patents granted in the U.S. for each of the two NOX pollution
                                           control technologies. Patents are sorted by their year of application, and only
                                           successfully granted patent applications are included. The data for recent years
                                           are scaled to account for applications not yet processed, as described in footnote
                                           21.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                                    36


      Figure 2 – Percentage of Boilers Adopting NOX Pollution Control Technologies
A. Overall


                           100%

                           90%

                           80%

                           70%
           Percent Using




                           60%

                           50%

                           40%

                           30%

                           20%

                           10%

                            0%
                              1990   1991   1992   1993   1994    1995   1996    1997   1998   1999     2000   2001   2002
                                                                          Year

                                            Post Combustion       Both    Combustion Modification       None


B. OTC States



                           100%

                           90%

                           80%

                           70%
       Percent Using




                           60%

                           50%

                           40%

                           30%

                           20%

                           10%

                            0%
                              1990   1991   1992   1993   1994    1995   1996    1997   1998   1999     2000   2001   2002
                                                                         Year
                                            Post Combustion      Both    Combustion Modification      None
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                               37


C. NOX SIP Call States



                   100%

                   90%

                   80%

                   70%
   Percent Using




                   60%

                   50%

                   40%

                   30%

                   20%

                   10%

                    0%
                      1990   1991   1992   1993   1994    1995   1996    1997   1998       1999    2000   2001   2002
                                                                  Year
                                     Post Combustion      Both    Combustion Modification         None


D. Other States



                   100%

                   90%

                   80%

                   70%
   Percent Using




                   60%

                   50%

                   40%

                   30%

                   20%

                   10%

                    0%
                      1990   1991   1992   1993   1994    1995   1996    1997   1998       1999    2000   2001   2002
                                                                  Year
                                    Post Combustion      Both    Combustion Modification      None


                   The figures show the percentage of boilers who have adopted each NOX control
                   technology by the year on the x-axis.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                               38


                                  Figure 3 – Knowledge Stocks Over Time




           250




           200




           150
  Stocks




           100




            50




             0
             1980   1982   1984     1986      1988     1990          1992      1994       1996    1998     2000      2002
                                                              Year
                    Comb. Mod: US          Comb. Mod: Foreign               NOX Post:US          NOX Post: Foreign




             The figure shows how each knowledge stock varies over time. Note that the
             foreign knowledge stock is generally greater than domestic knowledge for post
             combustion technologies, but that the domestic stock is greater for combustion
             modification. Also, note that both domestic stocks increase soon after passage of
             the 1990 Clean Air Act.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                39


                                        Table 1 – Descriptive Data


 variable                           N          mean           sd          min        median         max
 Dependent Variables:
 Has Comb. Mod.                   12295        0.449        0.497           0            0           1
 Has Post Comb. Treatment         12295        0.016        0.124           0            0           1
 Knowledge Stocks:*
 Comb. Mod: US                     13         92.651        25.439      49.295       100.755       118.615
 Comb. Mod: Foreign                13         51.736        11.257      35.191       51.418        66.191
 Post Comb. Treatment: US          13         171.587       24.566      115.820      185.996       189.365
 Post Comb. Treatment: For.        13         180.386       16.816      146.605      184.770       197.889
 Growth US CM Stock                13          0.077         0.055       0.002        0.077         0.159
 Growth For CM Stock               13          0.059         0.030       -0.001       0.057         0.114
 Growth US PCT Stock               13          0.048         0.056       -0.016       0.027         0.139
 Growth For PCT Stock              13          0.028         0.028       -0.023       0.027         0.083
 Regulations:
 OTC Dummy                        12295        0.037       0.190           0            0             1
 Has lb/mmBTU reg                 12295        0.498       0.500           0             0            1
 lb/mmBTU level**                  6122        0.665       0.394         0.045         0.57         6.600
 Has lb/hour reg                  12295        0.007       0.084           0             0            1
 lb/hour level**                    88        1928.114    1520.604        235         1360          5920
 Has ppm reg                      12295        0.005       0.070           0             0            1
 ppm at stack level**               61         0.476       0.089         0.32         0.500         0.76
 Boiler Characteristics:
 Company Experience: CM           12295        5.762        8.205          0             3           55
 Company Experience: PCT          12295        0.082       0.4269          0             0            5
 % sulfur content of coal         12295        1.224        0.906          0          0.933        13.353
 Capacity (MW)                    12295      1957.375     31144.090        8           200         790400
 Tangential Firing dummy          12295        0.424        0.494          0             0            1
 Revenues (millions)              12295      2519.964     3095.176     13.03074     1619.978      40137.520
 Compustat dummy                  12295        0.043        0.203          0             0            1
 Revenues * Compustat**            531       10320.950    9001.590     442.6078     8862.334      40137.52
 Age of boiler                    12295       31.764       12.133          0            33           69

* -- descriptive statistics from knowledge stocks faced by any firm in a given year (1990-2002)
** -- statistics for positive values only
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                  40
       Table 2 – Regression Results: Adoption of Combustion Modification Technology

 Variable                                            Base            Growth           Interact     Growth & Int.
 Comb. Mod. Knowledge: US                          0.4096            0.6643           -0.0089          -0.5258
                                                   4.5830            4.1917           -0.0730          -1.9438
 Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Foreign                    -0.5695           -1.1486           -1.5920          -1.8472
                                                  -4.4718           -3.2337           -6.2699          -4.3172
 Growth US CM Knowledge                                             -0.0893                             0.0550
                                                                    -1.7247                             0.9392
 Growth Foreign CM Knowledge                                        -0.0173                             0.0588
                                                                    -1.3729                             3.0128
 Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Interact                                                        0.7325           1.2623
                                                                                       4.7361           5.3052
 Company Experience (t-1)                         0.0408            0.0411             0.0408           0.0411
                                                  6.9444            6.6891             6.6060           6.4188
 has PostNOX(t-1)                                -1.2013           -1.2180            -1.2117          -1.2229
                                                 -2.1338           -2.1537            -2.0838          -2.1046
 OTC dummy                                        0.8528            0.8349             0.8021           0.8598
                                                  3.3419            3.1477             2.9949           3.1650
 SIP dummy                                        0.4781            0.4539             0.4098           0.4706
                                                  2.7404            2.4120             2.2339           2.4278
 lb/mmBTU level                                  -0.0202           -0.0204            -0.0210          -0.0215
                                                 -4.2011           -3.9515            -4.2663          -4.0186
 Has lb/mmBTU reg                                 1.7822            1.7948             1.8110           1.8207
                                                  9.5591            8.8450             9.3435           8.5721
 % sulfur content of coal                         0.0111            0.0113             0.0108           0.0105
                                                  1.9547            1.9327             1.8839           1.7886
 Capacity (MW)                                    0.0006            0.0006             0.0006           0.0006
                                                  5.8629            5.8487             5.8568           5.8807
 Tangential Firing dummy                         -0.0337           -0.0510            -0.0451          -0.0429
                                                 -0.2875           -0.3925            -0.3688          -0.3187
 Revenues (millions)                             -0.0098           -0.0096            -0.0091          -0.0095
                                                 -1.2951           -1.2337            -1.1691          -1.2034
 Revenues*Compustat                               0.0026            0.0026             0.0025           0.0026
                                                  2.0611            1.9945             1.9440           1.9708
 Vintage <= 1960                                 -0.5310           -0.5342            -0.5481          -0.5525
                                                 -5.7140           -5.7356            -5.8457          -5.8731
 Vintage 1971-1976                                0.4016            0.4035             0.3904           0.3975
                                                  3.3609            3.3584             3.2376           3.2735
 Vintage 1977-1980                                0.9810            0.9997             0.9869           0.9663
                                                  3.2368            3.2558             3.2364           3.1710
 Vintage 1981-1985                                1.6069            1.7109             1.6380           1.7141
                                                  2.6272            2.1805             2.4540           2.0488
 Vintage 1986-1990                                0.8698            0.6815             0.7819           0.5969
                                                  1.9208            1.2917             1.6318           1.0994
 Vintage 1991-1995                               -1.0291           -0.9836            -1.0319          -1.1139
                                                 -4.9005           -4.2959            -4.2936          -4.1860
 Vintage 1996+                                   -1.1672           -1.2917            -1.4474          -1.4059
                                                 -6.1624           -6.3678            -6.1302          -6.0066
 Constant                                        -3.4647           -3.4591            -3.4477          -3.4745
                                                -27.9746          -25.6712           -27.2047         -24.5222
 Log likelihood                                -1888.967         -1885.596          -1880.559        -1876.263
 Joint significance of knowledge vars: χ2          24.00             30.74              40.81            49.41
 Prob > χ2                                       <0.0001           <0.0001            <0.0001          <0.0001

NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates. Continuous variables normalized as described in footnote 30. N=7,279.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                  41
       Table 3 – Regression Results: Adoption of Combustion Modification Technology

 Variable                                            Base           Growth        Both Techs     Growth & Both
 Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                        -0.0077           0.1133           -0.2214           -0.0394
                                                  -0.2847           2.6425           -2.8191           -0.2524
 Growth All CM Knowledge                                            0.0770                              0.1446
                                                                    3.2866                              3.8508
 NOX Post Knowledge: All                                                               0.4344          -0.5491
                                                                                       2.8124          -2.1217
 Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                                                                         -0.1236
                                                                                                       -5.5213
 Company Experience (t-1)                          0.0416            0.0410            0.0410           0.0401
                                                   7.0323            7.0609            7.0185           6.6859
 has PostNOX(t-1)                                 -1.1132           -1.1631           -1.1457          -1.2083
                                                  -1.9053           -2.0553           -2.0010          -2.0874
 OTC dummy                                         0.5330            0.7579            0.6832           0.9092
                                                   2.1469            3.0125            2.7401           3.4214
 SIP dummy                                         0.1036            0.3687            0.2823           0.5086
                                                   0.6871            2.1772            1.7692           2.7819
 lb/mmBTU level                                   -0.0166           -0.0187           -0.0184          -0.0201
                                                  -3.4308           -3.9255           -3.9265          -4.2778
 Has lb/mmBTU reg                                  1.6485            1.7224            1.7180           1.7644
                                                   8.7122            9.3333            9.4373           9.6295
 % sulfur content of coal                          0.0115            0.0111            0.0114           0.0099
                                                   2.0920            1.9939            2.0534           1.7808
 Capacity (MW)                                     0.0005            0.0005            0.0005           0.0005
                                                   5.6991            5.8064            5.7802           5.8364
 Tangential Firing dummy                          -0.0020           -0.0123           -0.0147          -0.0160
                                                  -0.0176           -0.1076           -0.1299          -0.1392
 Revenues (millions)                              -0.0108           -0.0105           -0.0102          -0.0096
                                                  -1.4289           -1.4058           -1.3566          -1.2746
 Revenues*Compustat                                0.0027            0.0027            0.0026           0.0026
                                                   2.1449            2.1552            2.0790           2.0375
 Vintage <= 1960                                  -0.5402           -0.5318           -0.5341          -0.5536
                                                  -5.7974           -5.7250           -5.7418          -5.8957
 Vintage 1961-1970

 Vintage 1971-1976                                0.3882            0.3990             0.3937            0.3881
                                                  3.2330            3.3350             3.2982            3.2260
 Vintage 1977-1980                                0.9199            0.9418             0.9509            0.9396
                                                  3.1120            3.1639             3.1761            3.1629
 Vintage 1981-1985                                1.5123            1.5477             1.5164            1.5504
                                                  2.5419            2.6777             2.6852            2.6336
 Vintage 1986-1990                                0.7064            0.8332             0.9202            0.8531
                                                  1.5718            1.9095             2.1216            1.9183
 Vintage 1991-1995                               -0.9351           -1.0305            -0.9850           -1.1009
                                                 -5.8910           -5.5895            -5.6499           -4.9297
 Vintage 1996+                                   -1.4088           -1.1379            -1.2531           -1.3104
                                                 -6.1898           -5.6552            -6.2932           -5.5177
 Constant                                        -3.3070           -3.4154            -3.3864           -3.4489
                                                -28.4693          -28.2248           -29.3264          -28.1562
 Log likelihood                                -1900.912         -1894.845          -1896.453         -1884.824
 Joint significance of knowledge vars: χ2          0.110            12.240              9.030            32.280
 Prob > χ2                                         0.742             0.002              0.011           <0.0001


NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates. Continuous variables normalized as described in footnote 30. N=7,279.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                     42


                                               Table 4 – Net Effect of Technology



                         Foreign and Domestic Own Technology                          All Knowledge Both Technologies
Combustion Mod.        Base       Growth     Interact Growth & Int.            Base         Growth   Both Techs Growth & Both
average              -2.20%       -3.26%      0.07%        -2.63%            -0.45%         -2.40%        -0.68%      -0.11%
average 91-96         9.55%       10.93%     11.19%         8.02%            -0.61%          3.75%         4.86%       2.06%
average 97-02       -13.95%      -17.45%    -11.05%       -13.28%            -0.29%         -8.55%        -6.22%      -2.28%
Post Combustion
average               9.45%     41.32%      20.93%          28.71%            9.37%       18.44%       12.97%         20.04%
average 91-96        15.06%     29.14%      14.66%          88.88%           16.42%       14.10%       12.72%         23.50%
average 97-02         3.84%     53.51%      27.19%         -31.46%            2.32%       22.78%       13.22%         16.58%



The table shows the average change in the hazard ratio resulting from changes in the technology variables over time. The
values are the average of the additional contribution from new technology each year. The additional contribution is
calculated as exp(β*X(t)) - exp(β*X(t-1)), where X(t) is a vector of the various technology variables (both levels and
growth rates) in each year.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                  43
    Table 5 – Regression Results: Adoption of Post-Combustion Treatment Technology

Variable                                           Base             Growth           Interact     Growth & Int.
NOX Post Knowledge: US                           0.1213             1.7399           -0.3040          -2.7514
                                                 0.1544             1.1090           -0.3507          -1.6374
NOX Post Knowledge: Foreign                      0.4007             2.6933           -0.7028         -11.2648
                                                 0.3194             1.8039           -0.6236          -2.2966
Growth US NOX Post Knowledge                                        0.5243                             1.4660
                                                                    2.7261                             2.8260
Growth Foreign NOX Post Knowledge                                  -0.2985                             0.1337
                                                                   -2.8811                             0.9594
NOX Post Knowledge: Interact                                                          0.6465          12.1964
                                                                                      2.5820           2.5844
Company Experience(t-1)                          0.3081             0.2652            0.2063           0.2977
                                                 2.0563             1.7503            1.4035           1.9595
has Combustion Modification(t-1)                -0.1338            -0.1737           -0.1795          -0.2238
                                                -0.4379            -0.5593           -0.5795          -0.7543
OTC dummy                                        3.4979             3.2113            3.3610           3.3431
                                                 6.2325             5.6324            6.1558           5.5336
SIP dummy                                        1.7633             1.3883            1.5295           1.4860
                                                 3.9713             3.1871            3.5851           3.1375
lb/mmBTU level                                   0.0186             0.0186            0.0192           0.0188
                                                 1.3914             1.4947            1.5837           1.4778
Has lb/mmBTU reg                                -0.3609            -0.3950           -0.4463          -0.3879
                                                -0.7105            -0.7918           -0.9055          -0.7967
% sulfur content of coal                         0.0050             0.0049            0.0032           0.0050
                                                 0.3500             0.3263            0.2120           0.3414
Capacity (MW)                                   -0.0016            -0.0015           -0.0015          -0.0015
                                                -3.2721            -3.2369           -3.2874          -3.1985
Tangential Firing dummy                         -1.2216            -1.2131           -1.2143          -1.1922
                                                -3.5366            -3.5172           -3.5315          -3.4549
Revenues (millions)                              0.0352             0.0371            0.0370           0.0357
                                                 1.9309             2.0310            2.0213           1.9702
Revenues*Compustat                              -0.0051            -0.0058           -0.0055          -0.0059
                                                -1.6124            -1.7479           -1.6731          -1.7483
Vintage <= 1960                                 -0.5029            -0.5275           -0.5215          -0.5554
                                                -1.3465            -1.3959           -1.3802          -1.4660
Vintage 1961-1970

Vintage 1971-1976                                1.0845            1.0801             1.0791            1.0779
                                                 2.9386            2.9562             2.9441            2.9513
Vintage 1977-1980                                1.2026            1.1923             1.2055            1.2073
                                                 2.5591            2.5127             2.5453            2.5348
Vintage 1981-1985                                0.5610            0.5415             0.5738            0.5570
                                                 0.8464            0.8124             0.8619            0.8418
Vintage 1986-1990                                0.1339            0.1283             0.1404            0.1434
                                                 0.1303            0.1240             0.1352            0.1387
Vintage 1991-1995                                0.8111            0.8339             0.8466            0.7434
                                                 0.9193            0.9935             0.9583            0.9172
Vintage 1996+                                    2.5061            2.0918             2.1123            2.0236
                                                 3.2205            2.3897             2.4010            2.6437
Constant                                        -6.2196           -6.8264            -6.1478           -6.6928
                                               -14.6788          -11.1542           -14.6501          -12.8244
Log likelihood                                 -130.213          -122.952           -128.298          -117.881
Joint significance of knowledge vars: χ2            3.30            17.83                7.13            27.97
Prob > χ2                                        0.1917            0.0013             0.0678           <0.0001
NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates. Continuous variables normalized as described in footnote 30. N=12,156.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                                  44
     Table 6 – Regression Results: Adoption of Post-Combustion Treatment Technology

 Variable                                           Base            Growth        Both Techs     Growth & Both
 NOX Post Knowledge: All                          0.4700            0.0406            0.0047            1.8246
                                                  2.2933            0.1741            0.0092            2.0200
 Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                                     -0.0580                             -0.1163
                                                                   -2.1647                             -1.5820
 Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                                            0.2340           -1.2361
                                                                                      0.7986           -1.9557
 Growth All CM Knowledge                                                                               -0.1230
                                                                                                       -0.8607
 Company Experience(t-1)                          0.3054            0.2188            0.2731            0.2064
                                                  2.0646            1.4853            1.7950            1.4016
 has Combustion Modification(t-1)                -0.1362           -0.1697           -0.1433           -0.1920
                                                 -0.4530           -0.5535           -0.4753           -0.6238
 OTC dummy                                        3.5375            3.4162            3.3787            3.6468
                                                  6.7688            6.5627            6.7268            6.0146
 SIP dummy                                        1.8036            1.6024            1.6079            1.8286
                                                  5.1506            4.6732            4.2442            3.5953
 lb/mmBTU level                                   0.0185            0.0190            0.0191            0.0183
                                                  1.3630            1.5202            1.4768            1.4006
 Has lb/mmBTU reg                                -0.3551           -0.4282           -0.4033           -0.3884
                                                 -0.7057           -0.8727           -0.8002           -0.7498
 % sulfur content of coal                         0.0049            0.0033            0.0046            0.0027
                                                  0.3369            0.2143            0.3072            0.1786
 Capacity (MW)                                   -0.0016           -0.0015           -0.0015           -0.0016
                                                 -3.2718           -3.2900           -3.2852           -3.2814
 Tangential Firing dummy                         -1.2227           -1.2161           -1.2172           -1.2205
                                                 -3.5455           -3.5376           -3.5262           -3.5370
 Revenues (millions)                              0.0352            0.0367            0.0357            0.0373
                                                  1.9197            1.9914            1.9329            2.0102
 Revenues*Compustat                              -0.0051           -0.0054           -0.0052           -0.0055
                                                 -1.6114           -1.6563           -1.6177           -1.6693
 Vintage <= 1960                                 -0.5036           -0.5182           -0.5080           -0.5270
                                                 -1.3499           -1.3764           -1.3553           -1.4022
 Vintage 1961-1970

 Vintage 1971-1976                                1.0848            1.0795            1.0810            1.0814
                                                  2.9328            2.9391            2.9446            2.9349
 Vintage 1977-1980                                1.2036            1.2054            1.2009            1.2150
                                                  2.5431            2.5283            2.5413            2.5454
 Vintage 1981-1985                                0.5632            0.5733            0.5606            0.5901
                                                  0.8439            0.8543            0.8403            0.8829
 Vintage 1986-1990                                0.1359            0.1401            0.1297            0.1584
                                                  0.1321            0.1349            0.1256            0.1524
 Vintage 1991-1995                                0.8099            0.8409            0.8266            0.8372
                                                  0.9170            0.9507            0.9378            0.9490
 Vintage 1996+                                    2.5190            2.2038            2.3381            2.2821
                                                  3.2309            2.5423            2.8097            2.6867
 Constant                                        -6.2319           -6.1673           -6.1702           -6.3297
                                                -13.9225          -13.9722          -14.3213          -15.0211
 Log likelihood                                 -130.224          -128.907          -129.877          -127.962
 Joint significance of knowledge vars: χ2            3.28              5.92              3.98              7.81
 Prob > χ2                                        0.0700            0.0519            0.1370            0.0990

NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates. Continuous variables normalized as described in footnote 30. N=12,156.
 Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                        A1


                        Appendix A – Knowledge Stock Sensitivity Analysis

         In this appendix, I examine the sensitivity of the regression results to changes in the rates

 of decay and diffusion used to calculate the knowledge stock. I focus on interpretation of the

 knowledge variables, as there are no significant changes to the parameters of other variables

 when the rates of decay and diffusion are changed. In addition to the base rates of decay = 0.1

 and diffusion = 0.25, I consider three alternative sets of decay and diffusion rates. To aid in

 interpreting these rates, I also note the number of years it takes for a patent to have its maximum

 effect on the stock under each set of assumptions. For comparison, patents have their maximum

 effect after 4 years using the base rates.

             •   decay = 0.25, diffuse = 0.5 (peak = 1 year)

             •   decay = 0.05, diffuse = 0.5 (peak = 4 years)

             •   decay = 0.05, diffuse = 0.1 (peak = 10 years)

         Tables A1 – A4 present the estimates for the knowledge stock coefficients for each of the

model specifications.    Note that there are few changes in sign or significance of individual

parameters. Most of the changes that do occur are in the model including growth rates of both

foreign and domestic knowledge stocks.          As noted in footnote 37, the results suggest that

multicollinearity is a problem for this specification. Other than that, only the model assuming fast

diffusion differs much from the base results.

         Table A5 presents the tests for joint significance of the knowledge variables.           For

combustion modification, these results are also unchanged across the various assumptions of decay

and diffusion. For the post combustion technologies, the alternative assumptions about decay and

diffusion increase the joint significance of the knowledge variables. This result is particularly

striking for the slowest diffusion assumption. However, slower diffusion of the post-combustion
 Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                      A2

techniques occurs because the U.S. adopted stringent NOX regulations more slowly than other

countries. The base case decay and diffusion are chosen to be consistent with other studies in the

literature of knowledge flows. As regulatory differences appear to be the main influence on

adoption, there is no theoretical reason to a priori impose slower rates of decay and diffusion on

the spread of knowledge itself.

         To better interpret the differences, Table A6 reproduces the net technology effects shown

in Table 5 of the main text for each of the decay and diffusion assumptions. Comparing the

magnitude of the net effects is important, as the magnitude of the coefficients vary in part because

the magnitude of the stocks themselves varies as the rates of decay and diffusion are changed.

Here, we see a few cases where the effect of knowledge varies. One, as discussed before, is in the

model including growth rates for both domestic and foreign technology. A second is in the model

using only the overall technology level for NOX post combustion. Here, the average net effect of

technology ranges from 2.5% with rapid diffusion to 19.0% with slow diffusion. However, these

differences are smaller in the more complete models for this technology, with a range of 11.5%-

26.2% in the most complete model.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                               A3


   Table A1 – Parameter Sensitivity: Adoption of Combustion Modification Technology

                                                                            Growth &
    Variable                                  Base     Growth    Interact        Int.
    Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: US                 0.4096     0.6643   -0.0089     -0.5258
                                             4.5830     4.1917   -0.0730     -1.9438
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Foreign           -0.5695    -1.1486   -1.5920     -1.8472
                                            -4.4718    -3.2337   -6.2699     -4.3172
    Growth US CM Knowledge                             -0.0893                0.0550
                                                       -1.7247                0.9392
    Growth Foreign CM Knowledge                        -0.0173                0.0588
                                                       -1.3729                3.0128
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Interact                               0.7325       1.2623
                                                                 4.7361       5.3052
    Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: US                 0.1584     0.0848    0.1360     -0.6059
                                             4.3701     2.2499    1.5415     -3.3001
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Foreign           -0.2305    -0.4813   -0.2499     -0.8124
                                            -4.5367    -5.5204   -2.9064     -6.7789
    Growth US CM Knowledge                             -0.0401                0.0116
                                                       -3.5451                0.6620
    Growth Foreign CM Knowledge                         0.0192                0.0302
                                                        5.4349                6.6773
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Interact                               0.0251       0.8371
                                                                 0.2789       3.8551
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: US                 0.4467     0.5973    0.0045     -0.3887
                                             4.6168     4.3013    0.0309     -1.5586
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Foreign           -0.5781    -0.9378   -1.6023     -1.9445
                                            -4.7434    -3.5383   -5.5096     -5.7183
    Growth US CM Knowledge                             -0.0773                0.0325
                                                       -1.6804                0.6329
    Growth Foreign CM Knowledge                         0.0015                0.0618
                                                        0.0947                3.0401
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Interact                               0.7601       1.2237
                                                                 3.9150       4.8677
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10 (peak = 10)
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: US                  0.7989    1.5793    1.0946      0.7232
                                              3.4632    2.6671    4.0552      1.1377
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Foreign            -0.9660   -2.0503   -2.3449     -3.3775
                                             -3.5200   -2.5750   -3.3869     -3.8777
    Growth US CM Knowledge                             -0.0826                0.1856
                                                       -1.0548                1.7666
    Growth Foreign CM Knowledge                        -0.1372               -0.0441
                                                       -2.1434               -0.6430
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: Interact                               0.4943       1.2564
                                                                 2.1970       3.7259
   NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                              A4


   Table A2 – Parameter Sensitivity: Adoption of Combustion Modification Technology

                                                                            Growth &
    Variable                                  Base    Growth   Both Techs       Both
    Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All               -0.0077   0.1133      -0.2214    -0.0394
                                            -0.2847   2.6425      -2.8191    -0.2524
    Growth All CM Knowledge                           0.0770                  0.1446
                                                      3.2866                  3.8508
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                                       0.4344     -0.5491
                                                                  2.8124     -2.1217
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                                            -0.1236
                                                                             -5.5213
    Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 0.0160    0.1314      0.0043      0.0462
                                            0.6025    3.5164      0.1564      0.8520
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     0.0275                  0.0514
                                                      4.2532                  5.6282
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                     0.1418     -0.0752
                                                                  1.9058     -0.7717
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                  -0.0003
                                                                             -4.5481
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 -0.0093   0.1598      -0.3397     0.0606
                                            -0.4001   3.3429      -2.9427     0.3365
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     0.1141                  0.1385
                                                      4.0065                  3.7688
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                     0.5915     -0.6115
                                                                  2.9141     -1.9342
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                  -0.1485
                                                                             -4.0844
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 -0.0152   0.0794      -0.4933    -0.8599
                                            -0.7041   2.1241      -3.2704    -2.3277
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     0.1401                  0.0586
                                                      3.1082                  0.6332
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                     0.6679     -0.6636
                                                                  3.2032     -1.4144
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                  -0.8332
                                                                             -5.4745


   NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                              A5


 Table A3 – Parameter Sensitivity: Adoption of Post Combustion Treatment Technology

                                                                           Growth &
    Variable                                  Base    Growth    Interact        Int.
    Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
    NOX Post Knowledge: US                  0.1213     1.7399   -0.3040     -2.7514
                                            0.1544     1.1090   -0.3507     -1.6374
    NOX Post Knowledge: Foreign             0.4007     2.6933   -0.7028    -11.2648
                                            0.3194     1.8039   -0.6236     -2.2966
    Growth US NOX Post Knowledge                       0.5243                1.4660
                                                       2.7261                2.8260
    Growth Foreign NOX Post Knowledge                 -0.2985                0.1337
                                                      -2.8811                0.9594
    NOX Post Knowledge: Interact                                0.6465      12.1964
                                                                2.5820       2.5844
    Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: US                   0.4614    0.4240   -1.0520     -6.3287
                                             1.6911    1.4183   -1.1753     -2.0715
    NOX Post Knowledge: Foreign             -0.7721   -0.1038   -0.9341     -4.2932
                                            -3.4581   -0.1571   -3.2068     -1.9448
    Growth US NOX Post Knowledge                      -0.0058                0.0422
                                                      -1.4224                1.9075
    Growth Foreign NOX Post Knowledge                  0.0075               -0.0245
                                                       0.7165               -1.1778
    NOX Post Knowledge: Interact                                1.5568       7.0101
                                                                1.7490       2.2116
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: US                   0.6771    5.0620    0.0875      1.7010
                                             0.7774    2.1702    0.0986      1.0829
    NOX Post Knowledge: Foreign             -0.2041   -0.9501   -1.4396    -14.1589
                                            -0.1792   -0.6356   -1.2778     -2.6024
    Growth US NOX Post Knowledge                       0.7417                1.4567
                                                       2.9442                2.8115
    Growth Foreign NOX Post Knowledge                 -0.2694                0.3628
                                                      -2.9805                1.6174
    NOX Post Knowledge: Interact                                0.7892      10.3545
                                                                2.7455       2.4988
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
    NOX Post Knowledge: US                  -2.2509    6.5756   -2.5364     20.9624
                                            -1.0889    1.3247   -0.9021      2.7855
    NOX Post Knowledge: Foreign              3.1254    1.9021    3.7930    -26.9161
                                             1.2136    0.4729    0.8491     -2.2536
    Growth US NOX Post Knowledge                       3.5710                6.6223
                                                       2.9524                2.9990
    Growth Foreign NOX Post Knowledge                 -0.5089                1.5331
                                                      -2.0662                1.9097
    NOX Post Knowledge: Interact                                -0.1314     10.1576
                                                                -0.2635      2.3429
   NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                               A6


 Table A4 – Parameter Sensitivity: Adoption of Post Combustion Treatment Technology

                                                                             Growth &
    Variable                                  Base    Growth    Both Techs       Both
    Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 0.4700     0.0406      0.0047      1.8246
                                            2.2933     0.1741      0.0092      2.0200
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     -0.0580                 -0.1163
                                                      -2.1647                 -1.5820
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                      0.2340     -1.2361
                                                                   0.7986     -1.9557
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                   -0.1230
                                                                              -0.8607
    Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 -0.2270    0.3846      -0.2854     0.5948
                                            -1.2782    1.2452      -1.3189     1.5420
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     -0.0004                 -0.0006
                                                      -2.8677                 -3.3041
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                      0.0760     -0.1714
                                                                   0.7865     -0.8644
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                    0.0229
                                                                               0.6418
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 0.5476     0.1612      1.4325      4.7510
                                            2.2916     0.4882      1.6780      1.6422
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     -0.0641                 -0.2458
                                                      -1.4831                 -1.5402
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                      -0.4431    -2.8908
                                                                   -0.9392    -1.8296
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                   -0.1036
                                                                              -0.7243
    Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
    NOX Post Knowledge: All                 0.3664    0.5204       0.5033      3.6675
                                            2.4366    1.0013       0.7065      2.1027
    Growth All NOX Post Knowledge                     0.0630                   0.0755
                                                      0.3145                   0.1899
    Comb. Mod. Knowledge: All                                      -0.0889    -2.6208
                                                                   -0.1771    -1.6119
    Growth All CM Knowledge                                                   -0.5898
                                                                              -1.6156


   NOTES: T-stats appear below estimates.
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                    A7


                           Table A5 – Joint Significance of Knowledge Variables: Sensitivity Analysis

                            Foreign and Domestic Own Technology                     All Knowledge Both Technologies
Combustion Mod.           Base       Growth      Interact Growth & Int.    Base         Growth    Both Techs   Growth & Both
Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
LR chi2                   24.00        30.74       40.81         49.41       0.11       12.24          9.03           32.28
Prob > chi2            <0.0001      <0.0001     <0.0001       <0.0001     0.7419       0.0022         0.011         <0.0001
Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
LR chi2                   22.67        53.92       22.75         68.98       0.36       19.59          4.10           40.91
Prob > chi2            <0.0001      <0.0001     <0.0001       <0.0001     0.5464       0.0001        0.1289         <0.0001
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
LR chi2                   22.98          27.1      37.56         49.81      0.16        16.48          8.89           32.98
Prob > chi2            <0.0001      <0.0001     <0.0001       <0.0001      0.689       0.0003        0.0117         <0.0001
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
LR chi2                   13.05        18.91       17.78         32.32        0.5       10.32         11.08           41.13
Prob > chi2             0.0015        0.0008      0.0005      <0.0001     0.4806       0.0057        0.0039         <0.0001
Post Combustion
Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
LR chi2                    3.30        17.83         7.13        27.97      3.28          5.92         3.98            7.81
Prob > chi2             0.1917        0.0013      0.0678      <0.0001       0.07       0.0519         0.137           0.099
Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
LR chi2                    6.49          8.24      10.19         14.04       1.27         6.93         1.59             9.16
Prob > chi2               0.039       0.0832       0.017        0.0154    0.2606       0.0313         0.451          0.0572
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
LR chi2                    5.73        18.82         8.63        28.41       5.53         6.41          6.13          11.49
Prob > chi2             0.0569        0.0009      0.0346      <0.0001     0.0186       0.0406        0.0466          0.0216
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
LR chi2                    8.03        26.38         8.07        33.55       6.34         6.38          6.35            8.14
Prob > chi2               0.018     <0.0001       0.0446      <0.0001     0.0118       0.0412        0.0417          0.0866
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                A8


                                    Table A6 – Net Effect of Technology: Sensitivity Analysis
                             Foreign and Domestic Own Technology                     All Knowledge Both Technologies
Combustion Mod.           Base      Growth      Interact    Growth & Int.    Base    Growth      Both Techs       Growth & Both
Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
average                 -2.20%      -3.26%        0.07%           -2.63%    -0.45%   -2.40%         -0.68%              -0.11%
average 91-96            9.55%      10.93%     11.19%              8.02%    -0.61%    3.75%          4.86%               2.06%
average 97-02          -13.95%     -17.45%    -11.05%            -13.28%    -0.29%   -8.55%         -6.22%              -2.28%
Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
average                   0.7%        -5.6%        1.1%            -3.3%      0.5%    -5.1%           -0.8%              -2.3%
average 91-96             8.7%         2.5%        8.6%            -2.4%      1.4%     0.4%            3.4%              -0.3%
average 97-02            -7.3%      -13.6%        -6.4%            -4.1%     -0.4%   -10.6%           -5.1%              -4.3%
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
average                  -1.6%        -3.5%        0.9%            -2.5%     -0.6%    -2.8%           -0.3%              -0.6%
average 91-96             9.7%       10.3%        11.1%             8.0%     -0.7%     3.5%            4.6%               2.4%
average 97-02           -13.0%      -17.2%        -9.2%           -13.1%     -0.4%    -9.1%           -5.2%              -3.6%
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
average                  -3.0%        -1.4%       -4.1%            -0.6%     -1.1%    -2.0%           -1.1%              -1.9%
average 91-96             5.3%         8.9%        4.1%             9.7%     -1.1%     4.3%            5.6%               0.5%
average 97-02           -11.2%      -11.7%       -12.4%           -11.0%     -1.0%    -8.4%           -7.8%              -4.3%
Post Combustion
Decay = 0.1, Diffuse = 0.25
average                  9.45%      41.32%     20.93%             28.71%     9.37%   18.44%         12.97%             20.04%
average 91-96           15.06%      29.14%     14.66%             88.88%    16.42%   14.10%         12.72%             23.50%
average 97-02            3.84%      53.51%     27.19%            -31.46%     2.32%   22.78%         13.22%             16.58%
Decay = 0.25, Diffuse = 0.5
average                   8.6%       15.5%        20.6%            24.4%     2.5%     17.0%           6.2%               11.5%
average 91-96            14.9%       23.7%        33.9%            34.3%    -5.2%     23.0%           0.5%               20.0%
average 97-02             2.2%         7.3%        7.3%            14.5%    10.1%     11.0%          11.9%                3.1%
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.5
average                  15.4%       40.8%        23.1%            29.9%    15.4%     19.4%          13.4%               26.2%
average 91-96            22.1%       40.7%        20.0%            86.2%    17.0%     15.5%          22.1%               41.1%
average 97-02             8.7%       41.0%        26.2%           -26.4%    13.9%     23.3%           4.7%               11.3%
Decay = 0.05, Diffuse = 0.10
average                  21.7%       66.8%        21.5%            43.9%    19.0%     18.6%          18.8%               19.9%
average 91-96             2.2%       55.8%         2.0%           278.9%    13.4%     14.1%          14.4%               16.4%
average 97-02            41.3%       77.9%        41.0%          -191.0%    24.6%     23.2%          23.1%               23.4%
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                  B1


          Appendix B – Patent Classifications Used for Each Control Technology

European Classifications for Pollution Control Patents

Nitrogen Dioxide pollution control
       Combustion Modification
       F23C 6/04B       MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                        WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
                        characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
                        chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
                        enclosure]
       F23C 6/04B1      MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                        WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
                        characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
                        chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
                        enclosure]/ [N: with fuel supply in stages]
       F23C 9           MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                        WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus with
                        arrangements for recycling or recirculating combustion products or
                        flue gases

       Post-Combustion
       B01D 53/56      PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                       CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                       SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                       of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                       waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                       aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                       components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen oxides
       B01D 53/56D     PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                       CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                       SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                       of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                       waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                       aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                       components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen
                       oxides/[N: by treating the gases with solids]
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                               B2

      B01D 53/60    PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                    CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                    SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                    of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                    waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                    aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                    components of defined structure/Simultaneously removing sulfur
                    oxides and nitrogen oxides
      B01D 53/86F2  PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                    CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                    SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                    of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                    waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                    aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
                    processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
                    specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
                    compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/
      B01D 53/86F2C PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                    CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                    SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                    of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                    waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                    aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
                    processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
                    specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
                    compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/[N: Processes characterised by a
                    specific catalyst]
      B01D 53/86F2D PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                    CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                    SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                    of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                    waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                    aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
                    processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
                    specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
                    compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides [N: Processes characterised by a
                    specific device]
      B01D 53/86G   PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                    CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                    SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                    of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                    waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                    aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
                    processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
                    specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ [N: Simultaneously
                    removing sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides]
Adoption of NOX Control Technologies at U.S. Power Plants                                   B3

      B01J 29/06D2E     PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                        CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                        CHEMICAL OR PHYSICAL PROCESSES, e.g. CATALYSIS,
                        COLLOID CHEMISTRY; THEIR RELEVANT APPARATUS/
                        Catalysts comprising molecular sieves/ having base-exchange
                        properties, e.g. crystalline zeolites/ Crystalline aluminosilicate
                        zeolites; Isomorphous compounds thereof/ [N: containing metallic
                        elements added to the zeolite]/ [N: containing iron group metals, noble
                        metals or copper]/ [N: Iron group metals or copper]
