                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  LEARNING FROM OTHER ECONOMIES: THE UNIQUE
               INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY EXPERIMENTS DOWN UNDER

                                           Richard B. Freeman

                                          Working Paper 12116
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12116


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Richard B. Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning from Other Economies: The Unique Institutional and Policy Experiments Down Under
Richard B. Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 12116
March 2006
JEL No.

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper argues that detailed studies of particular economies, such as Bob Gregory’s work on
Australia, are relevant to all of economics. The paper builds on the concept of a model species from
biology to develop the notion of a model economy – one whose experiences illuminate fundamental
economic issues; examines the criterion for an economy to serve as a model economy; and describes
three areas – labour relations and the awards system of wage-setting, marketizing public services and
growth through immigration and natural resources – where Australian experience provides insights
into economic behaviour and the operation of markets broadly.

Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
freeman@nber.org
                                                                                      3
       Why should anyone outside of New Zealand or outside the circle of

friends of Bob Gregory be interested in the Australian economy? It’s far away

from the real world of the US, Europe, Japan, and from the growth economies of

Asia. With just 0.3% of the world’s population and 1.1% of world output,

Australia is a small player in the world economy. It has natural resources but not

the oil that fuels global economic activity and pollutes the planet.

       In this paper I argue that there are good reasons for economists to concern

themselves with Australian economic developments even if they live far from the

Antipodes and have never talked shop at Australian National University.

Australia does enough things differently than other economies, such as the awards

system of wage-setting, the income contingent mode of funding higher education,

and privatizing public employment services, to provide insights into economic

behaviour and the operation of markets that are otherwise difficult to identify. To

the extent that the economic behaviour of people is comparable across countries,

what we find in Australia can be generalized more broadly.

       My argument has three parts. First, I build on the concept of a model

species from biology, where analysts have thought deeply about generalizing

findings from one species to others, to develop the notion of a model economy –

one whose experiences illuminate fundamental economic issues and institutional

and policy choices in other economies. Second, I examine the criterion necessary

for an economy, such as Australia’s, to serve as a model economy, and for the

generalizability of particular findings. Section III examines economic areas in

which Australia would seem to be a model economy, deserving detailed attention
                                                                                         4
from the rest of the world. Since Bob Gregory’s work has focused almost

exclusively on the Australian economy, I view the paper as an examination of the

validity of a country-specific “Gregorian” approach to economic research.



                  I. Learning from Model Species Economies

       Almost everything we know about the fundamental properties of
       living cells – how they grow and divide, how they express their
       genetic information, and how they use and store information – has
       come from the study of model organisms. – Fields and Johnston,
       2005
       Most biologists spend their scientific lives studying particular species –

slugs, bacteria, flies, yeast, squid, zebra fish, mustard plants, mice, etc – known as

model species or organisms. Biologists dedicate themselves to a particular

species not because they have a weird fetish for that creature but because that

species provides exceptional insight into some fundamental biological issue.

Mendel’s peas opened the door to the genetics of inheritance that no other

organism might have done. The fruit fly allowed Morgan and others to locate

mutations on genes and to examine how mutations affect phenotypes and recently

for Bender to illuminate the genetics of behaviour. The giant axon of the squid

Loligo pealei makes it a model for studies of nerve functions. The transparent

body of the zebra fish allows scientists to see the operation of its internal organs.

Mice are a model for diseases that affect humans because mice have an

immunological system and contract some human diseases. And so on.1

i. Attributes of a Model
                                                                                     5
       Biologists highlight four factors in determining whether a species becomes

a model organism, studied by hundreds or thousands of researchers around the

world, or lives a life of quiet obscurity2: 1) the tractability of researching the

species, which depends on accessibility, the ease of experimenting on it and the

cost of maintaining it with extant laboratory technology;3 2) the presence of some

distinct feature(s) that allows researchers to make outstanding/speedy progress in

a significant line of inquiry; 3) the potential for generalizing findings to other

creatures, particularly to humans;4 4) the cumulated knowledge about the species,

which creates (in our lingo) economies of scale or agglomeration effects in

research.5

       The parallel in economics for experimental tractability is the availability

of reliable data on economic behaviour. When Simon Kuznets developed

national income accounts in the 1920s, the critical data need was for reliable

statistics on sales and income to show how the aggregate economy was

performing. Today the data go far beyond national accounts and measures of

economic aggregates to include diverse micro data on individuals and firms, such

as: longitudinal information on employees or employers; matched employer-

employee files over time; time budget studies; data on patents and R&D;

measures of individual health and biological markers linked to wages,

employment, and other outcomes; measures of workplace practices and

productivity; and so on. The French and Scandinavians have been particularly

good in developing matched longitudinal employee-employer data files (Abowd

and Kramarz, 1999). The Scandinavians have good data relating biological
                                                                                         6
measures, such as birth weight, to future outcomes. The UK has exceptional data

on labour practices at workplaces in the form of the Workplace Employment

Relation Surveys.

       Ready availability of the standard labour force or firm survey data files

that countries use to measure the state of an economy is also important. Nearly

every country conducts censuses and surveys of businesses and residents. But

most limit access to these data. A model economy should ideally provide

downloadable data over the Internet, so that researchers around the world can

study its workings. The University of Minnesota PUMS project that makes US

Census files freely available on the Internet and the US Bureau of the Census’s

provision of Current Population Survey files to researchers (most easily

downloadable from NBER) have sparked work on the US using those particular

sources of information.

       For its part, Australia has an excellent body of statistics for analysis of the

labour market, ranging from cross-section surveys to longitudinal surveys (Le and

Miller, 1998; Marks and Rothman, 2003), including a unique longitudinal survey

of immigrants (Cobb-Clark, 2001), workplace surveys (Hawke and Wooden,

1997), time use surveys, regular Censuses (Flatau, 1997) , input output tables

(Gretton, 2005), the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia survey

(Watson and Wooden, 2004) and so on. If the Australian Social Science Data

Archive (http://assda.anu.edu.au/index.html) or the Australian Statistical Bureau

were to make these files readily downloadable on the Web, it would attract

international research attention, to the benefit of Australian social science and
                                                                                       7
policy-makers and social science broadly.

       Tractability of research involves one additional factor as well: ease of

generating new data from market participants through interviews or surveys.

Given that statistical relations are often open to multiple interpretations, the

testimony of market participants, who have first hand knowledge of their own

incentives, motivations, and circumstances, can be crucial in understanding

events. As a case in point, when California had its energy crisis in 2000-2001,

most economists blamed the crisis on impersonal market forces that operated in

an inefficiently deregulated energy marketplace.6 Claims that oil supplying firms

had engineered the crisis were dismissed as the blathering of radical conspiracy

theorists, though criminal manipulating of markets fits well with economic theory

and the history of capitalism. Investigations by the US Attorney for Northern

California showed that Enron had manipulated the market and produced guilty

pleas from the market traders.7 Statistical analyses would never have uncovered

the illegal manipulation behind the California crisis. While this is an extreme

case, the statements by participants in other decisions also cast light on competing

explanations that neither theory nor econometrics can match. In the labour area,

the statements by ACTU and national union leaders provide critical insight into

why the Australian union movement endorsed a decentralized wage-setting

system in 1990-91 (Briggs, 2001, pp. 33-34). One of the few advantages that

social science has over the natural sciences in research is that we can interrogate

the decision-makers about whom we build our models, which should help us

assess competing explanations or theories. Without controlled lab experiments to
                                                                                        8
nail things down, we have to use whatever information we can get.

        Just as a model organism requires some special feature that gives it a leg

up in discovery, a model economy must experience some special exogenous or

near exogenous variation in economic conditions that allows researchers to draw

stronger or more reliable inferences from it than from some other economy. The

variation could be a change in policy – a sudden alteration in tariffs, imposition of

new labour laws, development of an independent central bank; rapid expansion of

the supply of schooling; etc; – that creates incentives for people to alter

behaviour. It could be a shock from outside, such as changes in the prices of

exports or imports due to factors overseas, an energy shortage per the California

crisis, a large demographic shift. It could even be an epidemic that kills much of

a population, which T.W. Schultz (1983) suggested was an ideal test for the claim

that traditional agricultural societies have labour surpluses with zero marginal

product of labour. What is important is that the change be sufficiently big that

reactions to it dominate other factors impacting an economy over some period of

time.

        The availability of experimental or pseudo-experimental measures of

outcomes before/ after policy initiatives can also provide insight into economic

behaviour beyond responses to the specific initiative. Researchers in economic

development have studied the economics of education in Columbia and Indonesia

because those countries have varied investments in schooling in experimental or

pseudo-experimental ways and have made the data available to researchers

(Duflo, 2002; Angrist, Bettinger, Kremer, 2004). The hope is that the findings
                                                                                        9
from these countries can be generalized to others, and thus help guide their

investments in schooling. Since we can conduct random assignment experiments

even in countries that lack good data in other domains, low wage countries have a

cost advantage in experimenting with economic incentives where the results are

likely to generalize to other economies. Extant studies show similarity in

responses in experiments across country lines (Kagel and Roth, 1995).

        Finally, the social science parallel to the fourth point listed above for a

model species – a cumulated body of knowledge about the creature –is the

strength of a country’s research community. A research community with

knowledge about how things work can be critical in assessing specific reforms,

particularly those relating to broad-ranging institutions and practices. De jure

measures of institutions available to outsiders may not accurately represent how a

given economy operates (Chor and Freeman, 2005), leading to potentially invalid

interpretations, which a knowledgeable research community can correct.

Availability of data on diverse parts of an economy - national income and flow of

funds accounts, measures of trade and investment – is also critical, as it allows

researchers to check the representativeness of samples and plausibility of statistics

in particular areas.

        In sum, any economy that combines good information with natural

experimental variation or random assignment experiments in practices/policies is

a viable candidate for model economy in those areas. At the minimum, we will

learn something about how the particular factors operate in one setting, which can

be compared to how they operate in other economies. At the maximum, we can
                                                                                       10
learn something about behaviour or markets that generalize from that economy to

other economies which we could not learn elsewhere.



                 II. Generalizing When Ceteris Is Not Paribus

       The degree to which results can be generalized from a model system is

more problematic in economics than in biology. In biology, cellular processes

operate similarly across living creatures, in part because they obey universal

scientific laws and in part because they have the same evolutionary heritage.8 We

share 96% of our DNA sequence with chimpanzees, according to the latest

estimates9, are closely related to worms and flies, and dingos and kangaroos, for

that matter. But generalizations across specie lines are easier at the molecular and

gene level than at the level of complete organisms. Doctors often test medicines

on mice or monkeys first, but they invariably do human trials to see if the

medicine works on humans.

       Using the biology analogy, the responses of individuals to incentives

would seem to be comparable to cellular processes, while the interactions of

people in organizations or markets as well as the general equilibrium interactions

in entire economies would be closer to whole organisms. This suggests that

phenomenon where the independent responses of people are critical– say demand

responses to price incentives – would generalize better across economies than

phenomenon involving interactions among groups, such as the institutional design

of markets. From this perspective, estimates of demand and supply elasticities

should be more comparable across countries than, say, estimates of the effects of
                                                                                        11
unions on outcomes.

       Population and output per capita should also affect generalizability.

Analysts often claim that the successes of Hong Kong or Singapore – city-states –

have little to say to larger countries such as Korea or China, since social

complexity grows with population. The European Union social dialogue model of

dealing with labour problems works better in Scandinavia, Austria, Ireland, than

in the more populous countries. On output per capita, development economics

lives on the notion that developing countries differ in important ways from

advanced countries; while advanced countries rarely look at what they can learn

from developing countries.10

       But even when economies have similar levels of complexity, generalizing

from one to another can be problematic to the extent that institutions or practices

affect outcomes interactively. When institutions/practices affect outcomes

without interactions, linear regressions identify their impact on outcomes. But if

the effect of an institution depends on the presence/absence of others, so that the

configuration of practices matters, the situation is more complex (Ragin, 1987).

In this case, a country may have to transform many institutions and practices to

match the performance of a model economy,11 per the big bang transition from

communism to capitalism that has not worked well for most ex-Soviet states.

Because the number of configurations rises rapidly with the number of

institutions/practices, moreover, it is difficult to determine what works or does not

work from the limited number of observations we have on particular economies.12

       To deal with this problem, analysts seeking to learn from cross-country
                                                                                       12
comparisons often group economies into families with similar institutional

features. The advanced English-speaking economies provide one natural

grouping, with their strong market orientation and English common law tradition

(Freeman, Boxall, Haynes, forthcoming 2006). Within that grouping, it is

presumably easier to generalize between Australia and New Zealand, or between

Canada and the US, than from either of those groups to the United Kingdom or

Ireland. The Scandinavian countries form another grouping over which

generalizations would seem to have primae facie validity. Djankov, La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silane, and Shleifer (2003) have proposed that the legal tradition of

countries offers a useful means to group them. The logic of seeking

generalizations in closely related settings suggests examining practices or policies

within a given country as the first step in moving from the specific to the general.

If something works in New South Wales but not in Melbourne, it would not be

sensible to make broad claims about that policy or institution. A federalist

structure, which naturally produces regional variation, increases the potential for

an economy to be a model for others.

       Another way to approach the configuration problem is to assume that the

diverse institutions reflect some underlying latent factor, such as reliance on

markets to allocate resources, that can be summarized in a thermometer style

scale. The Fraser Institute’s economic freedom index takes this approach, as does

the Heritage Foundation’s competing index. Australia rates fairly high as a “free

market” economy on these measures, which suggests that it is more valid to

generalize from Australia to the market-oriented economies, which include the
                                                                                     13
major English-speaking economies, than to economies further from the free

market end of the scale.

       Finally, the potentially most devastating limitation on generalizing from

one economy to another occurs when history matters greatly in the way

individuals or institutions respond to particular incentives. Since every country

has its own unique history, strong path or historical dependence limits

generalizations from other countries. In this case, even copying the institutions

and practices of a model economy need not give the same outcomes. It is critical

in comparative analysis to delimit the domains of issues where history matters

heavily and where it does no, if we are to generalize from model economies.

i. Unintended Side Effects

       Decision-makers want to know what works in another economy or

business in order to transplant successful policies or practices to their own. But

their concerns often go beyond the generalizability to the potential that a

successful transplant will have possible unintended consequences. To take an

extreme case, the main concern that the Chinese government has with freedom of

association for workers is not the economic effects of unionism on the labour

market, which might reduce inequalities and help channel social discontent in

ways consistent with economic goals, but that independent unions could lead to a

Solidarnosc-style union movement that would bring about democratic reforms. In

a more limited area, when the US was assessing possible reforms in the labour

relations system in the mid 1990s, the Chairman of the National Labor Relations

Board, William Gould IV argued against EU style works council as follows:
                                                                                        14
       partial transplantation (of labour practices) from a different system
       is a dangerous thing ... (and we) should tread warily about adopting
       fully systems which have been devised in the context of other legal
       frameworks and cultures, [for fear that a works council] would
       create difficulties for our system of exclusive bargaining
       representation status.13
Business and labour groups were also opposed to this innovation. Business feared

that works councils would lead workers to form unions. Unions feared that

councils would substitute for unions. Both felt that it was better to avoid reforms

if they risked unintended effects on their interests.

       Faced with a similar situation, the UK made a different decision. For

years, the British Trade Union Congress had opposed works councils as an

institution devised in countries whose tradition of industrial relations differed

from that of the voluntaristic UK. In the 1990s, the TUC changed its views and

endorsed European Works Councils and pressured the Labour government to

accede to the EU Social Charter, including mandated works councils. The TUC

also favoured the introduction of a voting procedure to resolve disputes over

representation at work places – a transplant from the US. Management opposition

to these changes was muted.

       The difference between the US and UK response to the potential

transplant of works councils reflects differing views about the extent to which the

foreign institution would fit with existing institutions or catalyze other changes in

the labour relations system. With large numbers of workers seeking but unable to

gain union representation through the exclusive representation bargaining system
                                                                                       15
in the US, and with firms unable to offer non-union mechanisms of voice due to

section 8(a)2 of the Labor Management Relations Act outlawing “company

unions”, the introduction of works councils threatened to change radically the

US’s legalist labour relations system. In the voluntarist and less contentious

labour relations scene in the UK, neither management nor unions saw works

councils as particularly threatening.

       Generalizing from these and related cases, it would seem that two factors

determine how an economy will respond to a transplanted institution: 1) the

nature of the potential change – whether it could be catalytic to other institutions

or practices; and 2) the status of the recipient economy – its malleability to

reforms, or stability. A policy/practice that is catalytic could have a huge impact

on a rigid institutional structure but only have a modest impact on a stable or

malleable system. A policy/practice that is not catalytic would have no impact on

a rigid system and be readily absorbed in malleable economy.



                        III. Australia as Model Economy

       There are (at least) three areas in which Australia has made unique

innovations in policy/practice and had distinctive economic experiences which

could yield findings that generalize to other economies. These areas are: labour

relations; use of market mechanisms to deliver public services in higher education

and employment services; and economic growth through immigration and natural

resources.

i. Labour Relations
                                                                                      16
‘Australia needs a workplace system geared to the future, not to the past’ – John

Howard, 2005

       When I first learned that Australia and New Zealand used an awards

system to determine wages, I had the same kind of reaction that early settlers must

have had on seeing the platypus or emu – utter disbelief. Markets are supposed to

set wages, not judges on industrial tribunal court proceedings. In fact, judges

aside, the Australian (and NZ) systems of awards are in the same family of

institutional wage-setting as European mandatory extension systems of

determining pay. These systems guarantee that the bulk of the work force is

covered by collective bargaining, regardless of the proportion unionized. This is

in sharp contrast to the situation in the US, Canada, Japan, or the UK, among

others, where there is a near one to one relation between the proportion of

workers unionized and the proportion covered by collective bargaining. Exhibit 1

shows the difference between countries where collective bargaining is extended

outside the bargaining unit and where it is not extended. The horizontal axis

shows the rate of union density. The vertical axis shows the proportion of

workers covered by institutionally set wages. Along the 45 degree line union

density and coverage are the same. Points above the line represent situations

where coverage exceeds density. In 2002 Australia was far above 45 degree line.

       By extending institutionally determined wages to much of the work force,

awards or extension systems invariably lower the dispersion of wage. From one

perspective, they accomplish what the Invisible Hand has seemingly failed to do

in the job market: establish a single price for a given type of labour. From
                                                                                     17
another perspective, they compress wages excessively, reducing incentives and

employment. The Australian awards system appears to be an important

determinant of the effect of other economic policies outcomes. It is the main

reason why equal pay legislation was more effective in increasing the pay of

women relative to men in Australia than in the US (Gregory 1999; Gregory and

Daly, 1991; Borland, 1999). To the extent that the various Australian Accords in

the 1980s succeeded, moreover, they did so because the wage-setting system

covered the bulk of the work force.

       In the 1990s-2000s, Australia shifted from its awards based system of pay

determination to a more decentralized pay setting system. The Australian Trade

Union Congress initiated the shift by endorsing enterprise bargaining in the early

1990s. The Labour Party’s 1993 Industrial Relations Reform Act strengthened

enterprise bargaining vis-a-vis awards. The Coalition government’s 1996

Workplace Relations Act introduced Australian Workplace Agreements to

encourage individual arrangements, ended union shop type agreements in favor of

freedom of association for workers and freedom of choice in the mode of wage

setting (which gave choice largely to employers); and limited the authority of

Industrial Relations Commission to make awards and to oversee the results from

other modes of wage settlement. Comparable legislation in New Zealand

produced a massive drop in union density and in collective bargaining coverage.

As Table 1 shows, union density and pay setting by awards and collective

bargaining also fell in Australia. But the proportion of workers covered by

institutional wage arrangements remained much higher than membership, at least
                                                                                      18
through 2004. Many Australian firms and workers preferred the status quo of

collective contracts and awards to the alternative of individual AWA mode of pay

setting that the 1996 legislation introduced. As a result, Table 2 shows that as of

2004 twenty percent of workers had pay set by awards and 41% had pay set by

collective bargaining, giving a total of 61% with pay institutionally determined.

        In November 2005 the Australian government enacted legislation to

further privilege individual contracts over collective contracts and weaken labour

market protections that workers won from the state and/or through collective

action. Under the new law, new employees could be required to sign an AWA

individual contract as a condition of employment and to give up the right to be

covered by a collective agreement. Enterprise agreements would no longer

override AWAs and the “no disadvantage test” that requires collective agreements

and individual contracts to give workers pay and conditions equal to or better than

the relevant award would be weakened. The law would excuse firms with less

than 100 employees from unfair dismissal laws; narrow the Industrial Relations

Commission’s role in labour relations; and establish a new government body to

set minimum awards over a smaller domain of issues. Finally, the new law

promised to make it more difficult for unions to strike while allowing

management the freedom to lockout workers. To accomplish this against the

opposition of state governments, the federal government promised to nationalize

industrial relations.

        Are the proposed changes as radical as they appear? The government and

its opponents agree that the answer is yes. A comparable change in corporate law
                                                                                       19
might be to privilege privately owned firms over publicly owned corporations by

removing the limited liability protection given to shareholders, and to reduce

consumer protection legislation for products made by small private firms. The

changes go beyond anything that conservative governments in the UK or US have

proposed. The changes are also remarkable in that government has proposed

them in a period when the Australian labour market and economy are functioning

well, with low unemployment and rapid accelerated productivity growth (Parham,

2004). It is not the Winter of Discontent in 1980s Great Britain, nor the US air

traffic controllers striking illegally against the Federal Government in 1981.

        Given the weakened state of unions, the new legislation could be the nail

in the coffin of collective labour arrangements in Australia, with potential

reverberations for other countries. Or it could prove that legislatively attacking

the collective rights of workers creates greater political and economic turmoil

than could justify such a policy. In either case, the new legislation is the sort of

“natural experiment” that will make Australia the model economy for assessing

collectivism in the labour market. What more could one ask for to assess how

labour codes affect labour relations and labour market performance than an

unnecessary extreme change in labour law? A new Australian Workplace

Industrial Relations Survey perhaps to help assess the change.

ii. Market Mechanisms for Public Services

       In 1989 Australia developed the world’s first income contingent mode of

funding much of higher education – the Higher Education Contribution Scheme

(HECS) (Chapman (2001). The HECS has many features that fit with the
                                                                                        20
predilections of economists. It differentiates prices by field, gives students the

option for paying fees up-front; offers a more equitable way of funding student

education than taxing citizens to pay for the education of the future elite; is less

risky for students than loans; and gives greater autonomy to universities. The

government’s partial deregulation of the higher education system allows

universities to determine the student contribution amount within the specified

ranges.

          Shifting the cost of higher education from the state to students has helped

Australia to increase university enrollments while reducing state funding of higher

education relative to GDP (Marginson, 2001, table 1). In addition, the market

orientation of Australian universities has led them to become world leaders in

selling undergraduate education to the citizens of other countries, further

increasing their revenues. There is no evidence that the HECS has discouraged

low income students from going to universities or reduced the overall rate of

university attendance. While the system has problems – student-faculty ratios

have risen and faculty earnings have fallen relative to other groups, raising issues

about quality – Chapman’s assessment is that the income contingent charge for

higher education has worked. No one has made a cogent case rejecting this

assessment. Given the seeming virtues of the system, the interesting question is

why other countries have not copied the Australian model. If detailed data on the

system were readily available on a web site, including university by university

records and surveys of students, analysts in other countries would download the

information and perform the types of studies that would fit their country’s
                                                                                     21
concerns, and thus spread this innovation.

       It is not only in provision of higher education that Australia has been a

world leader in marketizing government-funded services. In most countries, the

state aids unemployed job seekers through assistance in job finding, training, and

other active labour market policies. Until recently, some European countries

restricted private employment agencies so that the state had an effective

monopoly in many employment services. In 1998 Australia chose a different

route. It privatized or outsourced employment services to non-profit and profit-

seeking agencies, as well as to competing public agencies – ‘a radical

transformation of employment service delivery ...without parallel in OECD

countries’ (OECD, 2001, p 15). By opening the market for employment services

to competitive bids, with the bulk of payments based on a fixed fee for successful

placement of the unemployed, the Australian policy potentially unleashed the

forces of competition on what had been an administrative function of the

government. The result was a large drop in the cost of employment services, with

no apparent loss in the quality of services (Shergold, 2002), which impressed the

OECD in its review of Australian labour market policies (OECD, 2001).

However, the program has yet to receive the scrutiny of the microeconomic

evaluation research community, with specified counter factuals to assess

outcomes (Dawkins, 2002) and detailed studies of particular programs. As a

result independent researchers have taken a more skeptical view (Webster and

Harding, 2001; Oslington, 2005) than the OECD, withholding judgment until data

from providers of services are open to public scrutiny. Webster and Harding note
                                                                                     22
that the public sector had higher labour productivity than the private sector in

placing workers under the predecessor Working Nation program (Webster and

Harding, p 240), which raises questions about what underlies the cost savings of

the new program.

       To make a scientific case for the Australian model of market-driven

government funded employment services requires two detailed research

investigations. The first needed research is random assignment experiments

comparing the effectiveness of different services (Webster, 1998; Burtless, 2002).

Since Australia changed the entire system, with multiple service providers

offering different services in different ways, a random assignment study of the

full change is impossible. Still, the government and agencies can undertake

analyses of some services, which would enable them to decide what is working

and what is not, and thus improve the system. The second area where research

could greatly illuminate the Australian model is in the newly developing market

for contracting out employment services. The outsourcing of public employment

through a market mechanism offers a unique opportunity to examine the

organizations that enter and exit the market, the quality of services provided by

different government, private and community agencies, and the way in which

these organizations respond to winning or losing contracts. The results from such

a study could generalize to other markets where governments are considering

outsourcing provision of public goods.

iii. Growing Oz: Immigration and Natural Resources
                                                                                    23
       As a “settler economy” Australia has grown through immigration and the

application of modern technology to extract natural resources and to the

development of agriculture. Since not all settler economies have been economic

successes – Argentina is often viewed as Australia’s errant twin economy in this

respect -- and since natural resources have proven to be as much of a curse as a

boon to an economy (Sachs and Warner, 1999; Ross, 1999) -- Australia’s success

in growing through immigration and escaping the problems of a profitable mining

sector make it a model for other resource intensive economies.

       On the immigration side, in 2000 approximately one fourth of the

Australian population were immigrants – twice the proportion in the US and thirty

percent more than the proportion in Canada.14 The flow of immigration into

Australia was above the flow into the US, despite the US’s massive increase in

immigration over the 1990s. The only other advanced countries with comparable

flows of immigrants are Israel and New Zealand. With immigrant flows of these

magnitudes, the effects of immigration invariably go beyond the micro-economic

issues that dominate the bulk of the literature in the US and most other OECD

countries – how immigrants fare in the labour market compared to natives and

how immigrants affect native substitute workers. Australia is a model economy

for understanding the impact of immigration on macro-economic outcomes and

economic growth, and of the economies of scale and the composition of

immigrants that help determine aggregate effects (Junankar, Pope and Withers,

1998). While there is no definitive analysis of the potential scale economies

from immigration (OECD, 2003), evidence that immigrants have had little
                                                                                      24
adverse effects on the wages or employment of natives (Chang, 2004; Addison

and Worswick, 2002), that growth and immigration, particularly of skilled

workers, are positively related over time (Pope and Withers, 1995; Nevile, 1990)

and the country’s policy of selecting immigrants on the basis of labour skills, are

consistent with the notion that immigration contributed to growth per capita rather

than detracted from it.

       Going a step further, Australia’s variations in policy for selecting

immigrants itself that provides lessons for other countries. Until the early 1970s,

the country subsidized passage for Europeans from some countries. Since then

Australia has used a point system to encourage immigration of skilled workers

(Miller, 1999) By 1989/90 52% of Australian immigrants came as skilled

workers compared to 39% of Canadians and 8% of Americans (Antecol, Cobb-

Clark, Trejo, 2001, table 2). Australian gives points to persons who attend

Australian universities, which presumably both attract students to Australian

universities and encourages their immigration. The Longitudinal Survey of

Immigrants to Australia provides data that goes beyond standard Census and

labour force survey data on immigration to deal with issues of assimilation and

career progress (Chiswick, Lee, and Miller, 2005).

       On the natural resources side, Australia has developed economically

despite being highly dependent on minerals/fuels and agriculture for the bulk of

its exports. The country fell from near the top of the GDP per capita league tables

– 5th in the OECD in 1950 to a much lower position – 15th in 1990, but

rebounded in the 1990s with a sustained period of economic growth to reach 7th
                                                                                     25
spot in 2003. The Gregory thesis curse in which a booming mining/natural

resource sector where relatively few people work boosts the real exchange rates

and erodes the competitive position of other exporters, notably in manufacturing

where many people work and in agriculture, where many people once worked, has

somehow not prevented Australia from growth and prosperity. Indeed, the mineral

share of exports rose during the 1990s period of rapid growth so that in 2004,

minerals/fuels made up 40% of Australia’s exports. If China continues to become

the manufacturing center of the world, more countries may find that natural

resources will be more important to economic growth than in the past, and should

look to the Australian experience here. If there is one area where the rest of the

world needs to learn more about Australian experiences, it is how the country has

managed to avoid the resource curse (McLean, 2004; McLean and Taylor, 2003;

Anderson, 2001).



                IV. Conclusion: The Advantage of Home Brew

       The argument that economics has much to learn from behaviour in ”model

economies” just as biology learns from model species directs attention at the

variation in policies and practices in economies regardless of location. The

requirements for a model economy are adequate data; a knowledgeable set of

home grown economists; interesting variation in policies/practices; and sufficient

similarity to other economies to allow findings to be generalized. In addition,

model economies can provide independent tests of models initially fit on other

economies, where specification search (Leamer, 1978) risks over fitting the data
                                                                                       26
to match the idiosyncracy of that country’s experiences. Because no single

economy offers the best variation/instruments for studying more than a few

issues, there is space for more model economies than model species.

        Australia’s unique policies and practices and accessible data make it a

model economy for illuminating the critical issues summarized above and

potentially others as well. The country’s political system seems adept at creating

extreme policy experiments that will illuminate economic issues for the

foreseeable future, particularly in the direction of greater reliance on markets. As

a result, there is a lot the “real world” can learn from Australian experience – as

Bob Gregory has done throughout his career. The one thing Australia could do to

enhance the economy’s status as a model system would be to make Australian

data more readily available over the Internet to international researchers. Because

interpreting data requires tacit knowledge about an economy – home brew that is

easier for residents to imbibe than overseas scholars --Australian economists will

almost certainly maintain an edge in analyzing these data. Such provision would

more likely raise than lower demand for their services. Imagine, more economists

joining Bob and the cork hatted gang at the pub to ponder what’s going on down

under and what it means for economics and the real world. Home brew and

economics. Sounds good. Who needs cricket and Aussie rules football and all

that?
                                                                                                                                                                                                     27




                                                                             Exhibit 1: Union Density and Coverage, 2000
                                                                               Percentage of Wage and Salary Earners


                                     100.0
                                                      France                                          Austria                           Belgium                  Finland    Sw eden

                                      90.0

                                                             Spain           Portugal                                                                           Denmark
                                                                                                        Italy
                                      80.0                           Netherlands    Australia

                                                                                                                                       Norw ay
                                                                                 Germany
                                      70.0
Collective Bargaining Coverage (%)




                                                                                             Luxembourg

                                      60.0
                                                                                                Slovak Republic

                                      50.0

                                                        Poland           Sw itzerland
                                      40.0

                                                                 Hungary           Canada
                                                                                                   United Kingdom
                                      30.0
                                                                 New Zealand               Czech Republic


                                      20.0
                                                                                 Japan

                                                                 United States
                                                     Korea
                                      10.0


                                       0.0
                                             0.0       10.0             20.0                30.0                40.0            50.0              60.0   70.0              80.0       90.0   100.0
                                                                                                                       Trade Union Density (%)




                                                   Source: OECD Employment Outlook 2004, Chart 3.4
                                                                                           28

  Table 1: Percentage of Workers in Unions and Percentage Covered by

  Collective Bargaining, Australia and New Zealand, 1980 to 2003



                                                        Australia           New Zealand

                                                      Union     CB         Union     CB

Before Legal Changes, ~1980                             48       88         56       67



The Changes: 1991 NZ Employment Contracts Act:

1996 Australian Workplace Relations Act



2000                                                    25       60         17       20

2002                                                    23       59         17       18

2003                                                    23       58         17       17

2004                                                    23       58          --      --



Before to After Changes                                -25      -30         -39      -50



  Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (May 2004, cat no 6306.0); Australian

  Bureau of Statistics (August 2004, cat no 6310.0); Harbridge, et al (2003); May,

  et al (2003).
                                                                        29



Table 2: Percentage of Workers With Wages Set by Specified Mechanism,

2004




 Awards

 Mode of Wage-Setting                            Percentage Covered

 Awards                                          20

 Collective bargaining                           41

 Individual                                      34

 Proprietors/                                    5




Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (May 2004, cat no 6306.0).
                                                                                    30

                                         Bibliography



Abowd, J. and F. Kramarz (1999), ‘The Analysis of Labor Markets Using

Matched Employer-Employee Data’ in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.)

Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3B, Chapter 40 (Amsterdam: North

Holland), 2629-2710.



Addison, T. and C. Worswick (2002), ‘The Impact of Immigration on the

Earnings of Natives: Evidence from Australian Micro Data,” The Economic

Record 78(1) March, 68-78.



Anderson, K. (2001), ‘Australia in the International Economy,’ Centre for

International Economic Studies (CIES) Discussion Paper 0049. January revision.

http://www.adelaide.edu.au/cies/papers/0049.pdf



Angrist, J., E. Bettinger, M. Kremer (2004), ‘Long-Term Consequences of

Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in

Colombia,’ NBER Working Paper No. 10713 August.



Antecol, H., D. Cobb-Clark and S.J. Trejo (2001), ‘Immigration Policy and the

Skills of Immigrants to Australia, Canada, and the United States,’ IZA Discussion

Paper No. 363 (September). http://ssrn.com/abstract=284508
                                                                                  31
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2004), Employee Earnings, Benefits and Trade

Union Membership, (cat no 6310.0), August.



Australian Bureau of Statistics (2004), Employee Earnings and Hours, Australia,

(cat no 6306.0), May.



Australia Bureau of Statistics (2005), ‘Methods of Setting Pay,’ Australian

Labour Market Statistics, Labour Feature Article: Spotlight. Published January

21, last updated 11 April 2005.

http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/o/c9bf8d0efd2b6ca7ca256fe0001aa79b?

OpenDocument



Bahls, C., J.Weitzman and R. Gallagher (2003), ‘Biology’s Models,’ The

Scientist 17 (Issue Supplement 1) June 2: s5.



Barry, M. and N. Wailes (2004), ‘Contrasting Systems? 100 Years of Arbitration

in Australia and New Zealand,’ Journal of Industrial Relations 46(4) December,

430-447.



Becker, G. (1962), ‘Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory,’ Journal of

Political Economy.



Borland, J. (1999), ‘The Equal Pay Case – Thirty Years On,” The Australian
                                                                                   32
Economic Review 32(3), 265-72.



Briggs, C. (2001), ‘Australian Exceptionalism: The Role of Trade Unions in the

Emergence of Enterprise Bargaining,’ The Journal of Industrial Relations 43(1)

March, 27-43.



Breusch, T. and S. Holloway (2004), ‘Australian Social Science Data Archive,’

The Australian Economic Review 37(2), 222-9.



Burtless, G. (2002), ‘Innovations in Labour Market Policies: The Australian Way.

Comments on an OECD Report,’ The Australian Economic Review 35(1), 97-

103.



Chang, H-C. (2004), ‘The Impact of Immigration on the Wage Differential in

Australia,’ The Economic Record 80(248) March, 49-57.



Chapman, B. (2001), ‘Australian Higher Education Financing: Issues for

Reform,’

The Australian Economic Review, 34(2) June, 195-204.



Chiswick, B.R., Y.L. Lee, P.W. Miller (2005), ‘Immigrant Earnings: A

Longitudinal Analysis,’ IZA Discussion Paper No. 1750, September. Forthcoming

in Review of Income and Wealth, 2005.
                                                                                    33



Chor, D. and R.B. Freeman (2005), ‘The 2004 Global Labor Survey: Workplace

Institutions and Practices Around the World,’ NBER WP # 11598, September.



Cobb-Clark, D. (2001), ‘The Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Australia,’

The Australian Econmic Review 34(4), 467-77.



Commission on the Future of Worker-Management Relations (1994) Factfinding

Report. May. US Department of Labor, Office of the Secretary, Washington, DC.



Cooper, R. (2005), ‘Trade Unionism in 2004,’ Journal of Industrial Relations

47(2) June, 202-11.



Dawkins, P. (2002), ‘The OECD Review of Innovations in Labour Market

Policies: The Australian Way,’ The Australian Economic Review 35(1), 85-91.



DeFrancesco, L. (2003), ‘Programmed to Die,’ The Scientist 17 (Issue

Supplement 1) June 2, s14.



Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and J. Botero (2003),

‘The Regulation of Labor’ NBER WP #9756, June.



Duflo, E. (2002), ‘The Medium Run Effects of Educational Expansion: Evidence
                                                                                    34
from a Large School Construction Program in Indonesia,’ NBER WP #8710

January.



Fields, S. and M. Johnston (2005), ‘Whither Model Organism Research,’ Science

307, March 25, 1885-8.



Flatau, P. (1997), ‘Census Unit Record Data,’ The Australian Economic Review

30(1), 103-12.



Freeman, R. P.Boxall and P. Haynes (eds) (2006 forthcoming), What Workers

Say: Employee Voice in the Anglo-American World, Cornell University Press,

Ithaca, NY.



Gode, D.K. and S. Sunder (1993), ‘Allocative Efficiency of Markets with Zero

Intelligence Traders: Market as a Partial Substitute for Individual Rationality,’

Journal of Political Economy, 101, 119-137.



Gregory, R. (1999), ‘Labour Market Institutions and the Gender Pay Ratio,’

Australian Economic Review 32 (3), 273-8.



Gregory, R. and A. Daly (1991). ‘Can Economic Theory Explain Why Australian

Women Are So Well Paid Relative to their United States Counterparts”’, in S.L.

Willborn (ed.) International Review of Comparative Public Policy. Women’s
                                                                                   35
Wages: Stability and Change in Six Industrialised Countries Vol 3, 81-125.



Gretton, P. (2005), ‘Australian Input-Output Tables,’ The Australian Economic

Review 38(3), 319-32.



Harbridge, R., R. May and G. Thickett, Glen (2003), ‘The Current State of Play:

Collective Bargaining and Union Membership Under the ERA 2000.’ New

Zealand Journal of Industrial Relations, 28(2), 140-149.



Hawke, A. (2000), ‘The Business Longitudinal Survey,’ The Australian

Economic Review 33(1), 94-9.



Hawke, A. and M. Wooden (1997), ‘The 1995 Australian Workplace Industrial

Relations Survey,’ The Australian Economic Review 30(3). 323-8.



Howard, J. (2005), ‘Statement on Workplace Relations.’ May 26. Text available

at:

http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2005/05/26/1116950798933.html



Johnson, D. and S. Kells (1997), ‘Small Business Data Sources in Australia,’ The

Australian Economic Review 30(2), 215-24.



Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw and G. Prennushi (1997), ‘The Effects of Human
                                                                                 36
Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing

Lines,’ American Economic Review 87(3) June, 291-313.



Joskow, P. (2001), ‘California’s Electricity Crisis,’ MIT, September 28.

http://web.mit.edu/ceepr/www/2001-006.pdf



Junankar, P.N., D. Pope and G. Withers (1998), ‘Immigration and the Australian

Macroeconomy: Perspective and Prospective,’ The Australian Economic Review

31(4), 435-44.



Junankar, P.N. and S. Mahuteau (2005), ‘Do Migrants Get Good Jobs? New

Migrant Settlement in Australia,’ The Economic Record 81(255) August, S34-46.



Kagel, J.H. and A. Roth (1995), The Handbook of Experimental Economics,

Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.



Kellogg, E.A., and H. B. Shaffer (1993), ‘Model Organisms in Evolutionary

Studies,’ Systematic Biology 42(4) December, 409-14.



King, S.P. (2001), ‘The Funding of Higher Education in Australia: Overview and

Alternatives,’ The Australia Economic Review 34(2), 190-4.



Le, A.T. and P.W. Miller (1998), ‘The ABS Survey of Employment and
                                                                                     37
Unemployment Patterns,’ The Australian Economic Review 31(3), 290-7.



Leamer, E. (1978), Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with

Nonexperimental Data. Wiley.



Mandoli, D.F. and R. Olmstead (2000), ‘The Importance of Emerging Models in

Plant Biology,’ Journal of Plant Growth & Regulation, 19, 249-252



Marks, G.N. and S. Rothman (2003), ‘Longitudinal Studies of Australian Youth,’

The Australian Economic Review, 36(4), 428-34.



Marginson, S. (2001), ‘Trends in the Funding of Australian Higher Education,’

The Australian Economic Review, 34(2) June, 205-215.



May, R., P. Walsh, R. Harbridge, and G. Thickett (2003), ‘’Unions and Union

Membership in New Zealand: Annual Review for 2002,’ New Zealand Journal of

Industrial Relations, 28(3), 314-325.



McCallum, R. (2002), ‘Trade Union Recognition and Australia’s Neo-Liberal

Voluntary Bargaining Laws,’ Relations Industrielles / Industrial Relations, 57(2):

225-51.



McLean, I.W (2004), ‘Australian Economic Growth in Historical Perspective,’
                                                                                  38
The Economic Record,80(25) September, 330-45.



McLean, I.W. and A.M. Taylor (2003), ‘Australia and California: On Parallel

Paths?’ In Dani Rodrik (ed) In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on

Economic Growth. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/Growth%20volume/NEWFOL~1/MCLEAN

~1.PDF



Miller, G.H., et al. (2005), ‘Ecosystem Collapse in Pleistocene Australia and a

Human Role in Megafaunal Extinction,’ Science 309, July 8, 287-90.



Miller, P.W. (1999). ‘Immigration Policy and Immigrant Quality: The Australian

Points System,’ American Economic Review, 89(2), 192-197.



Miller, P.W. and L.M. Neo (2003), ‘Labour Market Flexibility and Immigrant

Adjustment,’ The Economic Record, 79(246) September, 336-56.



Nevile, J. (1990), The Effect of Immigration on Australian Living Standards.

AGPS, Canberra.



OECD (2001), ‘Innovations in Labour Market Policies: The Australian Way,’

Employment 2001 7, 1-340, OECD: Paris.
                                                                                 39
OECD (2004), Employment Outlook 2004, OECD, Paris, France.



OECD (2003), ‘OECD Economic Survey Australia,’ Chapter 4: ‘The Economic

Impact of Migration in Australia,’ OECD Economic Surveys 2003 4, March 3,

156-184.



Oslington, P. (2005), ‘Contracting-Out of Assistance to the Unemployed:

Implications of the Australian Experiment,’ The Economic Record, 81(252)

March, 30-37.



Parham, D. (2004), ‘Sources of Australia’s Productivity Revival,’ The Economic

Record 80(249) June, 239-57.



Pope, D. and G. Withers (1995), ‘The Role of Human Capital in Australia’s

Long-Term Economic Growth,’ Seminar Paper, Economics and Politics Division,

Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University.



Pyman, A. (2001), ‘Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act

1996 (CWLTH): Experiences of Five Australian Trade Unions,’ The Journal of

Industrial Relations 43(3) September, 340-7.



Ragin, C. (1987). The Comparative Method, University of California Press,

Berkeley, CA.
                                                                                 40



Ross, M. (1999), ‘The Political Economy of the Resource Curse,’ World Politics

51(2) January, 297-322.



Sachs, J.D. and A.M. Warner (1999), ‘The Big Push, Natural Resource Booms

and Growth,’ Journal of Development Economics, 59, 43-76.



Schultz, T.W. (1983), Transforming Traditional Agriculture, University of

Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.



Shergold, P. (2002), ‘The OECD Review of Australia’s Labour Market Policies,’

The Australian Economic Review, 35(1), 92-6.



Steinberg, D. (2003), ‘Illuminating Behaviors,’ The Scientist, 17 (Issue

Supplement 1) June 2, s18.



Sulston, J. (2003), ‘Keynote Speech,’ Joint ELSF, EMBO, FEBS, UNESCO

Meeting, Paris. February 19.



Watson, N. and M. Wooden (2004), ‘The HILDA Survey Four Years On,’ The

Australian Economic Review 37(3) September, 343-49.



Webster, E. and G. Harding (2001), ‘Outsourcing Public Employment Services:
                                                                             41
The Australian Experience,’ The Australian Economic Review 34(2), 231-42.



Webster, E. (1998), ‘Microeconomic Evaluations of Australian Labour Market

Programs,’ The Australian Economic Review 31(2), 189-201.



Wikipedia (2005), entry for “Model Organism”.



Withers, G. (2002), ‘Population Ageing and the Role of Immigration,’ The

Australian Economic Review 35(1), 104-12.



Wooden, M. (2005), ‘Workplace Relations Reform: Where to Now?’ The

Australian Economic Review 38(2), 176-81



Wooden, M. (2001), ‘Industrial Relations Reform in Australia: Causes,

Consequences and Prospects,’ The Australian Economic Review 34(3), 243-62.



WWW Virtual Library: Model Organisms, http://www.ceolas.org/VL/mo/
                                                                                      42
Endnotes



1.The Scientist, vol.17, supplement 1 June 2, 2003 Biology’s Models (www.the-
scientist.com/yr2003/jun/) discusses the “eight most used and most useful” model
organisms. The article “model organism” in Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org)
gives valuable references and another list of model organisms. Also, see
www.wellcome.ac.uk. NIH gives references to model organisms for biomedical
research. (Www.nih.gov/science/models)

2.See Mandoli and Omstead (2000), Kellogg and Shaffer (1993), in addition to
the articles cited in footnote 3. Fields and Johnston (2005) ask whether new
technologies for analyzing gene function will obsolesce model organism research
and conclude that they will not.

3.This gives an edge to small creatures that are plentiful in the environment, that
reproduce quickly, and that have readily discernible attributes or behaviour.

4.A model organism “must not only be convenient to work on, but it also has to
be related to other things that are useful”– John Sulston, cited in
www.welcome.ac.uk/en/genome/genesandbody/hg05f003.html, p 2

5.Once many scientists work on a given species and develop protocols for
experiments, isolate mutants, sequence its genes, the cost of research falls, which
attracts others. Still, model organisms are not fixed in number. Innovators have
turned previously ignored species into models by making important discoveries
from analyzing that species. And new technologies can expand the model species
to more complex creatures (Fields and Johnston, 2005).

6.Paul Joskow, California’s Electricity Crisis (MIT Sept 28, 2001)

http://web.mit.edu/ceepr/www/2001-006.pdf is the most cogent economic
analysis. See

http://www.erisk.com/Learning/CaseStudies/ref_case_californiacrisis.asp for a
time line

7.http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/can/press/html/2004_08_05_forney.html gives the
details of the plea bargain by James Forney, who devised the “Death Star”.
Forney was the third conviction the US Attorney'  s Office obtained in its
investigation into the illegal manipulation by Enron of California'
                                                                  s energy
markets from 1999 to 2001.
                                                                                       43



8.Nature did not “completely reinvent the wheel and come up with a new set of
molecular rules for each phylum” Thomas Carew, a specialist in the mollusk
Aplysia californica, cited by D. Steinberg, “Illuminating Behaviors”, The
Scientist, vol 17, supplement 1, June 2, 2003, p1.

9.http://usinfo.state.gov/gi/Archive/2005/Sep/01-272693.html. The estimate has
varied over time, due to the subtleties in making such comparisons.

10.If advanced countries thought policies were readily transportable from
developing countries, they would presumably fund policy experiments in those
countries, draw lessons from the experiments, and then import the successes.

11.Studies of labour practices find that firms need a bundle of advanced human
resource practices to create a high performance workplace (Ichniowski, Shaw,
Prennushi, 1997).

12.With four institutions/practices and the 0/1 measure of their state, there are 24
= 16 possible configurations to investigate before deciding on the best course of
action. With six institutions/practices, there are 64 possible configurations. And
so on.

13.William Gould IV, Chairman, NLRB, Sept 29, 1994, reported in Commission
on the Future of Worker-Management Relations.

14. In 2000, 24.6% of Australians were immigrants compared to 12.4% of
Americans and 18.9% of Canadians. The ratio of annual immigration to the
population in Australia was 0.51% compared to 0.45% for the United States.
