                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DEPRIVATION AND DISEASE IN EARLY
                              TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICA

                                              Karen Clay
                                            Werner Troesken

                                          Working Paper 12111
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12111


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Troesken gratefully acknowledges grant support from the NIA/NIH, P01 AG10120. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Karen Clay and Werner Troesken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Deprivation and Disease in Early Twentieth-Century America
Karen Clay and Werner Troesken
NBER Working Paper No. 12111
March 2006
JEL No. I3, N3

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper explores how early life exposure to poverty and want adversely affects later life health
outcomes. In particular, it examines how exposure to crowded housing conditions and impure
drinking water undermines long-term health prospects and increases the risk of age-related
pathologies such as cancer, heart disease, kidney disease, and stroke. Exploiting city-level data from
early-twentieth century America, evidence is presented that cities with unusually high rates of
typhoid fever in 1900 had elevated rates of heart and kidney disease fifteen years later; also cities
with unusually high rates of tuberculosis in 1900 had elevated rates of cancer and stroke fifteen years
later. The estimated coefficients suggest that eradicating typhoid fever (through water purification)
and tuberculosis (through improved housing and nutrition) would have reduced later death rates from
heart disease, cancer, stroke, and kidney disease by 23 to 35 percent.

Karen Clay
Carnegie Mellon University
Heinz School of Public Policy and Management
5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

Werner Troesken
Department of History
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
troesken@pitt.edu
1. Introduction

         That material deprivation is associated with disease is not especially controversial.

Demographers and economists have long recognized that the poor tend to live short, wretched

lives (Alison 1842; Griffin 1841; Sykes 1850; Stevenson 1921; and Haines 1995). Indeed, one

might even argue that there is a class of diseases that should be called diseases of deprivation.

The obvious candidates to place in such a category would be pathologies that are highly

correlated with poverty and want, diseases like typhoid fever and tuberculosis. Typhoid, a

disease spread mainly through water contaminated with human fecal matter, is largely

unheard of in the developed world. It persists only in those countries too poor to finance the

infrastructure necessary to purify and distribute water (Crump et al. 2004). Similarly,

tuberculosis is most common in the poorest nations, and although it continues to afflict some

populations in wealthier countries, it is concentrated among disadvantaged groups (Dye et al.

1999).

         Less obvious, however, is the classification of cancer, heart disease, kidney disease,

and other age-related pathologies. One might argue that heart disease and certain forms of

cancer are diseases of excessive wealth, the result of years of idle chatter, fine wine, and rich

food. Historically, physicians and medical experts often attributed gout, heart problems, and

a variety of otherwise mysterious ailments among the wealthy to their sedentary and decadent

lifestyle and to a diet laden with fat and alcoholic spirits (Appleby 1979; Horrocks 1995;

Pollock 1990). Along the same lines, it is possible that because the poor died mainly from

infectious diseases, they did not live long enough to die from diseases of old age like cancer



                                                 1
and heart disease. On the other hand, there is much evidence to suggest that exposure to

infectious diseases early in life adversely affects later life health outcomes (Almond 2005;

Barker 1992 and 1994; Bengtsson and Lindstrom 2000; Leon and Smith 2000). To the extent

that the poor were exposed to more infections early in life, they might have been at greater

risk for developing heart problems, cancer, and other pathologies later in life (Dorling et al.

2005; Macleod et al. 2005).

       Revisiting the classification of diseases of deprivation, this paper explores the

possibility that material want at an early life stage increases the risk of various age-related

diseases at a later life stage. The paper is predicated on two indicators of early-life poverty,

overcrowded housing and impure drinking water. There are, in turn, two specific

physiological pathways through which substandard housing and tainted water supplies might

adversely affect later-life health outcomes. Crowded and poorly-ventilated housing is

correlated with tuberculosis (McSherry and Connor 1993; Elender et al. 1998; Reinhard et al.

1997), and prior exposure to tuberculosis is a risk factor for cancer and stroke (Wu et al. 1995;

Pananini-Hill et al. 2003). Impure drinking water is the primary cause of typhoid fever (Budd

1877), and common sequella of typhoid include heart and kidney disease (Dublin 1917; Khosla

and Lochan 1992; Nand et al. 1996). These pathways imply that a population subjected to

crowded housing conditions and tuberculosis in its youth should exhibit elevated rates of

cancer and stroke in adulthood, and that a population exposed to tainted drinking water and

typhoid fever in its youth should exhibit elevated rates of heart disease and kidney failure in

adulthood. Although previous studies try to link measures of material want early in life with



                                                 2
later life health outcomes, the results of these efforts have been mixed and call for further

research (Dedman et al. 2001; Ness et al. 2005).

       In the analysis that follows, cities in turn-of-the-century America serve as a laboratory

in which to explore the hypothesis that crowed housing conditions and impure water supplies

have lingering health effects. This period in American history affords an almost ideal setting

for this experiment. As explained below, during the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth

century, American cities were moving from a high-mortality environment where infectious

diseases were the leading causes of death, to a low-mortality environment where chronic and

age-related diseases such as cancer and heart disease were the leading causes of death.

Focusing on time periods within this transition makes it comparatively easy to disentangle the

effects of prior disease exposure from contemporaneous exposure. Moreover, while one

might question the exogeneity of the mortality transition, evidence presented below suggests

that it is appropriate to treat it as such. The specific disease pathways mentioned

above—tuberculosis leads to cancer and stroke; typhoid leads to heart and kidney

disease—are particularly relevant in this regard. So too is the broader historical literature on

the sources of mortality change in urban areas.

2. Estimating Strategy

2.A. Empirical Model

       The estimating strategy employed here involves regressing mortality rates from age-

related pathologies against lagged and contemporaneous measures of deprivation and

deprivation-related disease. More formally, variants on the following generic model will be



                                                   3
estimated:

(1)     yit = " + $1 xit + *1 xi(t-k) + (yi(t-k) + Zit$2 + Zi(t-k)*2 + ,it,

where yit is the mortality rate from cancer, heart disease, or kidney disease in city i in year t; xit

is a measure of deprivation (such as persons per dwelling) or a deprivation-related disease

(such as tuberculosis or typhoid fever) in city i in year t; xi(t-k) is the measure of deprivation or

deprivation-related disease in city i in year t-k; yi(t-k) is the lagged value of the dependent

variable, or more precisely, the mortality rate from cancer, heart disease, or kidney disease in

city i in year t-k; Zit is a vector of contemporaneous control variables, such as the population

level and the city’s illiteracy rate in city i in year t; Zi(t-k) is a vector of control variables in city i

in year t-k; and ,it is a random error term.

        If deprivation and deprivation-related diseases early in life adversely affected later-life

health outcomes, one expects the lagged measures of deprivation and disease to be correlated

with age-related pathologies, even after controlling for the contemporaneous measures of

deprivation and disease. Within this econometric framework, the contemporaneous measures

of deprivation and disease (xit) and the lagged value of the dependent variable (yi(t-k)) will

capture, at least partly, any unobserved heterogeneity that might otherwise confound the

estimated relationship between the lagged explanatory variables and the dependent variable.

Previous studies of the effects of prior disease on current populations generally do not

adequately control for the contemporaneous disease environment, and therefore tend to

overstate the effects of prior disease (Ben-Shlomo and Smith 1991). In addition, it is possible

to assess the effects of unobserved heterogeneity by examining correlations between variables


                                                              4
that should, in theory, exhibit no correlation. For example, there is no scientific evidence to

suggest that prior and acute exposure to typhoid fever increases an individual’s risk for stroke

or most types of cancer. In light of this, if one observes lagged typhoid rates in year t-k

influencing stroke or cancer rates in year t, there is reason to believe that the correlation is

driven by some unobserved factor.

       In equation (1), the variable of primary interest is xi(t-k), the lagged measure of

deprivation or deprivation-related disease. Figure 1 depicts three possible relationships

between xi(t-k) and the dependent variable, yit. Line (A) illustrates the relationship if early-life

exposure to deprivation and deprivation-related disease has lasting effects on human health.

This relationship implies that cities with relatively poor water supplies or crowded housing in

the year t-k, have elevated rates of cancer, heart disease, and kidney disease in year t. Line (B)

illustrates a competing and equally plausible hypothesis. Cities with relatively poor water

supplies or crowded housing in year t-k have low rates of cancer, heart disease, or kidney

disease in year t. This outcome would result if deprivation in year t-k induce rates of

infectious disease that are so high that only the most robust and healthy individuals can

survive to year t. Put another way, infections in the early period kill the population that

would die from cancer, heart disease, and kidney disease in the later period. Line (C)

illustrates an intermediate and non-linear relationship. This relationship implies that only

cities with extremely high rates of deprivation and deprivation-related disease in period t-k

would give rise to the censoring process embodied in line (B).




                                                  5
2.B. The Data and Some Preliminary Observations

       To implement the strategy described above, a sample of 110 American cities is

compiled and observed over two time periods, 1915 (year t) and 1900 (year t-k). For each city

in the sample, information regarding mortality rates from infectious and age-related diseases

are gathered from the 1900 and 1915 volumes of the United States Mortality Statistics. Data on

the population and housing density are taken from various Census volumes. Table 1 reports

descriptive statistics for the sample in both 1900 and 1915. Death rates are reported as deaths

per 100,000 persons. The mean total mortality rate for 1900 is 1,812.0; the mean rate for 1915 is

1,451.7. The smallest city in the sample is Pawtucket, RI, with a population of 11,523 in 1900;

the largest city is New York with a population of 3,437,202 in 1900. The median city is

Manchester, NH, with a population of 56,987 in 1900.

       Table 1 reveals two patterns of interest. First, the total mortality rate fell by roughly 20

percent between 1900 and 1915. This decline was part of rapid downward trend in urban

mortality that began after 1880 and ended sometime around 1940. Demographers and

economic historians refer to this decline as the urban mortality transition (Haines 2001).

Second, as cities moved from high to low mortality regimes, chronic diseases and diseases of

old age replaced infectious diseases as the leading causes of death. This change can be seen in

the statistics reported in table 1. Between 1900 and 1915, the death rates from cancer, heart

disease, and kidney disease rose by 50, 6, and 38 percent, respectively. Over the same period,

the death rates from tuberculosis and typhoid fever fell by 33 and 66 percent, respectively.

       The hypothesis that early life deprivation has lasting health effects suggests that one



                                                  6
should observe persistence in mortality levels across cities, despite the changing disease

profile. Cities that had relatively high infectious disease rates of during the high-mortality

regime, would have also had relatively high rates of cancer, heart disease, and other aging-

related pathologies during the early stages of the low-mortality regime. Evidence of such

persistence can be seen in figure 2, which plots the total mortality rate in 1915 against the

mortality rate in 1900. The total mortality rate in 1900 explains more than 30 percent of the

mortality rate in 1915. Although the sources of such persistence were probably manifold, one

possible explanation is that the infectious diseases that dominated the urban landscape during

the late 1800s had lingering effects on the individuals who survived.

       Trying to identify the long term of early life deprivation and disease would be

problematic if one did not focus on this particular period in American demographic history.

If one looked at earlier (later) eras so that infectious disease rates remained high (low) over the

entire study period, it would be difficult to disentangle the effects of prior disease exposure on

current health from the effects of contemporaneous disease exposure. Furthermore, the

precise timing of the urban mortality transition differed across cities. In some cities the

transition began during the late 1800s; in others, the transition did not begin until the early

1900s. Hence by focusing on repeated cross sections during the transition period broadly

construed, one can obtain greater inter-city variation in mortality rates and disease profiles

than could be realized by looking at periods when all cities were operating in either high or

low-mortality regimes.




                                                 7
2.C. Was the Urban Mortality Transition Unrelated to Prior Disease Rates?

       If the factors that initiated the mortality transition were somehow correlated with

mortality from age-related diseases this would undermine the assumption, implicit thus far,

that the urban mortality transition was unrelated to prior infectious disease rates. Consider, in

particular, the possibility that the mortality transition began only after local governments

enacted some policy P. Assume that policy P was designed to eradicate infectious diseases;

that the policy succeeded in that end; and that the cities most likely to enact P were those with

the highest death rates from infectious diseases in 1900. Assume further that policy P, while it

reduced infectious disease rates in the short term, had undesirable secondary effects that

undermined long-term health prospects. Although this scenario is predicated on a long list of

assumptions, it is not implausible, and if true, might bias the estimated coefficients on the

lagged measures of deprivation and deprivation-related disease. The relevant questions,

therefore, are twofold. First, can one identify any historical policies that might have

conformed to such a scenario? Second, if so, what estimating strategies might be employed to

address the potential relationship between the mortality transition and lagged disease rates?

       Regarding the first question, demographers and economic historians emphasize the

following three forces as having set the urban mortality transition in motion: the discovery

and dissemination of the germ theory of disease (Mokyr 2000); sustained economic growth,

which resulted in higher wages, better living conditions, and increased caloric intake and

improved nutrition (Fogel and Costa 1997; McKeown 1976); and large public health initiatives

in urban sanitation and disease prevention, such as the installation of public water and sewer



                                                 8
systems (Meeker 1974; Szreter 1988, 1997). It is unlikely that the discovery and dissemination

of the germ theory disease could have generated an outcome consistent with that implied by

the discussion of policy P. The discovery that diseases like cholera, typhoid, and tuberculosis

were caused by specific bacterial agents, as opposed to some miasmatic poison floating in the

air, was mainly the result of scientific inquiry and experimentation (Melosi 2000, pp. 60-61).

Furthermore, while the dissemination of the germ theory induced behavioral changes at the

household level such as keeping a cleaner house and washing one’s hands more frequently

(Mokyr 2000), it is difficult to see how these changes would have undermined the long-term

health of their practitioners.

       Economic growth appears a more likely avenue. One could imagine, for example, that

while economic growth might have promoted better housing and nutrition, which helped

reduce infectious disease rates in the short term, such growth also generated externalities that

undermined health in the long term, particularly in the form of increased cancer rates (Szreter

1997). A crude but suggestive piece of evidence in favor of this proposition is that while

Massacusetts, arguably the most rapidly growing and industrializing state in America, lead

the country in terms of eradicating infectious diseases, it had the highest cancer rates of any

state during the late nineteenth century (U.S. Census Bureau 1880). Proponents of growth-

lead mortality declines, however, generally portray the mechanisms as operating on a national

or supranational scale, and at least implicitly, seem to suggest that regional differences within

nations would not have been sufficient to generate the outcomes implied by the discussion of

policy P above (Fogel and Costa 1997; McKeown 1976). To the extent that labor and food



                                                9
markets were integrated within and between industrializing nations, the emphasis on national

and supranational change would seem appropriate. The available evidence suggests extensive

international and national market integration by the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth

century (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999).

       Nevertheless, it is a simple matter to directly control for differences in growth across

cities. If differences economic growth rates across urban areas is what drives the correlation

between age-related disease rates and lagged infectious disease rates then that correlation

should vanish, or at least become much smaller, once one adds measures of population

change to the regressions. In addition, the econometric results presented later in this paper

indicate that prior exposure to deprivation and deprivation-related disease works through

specific disease pathways that are scientifically plausible. There is no evidence that prior

deprivation affects age-related diseases in surprising or theoretically remote ways. For

example, the results below indicate that populations exposed to crowded living conditions

and tuberculosis early in life exhibit higher rates of cancer later in life. This pattern is sensible

in light of modern medical research showing that a history of tuberculosis is a predisposing

factor for cancer (e.g., Wu et al. 1995). The results, however, also indicate that prior exposure

to crowded housing and tuberculosis had no impact on rates of kidney disease later in life.

This pattern is also sensible in light of modern medical research which contains no evidence of

a systematic relationship between prior tuberculosis infections and kidney disease. It is not all

clear how an interpretative framework that relies solely on differences in economic growth

could account for the physiological specificity with which early-life deprivation appears to



                                                 10
affect later-life health outcomes.

       The most promising candidate to assume the role of policy P is the introduction of

urban water and sewer systems, and related attempts to filter and purify public water

supplies. Municipal governments improved public water supplies mainly to eradicate

diseases like infant diarrhea and typhoid fever, and such improvements had a large effect on

the health of urban populations. In Chicago, IL, for example, improvements in the city’s water

supply account for roughly 40 percent of the mortality decline observed between 1850 and

1925 (Ferrie and Troesken 2005), and the experience of Chicago was not unique (Cutler and

Miller 2005). Perhaps efforts to improve public water supplies helped eliminate a broad

swathe of infectious diseases, but also inadvertently exposed urban dwellers to chemicals that

increased the incidence of cancer, heart disease, and kidney disease later in life.

       There are at least two pieces of evidence that support the idea that water treatment

processes during the early 1900s might have impaired long-term health. First, the chemistry of

water treatment is complex, as are the potential health effects of alternative treatment

processes (Booker 2000; Foss-Mollan 2001, pp. 168-75). Only recently have scientists and

policymakers come to appreciate this complexity. In 1900, the engineers who operated water

treatment facilities were almost exclusively concerned with eradicating bacterial pathogens;

they were much less concerned, if they were concerned at all, about inorganic water

constituents and their potential effects on human health (Melosi 2000). Second, recent

research in public and environmental health suggests that water can affect human health in a

myriad of hitherto unappreciated ways. For example, water hardness is correlated with



                                                11
cardiovascular disease and the source of this correlation remains a mystery (Sauvant and

Pepin 2002); heavy metals corroded from the interior of water distribution pipes, previously

considered an unimportant health risk, have been shown to adversely affect both the young

and old (Troesken 2006); and the by products of water treatment techniques used to destroy

organic pathogens like typhoid and cryptosporidium has been shown to increase the risk of

cancer and adverse pregnancy outcomes (Boorman et al. 1999; Bove et al. 2002).

       The possible connection between water treatment and age-related pathologies can be

explored through remedial steps. For example, one might imagine that the cities that were the

most aggressive in treating their water supplies with potentially carcinogenic chemicals were

those with the highest typhoid rates in 1900. If so, one should observe a strong correlation

between cancer rates in 1915 and typhoid rates in 1900, despite the fact that there is no medical

evidence that prior exposure to an acute typhoid infection increases a person’s risk of

developing cancer later in life.1 An alternative would be to ask if the water treatment

processes introduced after 1900 might account for relationships involving tuberculosis,

crowded housing, and subsequent cancer rates.

       Another candidate for policy P is the introduction of vaccines and antibiotics to



       1
          There is evidence that typhoid carriers, who are chronically exposed to the typhoid
bacilli, face a higher risk of urinary and gall bladder cancer. There are, however, three reasons
to believe that this effect would not be sufficiently large to influence the estimation strategy
outlined above. First, less than 5 percent of all individuals exposed to typhoid ever become
carriers (Bhan et al. 2005). Second, today as in the past, gall bladder and urinary cancer are
relatively uncommon forms of cancer, with the former accounting for less than 1 percent of all
cases and the latter accounting for less than 10 percent (Edwards et al. 2005). Third,
individuals exposed to acute infections, who constitute more than 90 percent of all typhoid
victims, do not suffer from elevated rates of cancer later in life (Caygill et al. 1994).

                                               12
combat infectious diseases. Most demographic and economic historians, however, do not

believe improved medical therapies played a significant role in the mortality transition.

Consider the fall in tuberculosis and typhoid rates highlighted in table 1. Although Koch

isolated the tuberculosis bacillus during the late nineteenth century, the first effective vaccine

was not introduced until 1921. Antibiotic treatments for tuberculosis were not introduced

until the 1940s. These changes come too late to explain even part of the decline in mortality

shown in table 1, which focuses on the period 1900 to 1915 (Johnston 1993).

       In the case of typhoid, Almroth Wright developed an effective typhoid vaccine around

1900. Employing dead bacteria to induce an immune response, the vaccine had a protective

effect of about 75 percent. While the vaccine could be produced cheaply and easily, it was

costly to store and administer. The vaccine was given through three shots with a hypodermic

needle, each shot ten days apart. The vaccine also frequently caused adverse reactions,

including high fever, soreness, nausea, vomiting, and headaches. Developed in England, the

Wright vaccine did not gain popularity in the United States until World War I, when the

American high command ordered mandatory vaccination for all soldiers.2 As for clinical

treatments, these did not come on the scene until fairly late. Not until 1948, when doctors

started giving typhoid victims the antibiotic chloramphenicol, did the medical community



       2
         In part because of these reactions and the vaccine’s limited effectiveness, the Secretary
of the Connecticut State Board of Health argued in 1913 that: “It is not to be expected . . . that
typhoid vaccination will ever be used as is smallpox vaccination and depended upon for the
eradication of typhoid, nor should it be. For that purpose we continue to depend on, and
strive for, pure water, pure food, proper sewerage disposal, and other hygienic measures.”
See Townsend (1913).


                                                13
develop effective treatments for typhoid fever (LeBaron and Taylor 1993).

3. Two Infectious Diseases

        This section reviews the etiology of two infectious diseases, tuberculosis and typhoid

fever. The central messages of this discussion are twofold. First, both tuberculosis and

typhoid are positively correlated with poverty and material deprivation. In the case of

tuberculosis, poor diet and crowded housing conditions are strong predictors of the incidence

of the disease. In the case of typhoid fever, impure water and inadequate sewerage are the

main determinants of disease rates. Second, both tuberculosis and typhoid have long-lasting

effects on human health, so that exposure to either disease increases the risk of various

pathologies later in life.

3.A. Tuberculosis

        Although tuberculosis was endemic in much of the ancient world, it did not become a

prominent cause of death in Europe and North America until the eighteenth and nineteenth

centuries, when rapid industrialization and urbanization created the population densities

necessary for the disease to proliferate. Today, about one-third of the world’s population is

infected with tuberculosis. With nine million new cases arising every year, there are two to

three million deaths from tuberculosis annually. Depending on the region, estimated case

fatality rates range from 10 to 50 percent. The geographic variation in the incidence of

tuberculosis suggests the disease is correlated with poverty and underdevelopment. For

example, in Indonesia and Zimbabwe, 49 and 64 percent of the population, respectively, is

infected with tuberculosis. In contrast, in Europe less than 20 percent of the population is



                                               14
infected, with the heaviest burden of the disease located in the poorest and least developed

regions. In the United States, 7 percent of the population is infected (Dye et al. 1999; Johnston

1993).

         Tuberculosis is caused by the bacillus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Once they enter the

body, tubercle bacilli have no fixed or easily defined incubation and illness period. They can

result in a quick and acute infection that kills the victim in a few weeks, or they can lie

dormant for years until an individual’s resistance falls. Once the infection becomes active,

however, it usually takes months and sometimes years before the disease culminates in either

recovery or death. Although tuberculosis can infect almost any part of the body, it is most

commonly associated with the lungs and a persistent and violent cough. In advanced cases,

patients will sometimes cough up blood hemorrhaged in the lungs, but more frequently,

coughing produces only blood-streaked sputum. Aside from frequent coughing, other

symptoms of an active tuberculosis infection include anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, low-grade

anxiety, irregular menstruation in women, muscle aches, sweating, fever, and intermittent

chills. Because tuberculosis often produces mild symptoms that mimic the common cold or

the flu, historically many individuals recovered from the disease without ever realizing they

had it. In contrast to many other infectious diseases, exposure to tuberculosis early in life

confers no immunity or protection against later life infections (Johnston 1993).

         As for the long-term effects of tuberculosis on human health, the current medical

literature focuses mainly on cancer. Prior lung disease is generally recognized as a risk factor

for lung cancer (Ernster 1996). For example, in a study of nearly 2,000 non-smoking American



                                                15
women, Wu et al. (1995) find that a history of lung disease such as tuberculosis or pneumonia

increases the risk of developing lung cancer by 56 percent. More recently, Tocque et al. (2005)

followed a cohort of 439 tuberculosis patients over an eight year period. Of these patients,

twenty four (28 percent) died from cancer within the study period. This implies that TB

patients are 30 times more likely than the general population to die of lung cancer within eight

years of developing active cases of tuberculosis. There are also reports that a history of

tuberculosis increases the risk of prostate cancer and brain tumors (Ilic et al. 1996; Mills et al.

1989; Sidney et al. 1991). Although the precise mechanisms through which tuberculosis gives

rise to cancer are not yet clear, recent research focuses on the immunological processes

involved in combating both cancer and tuberculosis and higher protein expression in certain

genes after tuberculosis infection (Cocito and Maes 1998; Song et al. 2005).

       Beyond cancer, there is evidence indicating that infectious agents, particularly

Chlamydia pneumoniae, play a role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, myocardial

infarction, and stroke (Nieto 1998; Macko et al. 1996). The evidence linking inflammatory

infections like tuberculosis and influenza to strokes later in life appears particularly strong,

and for certain populations, respiratory infections could increase the risk of stroke by a factor

of 4 (Paganini-Hill et al. 2002). It has been shown, for example, that AIDS patients, who are

especially vulnerable to tuberculosis and other infections, have an elevated risk of stroke (Cole

et al. 2003). Along the same lines, Grau et al. (2005) show that regular influenza vaccination

reduces the risk of stroke.

       A variety of host factors shape individual vulnerability to tuberculosis. Infants,



                                                 16
children, adolescents, and the elderly are more vulnerable to active infection than are young

adults and the middle aged. Below the age of thirty, women are at greater risk from dying

from tuberculosis than men, while after thirty, the male mortality rate exceeds the female rate

(Johnston 1993). Genetic factors heavily influence the ability of individuals and groups to

withstand tuberculosis and help explain why only 10 percent of those infected with TB ever

develop the active disease (Ottenhoff et al. 2005). This genetic component raises the possibility

that repeated exposure has given some ethnic groups a heightened level of immunity to

tuberculosis. For example, there is evidence to suggest that Jews are more resistant to the

disease than other groups because of their long history of living in urban areas (Johnston

1993). Individuals with compromised immune systems are particularly vulnerable to

tuberculosis, and the disease is pervasive among individuals with HIV and AIDS (Mohle-

Boetani et al. 2002). Relatedly, animal experiments indicate that stress undermines immune

function and impairs the body’s ability to fight off tuberculosis (El-Lethey et al. 2003).

       Nutritional status has long been recognized as an important determinant of TB-

mortality (Macallan 1999). During the early twentieth century, there emerged a series of

studies showing that protein-rich diets hastened recovery and promoted immunity against

tuberculosis (Lange and Simmond 1923; Krause and Willis 1919; Zueblin 1924). More recent

studies indicate that deficiencies in vitamin D predispose individuals to severe cases of

tuberculosis (Wilkinson et al. 2000), and suggest that high cholesterol diets can hasten recovery

from the disease (Pérez-Guzmán et al. 2005). Large-scale epidemiological studies indicate that

populations with low serum cholesterol levels have elevated rates of tuberculosis and



                                                17
tuberculosis mortality (Kozarevic et al. 1981). Overall nutrition and body mass are important

because tuberculosis induces wasting and anorexia. Individuals with higher body mass,

therefore, are in a better position to survive the disease. Beyond this, it is well known that

alcoholics are more susceptible to tuberculosis than the general population. This heightened

susceptibility appears to be related to altered T cell modulation in the alcoholic (Li et al. 1998).

       The two environmental factors that have the greatest impact on tuberculosis are

working and housing conditions. Individuals working in dusty trades tend to have much

higher rates of tuberculosis than the general population. For example, the rate of tuberculosis

among coal miners in northern Spain is three times greater than the rate among non-coal

miners in the same region (Mosquera et al. 1994). Similarly, gold miners in South Africa and

foundry workers in Denmark who are exposed to silica dust have elevated rates of

tuberculosis (Sherson and Lander 1990; Hnizdo and Murray 1998). Overcrowded and poorly-

ventilated housing has long been recognized as facilitating the transmission of tuberculosis.

Crowding matters because when an infected individual coughs or sneezes, the residue hangs

in the air, and can be easily inhaled by those close by. The connection between crowded

housing and tuberculosis is among the most robust epidemiological associations ever

discovered, and has been confirmed repeatedly in modern, case-controlled studies (Johnston

1993; Reinhard et al. 1997; Elender et al. 1998).

3.B. Typhoid Fever

       Typhoid fever is caused by Salmonella typhi, a bacterium which survives only in human

hosts and lives in the intestinal tract. People typically contract typhoid by drinking water



                                                    18
tainted with human waste. Historically, a common transmission might have gone like this.

The family of a typhoid victim dumped the patient’s waste into a cesspool or privy vault. If

the vault was too shallow or had leaks, it seeped into underground water sources. In turn, if

these water sources were not adequately filtered, people who drew their water from them

contracted typhoid. A related mode of transmission occurred when surface privies were not

screened. With open privies, flies would interact with the pathogens contained in human

wastes and then transfer the germs to the kitchens of neighboring homes. Fly-transmitted

infections appear to have been common in the American South, where the climate was

conducive to the proliferation of insects. Although tainted drinking water and inadequate

sewerage are the most frequent modes of transmission, other vectors include: shellfish from

polluted waters; milk handled by typhoid infected individuals; vegetables washed with

tainted water; and direct infections from typhoid carriers. (Budd 1877; Whipple 1908; Terry

1911).

         To the extent poverty is correlated with poor sanitation and health practices, typhoid is

also positively correlated with poverty. For example, in the U.S., Europe, and Japan today, the

annual death rate from typhoid is less 1 death per 100,000 persons, while in lesser-developed

areas, such as Africa and southeast Asia, annual death rates range from 500 to 1,000 (Crump et

al. 2004). Conversely, there is evidence that improvements in public water supplies (which

eventually eradicated typhoid fever in American cities) benefitted poor socioeconomic groups

disproportionately. In the typical American city, water filtration reduced black typhoid rates

by 53 percent, but white typhoid rates by only 16 percent (Troesken 2004). This pattern



                                                19
supports the idea that disadvantaged socioeconomic groups were relatively ineffective in

preventing typhoid fever through private means. It also supports the idea that the

disadvantaged bore the brunt of disease in the absence of filtered and universally distributed

water supplies.

       Once they enter the body, typhoid bacilli have a one to three week incubation period.

During incubation, an infected individual experiences mild fatigue, loss of appetite, and

minor muscle aches. After incubation, more severe symptoms develop, including, chills,

coated tongue, nose bleeds, coughing, insomnia, nausea, and diarrhea. At its early stages,

typhoid’s symptoms often resemble those of respiratory diseases and pneumonia is often

present. In nearly all cases, typhoid victims develop a severe fever with body temperatures

reaching as high as 105° Fahrenheit. A week or so after incubation, rose-colored spots

sometimes appear on the patient’s abdomen. Three weeks after incubation, the disease is at its

worst. The patient is delirious, emaciated, and often has blood-tinged stools. Historically,

perhaps as many as one in five typhoid victims experienced a gastrointestinal hemorrhage.

Internal hemorrhaging results when typhoid perforates the intestinal wall, and frequently

continues on to attack the kidneys and liver (Bhan et al. 2005; LeBaron and Taylor 1993).

       Typhoid fever has diffuse effects, adversely impacting many physiological systems,

including the heart and respiratory system, the liver and kidneys, and the neurological

system. Khosla (1981) reports that 12 percent of typhoid patients studied during the mid-

twentieth century experienced some sort of cardiac event while fighting off the disease. A

study of 65 lethal cases of typhoid fever among Russian soldiers between 1980 and 1986 finds



                                               20
that 85 percent of the population experienced myocarditis, and in 14 percent of the cases acute

heart failure was the proximate cause of death (Bobin et al. 1993). Animal experiments reveal

similar evidence (Sen et al. 1987). As for typhoid’s impact on respiratory function, recent

autopsies of typhoid victims reveal evidence consistent with respiratory distress syndrome

(Azad et al. 1997). The aforementioned study of Russian soldiers suggests that about 75

percent of all typhoid victims develop pneumonia, and that pneumonia is the proximate cause

of death in 20 percent of the cases (Bobin et al. 1993). The claim that typhoid adversely affects

respiratory function receives support from Costa (2000), who shows that exposure to typhoid

increases the risk of respiratory problems later in life by more than 50 percent.

       In a recent paper with the apt title, “The Liver in Typhoid Fever: Always Affected, Not

Just a Complication,” Morgenstern and Hayes (1991) show that 90 percent of all typhoid cases

have some degree of liver involvement, ranging from biochemical abnormalities to overt

hepatitis– about 5 percent of all typhoid victims develop hepatitis. Kidney problems are also

common, ranging from swelling and high protein levels in the urine, to full-blown nephritis.

Studies of current populations suggest that at least 10 to 15 percent of typhoid sufferers

experience a significant abnormality in kidney function. In another study, 79 percent of all

typhoid victims experienced symptoms consistent with urinary tract infections (Adu et al.

1975; Khosla and Lochan 1992). Today, complications with the kidney and liver can be

managed through dialysis and drug treatment, limiting the long-term damage to these vital

organs. However, among historical populations, typhoid was allowed to run its course and it

seems likely that the disease would have left the kidneys and liver irreparably compromised



                                               21
for a large portion of the population that survived the short term effects of the disease.

       The high fever associated with typhoid is so severe that between 35 to 85 percent of all

victims experience neurological complications. These complications include abnormal

behavior, babbling speech, nervous tremors, severe confusion, and visual hallucinations (30 to

70 percent of all cases); some type of swelling or inflamation of the brain or spinal chord (5 to

10 percent of all cases); and acute schizophrenia or psychosis (1 to 2 percent of all cases).

Autopsies of people who have been killed by typhoid reveal diffuse damage to neurons,

softening of the brain’s vascular system, the formation of abscesses on the brain, and

discharges of pus in the brain and meninges (Ali et al. 1997). If, however, the patient survives

all of this, the fever begins to fall off and a long period of recovery sets in. It can take as long

as four months to fully recover. Surprisingly, given the breadth and severity of typhoid’s

symptoms, more than 90 percent of its victims survived historically, and today, with the aid of

antibiotics, more than 99 percent of typhoid patients survive (Bhan et al. 2005; LeBaron and

Taylor 1993).

       That typhoid killed only 5 to 10 percent of its victims might lead one to wonder just

how significant this disease could have been for human health and longevity. But typhoid’s

low case fatality rate understates its true impact, because when the disease did not kill quickly

and directly, it killed slowly and indirectly. Consider, for example, how typhoid affected the

cardiovascular system over the long term. Using a sample of nearly 30,000 Union Army

veterans, Costa (2000) shows that those recruits who fell victim to typhoid during the Civil

War had a 25 percent higher risk of heart trouble forty years later. In a turn-of-the-century



                                                 22
study, Thayer (1904) followed 182 typhoid survivors over a thirteen-year period. He found

that typhoid survivors had elevated pulse rates, high blood pressure, enlarged hearts, and

suffered from cardiac murmurs more frequently than the control population. More recently,

fifty adult patients with typhoid fever were given daily ECGs and electrolyte assessments to

evaluate cardiac status. Of these patients, 29 (58 percent) exhibited ECG or enzyme changes,

and 17 (34 percent) exhibited both ECG and enzyme changes. Based on these findings, the

authors of this study conclude that “definite injury to the heart occurs during typhoid fever”

(Nand et al. 1996).

       More general evidence regarding typhoid’s lingering health effects comes from a study

conducted by Dublin (1915). A statistician for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company,

Dublin followed 1,574 typhoid survivors over a three year period. Comparing the mortality

rates of typhoid survivors to the mortality rates of similarly-aged persons in the general

population, he found that typhoid survivors were, on average, 3 times more likely to have

died than the general population in the first year after recovery, and typhoid survivors were 2

times more likely to have died than the general population in the second year after recovery.

The two biggest killers of the typhoid survivors were tuberculosis (39 percent of all deaths)

and heart failure (23 percent). Other prominent killers included kidney failure (8 percent) and

pneumonia (7 percent).

4. Results

       Before turning to the formal regression results, consider the patterns exhibited in

figures 3, 4, and 5. Taken together, these three figures suggest that cities with crowded



                                               23
housing in the year 1900 increased the incidence of tuberculosis during the same period, and

in turn, because prior exposure to TB is a risk factor for cancer, these same cities had elevated

rates of cancer fifteen years later. Using the city-level data described above, figure 3 plots

tuberculosis rates in 1900 against persons per dwelling in 1900. A trend line is also plotted (R2

= .091). Consistent with much other research, the patterns here suggest a strong positive

correlation between tuberculosis and crowded housing. Figure 4 plots cancer rates in 1915

against persons per dwelling in 1900. Two fitted lines are also plotted. One fitted line is based

on a simple linear regression model that excludes four cities with unusually crowded housing

conditions(R2 = .049); the other is based on a model that includes the square of persons-per-

dwelling (R2 = .051). These data indicate that in cities that had fewer than 9.2 persons per

dwelling, there is a positive and statistically significant relationship between crowded housing

conditions in 1900 and cancer rates fifteen years later. Figure 5 plots cancer rates in 1915

against tuberculosis rates in 1900. The trend line is based on a regression that includes the

square of the tuberculosis rate in 1900, as well as the level (R2 = .098). These data mirror those

shown in figure 4, and suggest that cancer rates in 1915 were positively correlated with

tuberculosis rates in 1900, below some threshold level of tuberculosis.

       Table 2 reports the formal regression results. Regression (1) suggests that even after

controlling for lagged cancer rates and for persons-per-dwelling in 1915, there exists a

parabolic relationship between persons per dwelling in 1900 and the cancer rate in 1915. The

fit, however, is noisy and not as strong as when tuberculosis rates are used directly.

Regression (2) shows that even after controlling for lagged cancer rates and for the



                                                24
tuberculosis rate in 1915, there exists a parabolic relationship between the tuberculosis rate in

1900 and the cancer rate in 1915. The estimates from regression (2) imply that had tuberculosis

been eradicated in 1900, the death rate from cancer in 1915 would have been 32 percent lower

than it otherwise was. Figure 6 plots the relationship between the 1900-tuberculosis rate and

the 1915-cancer rate implied by the estimates in regression (2). The vertical lines at 348 and

432 indicate the 95th and 99th percentiles, respectively, for the tuberculosis rate in 1900. In light

of the distribution of tuberculosis rates in 1900, the estimated relationship between the lagged

tuberculosis rate and the cancer rate in 1915 suggests that for all but a handful of cities with

unusually high rates of TB, there was a strong positive relationship between cancer and prior

tuberculosis rates.

       Regressions (3) and (4) explore the relationship between stroke and prior exposure to

poor housing and tuberculosis. There is not a statistically significant relationship between

stroke in 1915 and housing density in 1900 (see regression 3). However, there is a strong and

statistically significant correlation between stroke in 1915 and the tuberculosis rate in 1900.

The estimates from regression (4) imply that had tuberculosis been eradicated in 1900, the

death rate from stroke in 1915 would have been 32 percent lower than it otherwise was.

Figure 7 plots the relationship between the 1900-tuberculosis rate and the 1915-stroke rate

implied by the estimates in regression (4). As before, the vertical lines indicate the 95th and 99th

percentiles for the tuberculosis rate in 1900. In light of the distribution, the estimated

relationship between the lagged tuberculosis rate and the stroke rate in 1915 suggests that for

all but a handful of cities with unusually high rates of TB, there was a strong positive



                                                 25
relationship between stroke and prior tuberculosis rates. The parabolic relationship between

the 1900-tuberculosis rate and the 1915-stroke rate is sufficiently strong that it can be observed

in the raw data as well. This is shown in figure 8, which plots the 1915-stroke rate against the

1900-tuberculosis rate. A non-linear trend line is also plotted (R2 = .044).

       Regressions (1)-(4) are consistent with the existing medical literature, which indicates

that there are specific physiological pathways through which exposure to tuberculosis at an

early life stage increases the risk of cancer and stroke at a later life stage. Nevertheless, it is

possible that regressions (1)-(4) are picking up the effects of some unobserved process, and not

the effects of prior exposure to crowded housing conditions and tuberculosis. To explore this

possibility further, regressions (5) and (6) identify the extent to which prior exposure to

tuberculosis increases the risk of kidney disease later in life. Because there exists no scientific

or medical evidence to suggest that a history of tuberculosis is a risk factor for kidney disease,

any correlation between the death rate from kidney disease in 1915 and the death rate from

tuberculosis in 1900 would raise questions about what drives the correlation between

cancer/stroke and prior tuberculosis rates. However, regressions (5) and (6) indicate that there

is no such correlation.

       To the extent that tuberculosis was associated with crowded housing and poor

nutrition, the results above suggest that exposure to inadequate housing and diet at an early

life stage increased the risk of cancer and stroke at a later life stage. A related hypothesis is

that exposure to polluted water and unsanitary sewage disposal also has lingering health

effects. This hypothesis can be tested by looking at the relationship between typhoid fever



                                                  26
and various age-related pathologies. As explained above, impure water supplies and

substandard sewerage systems affected poor socioeconomic groups disproportionately and

resulted in high rates of typhoid fever. Furthermore, typhoid fever had a low case fatality

rate, had diffuse health effects, and damaged critical organs, particularly the heart and

kidneys. Hence, if exposure to impure water and inadequate sewage disposal at an early life

stage increased the risk of disease at a later life stage, one expects to observe a strong and

positive correlation between heart and kidney disease in 1915 and typhoid in 1900.

       Figures 9 and 10, which plot the death rate from heart and kidney disease in 1915 and

against the death rate from typhoid fever in 1900, support the hypothesis that exposure to

tainted drinking water and substandard sewerage had lingering health effects. In particular,

for death rates from typhoid fever in 1900 that range from 10 to 60 deaths per 100,000 persons,

figure 9 shows that the death rate from heart disease in 1915 rises from around 140 to more

than 160. After the death rate from typhoid in 1900 reaches 70, a censoring process sets in and

typhoid begins to kill off individuals who would have otherwise died from heart disease later

in life. It is notable, however, that most cities had death rates below this threshold. Figure 10

reveals the same basic pattern for kidney disease. Typhoid rates between 10 and 70 are

associated increases in the death rate from kidney disease fifteen years later, while typhoid

rates greater than 70 are associated with declining rates of kidney disease in later years.

       Table 3 reports the results of three regressions. Regression (1) supports the findings

presented in figure 8 regarding typhoid fever and heart disease. After controlling for the

contemporaneous typhoid rate and the lagged death rate from heart disease, the typhoid rate



                                                27
in 1900 is related in a parabolic fashion to the death rate from heart disease in 1915. Moreover,

the coefficient estimates suggest that the lagged typhoid rate had a large effect on heart

disease. In particular, if urban governments in 1900 could have eradicated typhoid fever, the

death rate from heart disease in 1915 would have been reduced by 21 percent. Regression (2)

identifies the effects of early-life exposure to typhoid on the death rate from kidney disease in

later life. After controlling for the contemporaneous typhoid rate and the lagged death rate

from kidney disease, the typhoid rate in 1900 is related in a parabolic fashion to the death rate

from kidney disease in 1915. The coefficient estimates suggest that typhoid had a large and

adverse effect on long-term kidney function. If typhoid fever had been eradicated in 1900

(through aggressive investment in urban water and sewer systems), the death rate from kidney

disease in 1915 would have been reduced by 23 percent.

       Regressions (3) and (4) explore the possibility that regressions (1) and (2) yield biased

results because of unobserved heterogeneity. It explores this possibility by identifying the

correlations between cancer and typhoid fever; and between stroke and typhoid. As explained

above, there is no evidence that exposure to typhoid at an earlier life stage increases the risk of

stroke or most forms of cancer at a later life stage. (The only exception to this is the very small

proportion of the exposed population that become typhoid carries. Typhoid carriers have an

elevated risk of bladder cancer, a relatively uncommon form of cancer.) If the correlation

between heart/kidney disease and lagged typhoid fever rates is driven by unobserved

heterogeneity, one might expect to observe the same correlation between cancer/stroke and

lagged typhoid rates even though there is no scientific evidence to suggest such a relationship.



                                                28
The results of regression (3), however, do not indicate that cancer is related to lagged typhoid

rates in the same way as heart and kidney disease. On the contrary, the exact opposite pattern

obtains. Below some threshold, increasing typhoid rates in 1900 are associated with falling

cancer rates in 1915. This is consistent with the idea that typhoid was killing off individuals

who would have otherwise died from cancer later in life. The results in regression (4),

moreover, indicate that there is no systematic correlation between the death rate from stroke in

1915 and the death rate from typhoid fever in 1900.

5. Conclusions

       The results above are consistent with the hypothesis that deprivation early in life can

have lingering physiological effects. In particular, the results suggest that crowded housing

conditions in early life facilitate the spread of tuberculosis, which in turn, increases the risk of

cancer and stroke later in life. The lingering effects of crowded housing and tuberculosis

appear to have been large. In the typical city, eradicating tuberculosis in 1900 would have

reduced the death rates from cancer and stroke in 1915 by 32 percent. Similarly, drinking

impure water in early life raises the likelihood that one will be infected with typhoid fever,

which in turn, increases the risk of heart and kidney disease later in life. Again, the lingering

effects appear to have been large. In the typical city, eradicating typhoid fever in 1900 would

have reduced the death rate from heart disease by 21 percent, and the death rate from kidney

disease by 23 percent. These results are obtained after including controls for the

contemporaneous disease environment, and after including lagged values of the dependent

variable and the overall disease environment.



                                                 29
References

Adu, D., Y. Anim-Addo, A.K. Foli, E.D. Yeboah, J.K. Quartey. 1975. “Acute Renal Failure and
      Typhoid Fever.” Ghana Medical Journal, 14:172-74.

Ali, Gazanfar, Samia Rashid, M.A. Kamli, Parvez A. Shah, and G.Q. Allaqaband. 1997.
       “Spectrum of Neuropsychiatric Complications in 791 Cases of Typhoid Fever.”
       Tropical Medicine and International Health, 2:314-18.

Alison, W.P. 1842. “On the Destitution and Mortality in Some Large Towns in Scotland,”
       Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 5:289-92.

Appleby, Andrew B. 1979. “Diet: Sources: Problems, Possibilities,” in Health, Medicine, and
      Mortality in the Sixteenth Century. Charles Webster, editor. Cambridge.

Azad, A.K., R. Islam, M.A. Salam, A.N. Alam, M. Islam, and T. Butler. 1997. “Comparison of
      Clinical Features and Pathologic Findings in Fatal Cases of Typhoid Fever During the
      Initial and Later Stages of the Disease,” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
      Hygiene, 56:490-93.

Barker, D.J.P. 1992. Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. London: BMJ Publishing Group.

Barker, D.J.P. 1994. Mothers, Babies, and Disease Later in Life. London: BMJ Publishing Group.

Ben-Schlomo, Y., and G.D. Smith. 1991. “Deprivation in Infancy or in Adult Life: Which is
      More Important for Mortality Risk?” Lancet, 337:530-34.

Bengtsson, T., and M. Lindstrom. 2000. “Childhood Misery and Disease in Later Life: the
       Effects on Mortality in Old Age of Hazards Experienced in Early Life, southern
       Sweden, 1760-1894,” Population Studies, 54:263-77.

Bhan, M.K., Rajiv Bahl, and Shinjini Bhatnagar. 2005. “Typhoid and Paratyphoid Fever,”
      Lancet, 366:749-62.

Bobin, A.N., N.D. Klochkov, and N.V. Bogomolova. 1993. “Complications and the Proximate
       Cause of Death in Typhoid,” Voenno-Meditsinkii Zhurnal, 1:49-52.

Booker, Susan. 2000. “NTP Taps Disinfection By-Products for Study,” Environmental Health
      Perspectives, 108:A64-A67.




                                              30
Boorman, G.A., V. Dellarco, J.K. Dunnick, et al. 1999. “Drinking Water Disinfection By-
      Products: Review and Approach to Toxicity Evaluation,” Environmental Health
      Perspectives, 107:207-217.

Bove, F., Y. Shim, and P. Zeitz. 2002. “Drinking Water Contaminants and Adverse Pregnancy
       Outcomes: A Review,” Environmental Health Perspectives, 110:61-74.

Britton, Warwick J., and Umainthan Palendira. 2003. “Improving Vaccines against
        Tuberculosis,” Immunology and Cell Biology, 81:34-45.

Budd, William. 1877. “Typhoid Fever: Its Nature, Mode of Spreading, and Prevention.”
      Reprinted in American Journal of Public Health, 8:610-12.

Caygill, C.P.J., M.J. Hill, M. Braddick, et al. 1994. “Cancer in Chronic Typhoid and
       Paratyphoid Carriers,” Lancet, 343:83-84.

Cocita, C., and H. Maes. 1998. “Immunological Relatedness of the Protective Mechanisms
        against Tuberculosis and Cancer,” European Journal of Clinical Investigation, 28:1-12.

Cole, John W., Amelia N. Pinto, J. Richard Hebel, et al. 2003. “Acquired Immunodeficiency
        Syndrome and the Risk of Stroke,” Stroke, 35:51-56.

Costa, Dora L. 2000. “Understanding the Twentieth-Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
       Among Older Men.” Demography, 37:53-72.

Crump, J.A., S.P. Luby, and E.D. Mintz. 2004. “The Global Burden of Typhoid Fever,” Bulletin
     of the World Health Organization, 82:346-53.

Curschmann, H. 1901. Typhoid Fever and Typhus Fever. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders and
      Company.

Cutler, David M., and Grant Miller. 2004. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
        Advances: The 20th Century United States.” NBER working paper #10511.

Dedman, D.J., D. Gunnell, G. Davey Smith, et al. 2001. “Childhood Housing Conditions and
     Later Mortality in the Boyd Orr Cohort,” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
     55:10-15.

Dorling, D., R. Mitchell, M. Shaw, et al. 2000. “The Ghosts of Christmas Past: Health Effects of
       Poverty in London in 1896 and 1991,” British Medical Journal, 321:1547-51.




                                                31
Dublin, Louis I. 1915. “Typhoid Fever and Its Sequelae.” American Journal of Public Health,
       5:20-27.

Dye, Christopher, Suzanne Scheele, Paul Dolin, et al. 1999. “Global Burden of Tuberculosis:
      Estimated Incidence, Prevalence, and Mortality by Country,” Journal of the American
      Medical Association, 282:677-86.

Edwards, Brenda K., Martin L. Brown, Phyllis A. Wingo, Holly L. Howe, et al. 2005. “Annual
      Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer, 1975-2005, Featuring Population Based
      Trends in Cancer Treatment,” Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 97:1407-26.

Elender, F., G. Bentham, and I. Langford. 1998. “Tuberculosis Mortality in England and
      Wales during 1982-1992: Its Association with Poverty, Ethnicity, and AIDS,” Social
      Science and Medicine, 46:673-81.

El-Lethey, H., B. Huber-Eicher, T.W. Jungi. 2003. “Exploration of Stress Induced
       Immunosuppression in Chickens Reveals Both Stress-Resistant and Stress-Susceptible
       Antigen Responses,” Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology, 95:91-101.

Ernster, V.L. 1996. “Female Lung Cancer,” Annual Review of Public Health, 17:97-114.

Ferrie, Joseph P., and Werner Troesken. 2005. “Death and the City: Chicago’s Mortality
        Transition, 1857-1925.” Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        Cambridge, MA.

Fogel, Robert W., and Dora L. Costa. 1997. “A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, with Some
       Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs, and Pension Costs,”
       Demography, 34:49-66.

Foss-Mollan, K. 2001. Hard Water: Politics and Water Supply in Milwaukee, 1870-1995. West
      Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.

Grau, A.J., B. Fischer, C. Barth, et al. 2005. “Influenza Vaccination is Associated with a
       Reduced Risk of Stroke,” Stroke, 36:1501-06.

Griffin, Daniel. 1841. “An Enquiry into the Mortality Occurring Among the Poor of the City
        of Limerick,” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 3:305-30.

Haines, Michael R. 1995. “Socio-economic Differentials in Infant and Child Mortality during
       the Mortality Decline: England and Wales, 1890-1911,” Population Studies, 49:297-315.




                                               32
Haines, Michael R. 2001. “The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940.”
       Historical Paper No. 134. National Bureau of Economic Research. (A shorter version
       of this paper also appears in the journal Annales de Demographie Historique.)

Hare, Hobart Amory, and E.J.G. Beardsley. 1909. The Medical Complications Accidents and
       Sequels of Typhoid Fever and the Other Exanthemata. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.

Hnizdo, E., and J. Murray. 1998. “Risk of Pulmonary Tuberculosis Relative to Silicosis and
      Exposure to Silica Dust in South African Gold Miners,” Occupational and Environmental
      Medicine, 55:496-505.

Horrocks, Thomas A. 1995. “‘The Poor Man’s Riches, The Rich Man’s Bliss’: Regimen,
      Reform, and the `Journal of Health’, 1829-1833,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical
      Society, 139:115-34.

Ilic, M., H. Vlajinac, and J. Marinkovic. 1996. “Case-Control Study of Risk Factors for Prostate
        Cancer,” British Journal of Cancer, 74:1682-86.

Johnston, William D. 1993. “Tuberculosis,” in The Cambridge World History of Disease. Kenneth
       Kiple, editor. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Khosla, S.N. 1981. “The Heart in Enteric (Typhoid) Fever.” Journal of Tropical Medicine and
       Hygiene, 84:125-31.

Khosla, S.N., and R. Lochan. 1992. “Renal Dysfunction in Enteric Fever.” Journal of the
       Association of Physicians of India, 39:382-84.

Kozarevic, D., D. McGee, N. Vojvodic, T. Gordon, Z. Racic, W. Zukel, and T. Dawber. 1981.
      “Serum Cholesterol and Mortality: the Yugoslavia Cardiovascular Study,” American
      Journal of Epidemiology, 114:21-28.

Krause, A.K., and H.S. Willis. 1919. “Experiments on the Influence of Protein Intoxication on
      Tuberculosis Infection in Guinea Pigs,” American Review of Tuberculosis, 3:153-65.

Lange, Linda B., and Nina Simmond. 1923-24. “Experimental Tuberculosis in Rats in Varied
       Diets; Protein and Salt Factors,” American Review of Tuberculosis, 7:49-59.

LeBaron, Charles W., and David W. Taylor. 1993. “Typhoid Fever,” in The Cambridge World
      History of Disease. Kenneth Kiple, editor. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Leon, David A., and George Davey Smith. 2000. “Infant Mortality, Stomach Cancer, Stroke,
       and Coronary Heart Disease: Ecological Analysis,” British Medical Journal, 320:1705-06.

                                               33
Li, X., C.J. Grossman, C.L. Mendenhall, et al. 1998. “Host Responses to Mycobacterial
        Infection in the Alcoholic Rat: Male and Female Dimorphism,” Alcohol, 16:207-12.

Macallan, D.C. 1999. “Malnutrition in Tuberculosis,” Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious
       Disease, 34:153-57.

Macleod, John, George Davey Smith, Chris Metcalf, et al. 2005. “Is Subjective Social Status a
      More Important Determinant of Health Than Objective Social Status? Evidence from a
      Prospective Observational Study of Scottish Men,” Social Science and Medicine, 61:1916-
      29.

Macko, Richard F., Sebastian F. Ameriso, Robert Barndt, et al. 1996. “Precipitants of Brain
      Infarction: Rolse of Preceding Infection/Inflammation and Recent Psychological
      Stress,” Stroke, 27:1999-2004.

Mathal, Elizabeth, T. Jacob John, Mallika Rani, et al. 1995. “Significance of Salmonella Typhi
      Bacteriuria.” Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 33:1791-92.

Meeker, Edward. 1974. “The Social Rate of Return on Investment in Public Health, 1880-
      1910,” Journal of Economic History, 34:392-421.

Melosi, Martin V. 2000. The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times to
       the Present. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Mills, P.K., S. Preston-Martin, J.F. Annegers, et al. 1989. “Risk Factors for Tumors of the Brain
        and Cranial Meninges in Seventh-Day Adventists,” Neuroepidemiology, 8:266-75.

McKeown, Thomas J. 1976. The Modern Rise of Population. New York: Academic Press.

Mohle-Boetani, Janet C., Vanessa Miguelino, Daniel H. Dewsnup, et al. 2002. “Tuberculosis
      Outbreak in a Housing Unit for Human Immunodeficiency Virus—Infected Patients in
      a Correctional Facility: Transmission Risk Factors and Effective Outbreak Control,”
      Clinical Infectious Diseases, 34:668-76.

Mokyr, Joel. 2000. “Why ‘More Work for Mother?’ Knowledge and Household Behavior,
      1870-1945,” Journal of Economic History, 60:1-41.

Morgenstern, R. and P.C. Hayes. 1991. “The Liver in Typhoid Fever: Always Affected, Not
     Just a Complication.” American Journal of Gastroenterology, 86:1235-39.

Mosquera, J.A., L. Rodrigo, and Z.F. González. 1994. “The Evolution of Tuberculosis in Coal
     Miners in Asturias, Northern Spain,” European Journal of Epidemiology, 10:291-97.

                                               34
McSherry, G., and E. Connor. 1993. “Current Epidemiology of Tuberculosis,” Pediatric Annals,
      22:600-04.

Nand, N., M. Sharma, M. Bhutani, G.P. Singh, and V.K. Sharma. 1996. “Cardiac Status in
      Typhoid Fever,” Angiology, 47:1095-100.

Neito, F.J. 1998. “Infections and Atherosclerosis: New Clues from an Old Hypothesis,”
       American Journal of Epidemiology, 148:937-48.

Ness, A.R., M. Maynard, S. Frankel, et al. 2005. “Diet in Childhood and Adult Cardiovascular
       and All Cause Mortality: the Boyd Orr Cohort,” Heart, 91:894-98.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History: The Evolution of
      a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Ottenhoff, T.H., F.A. Verreck, M.A. Hoeve, et al. 2005. “Control of Human Host Immunity to
      Mycobacteria,” Tuberculosis, 85:53-64.

Pananini-Hill, A., E. Lorano, G. Fischberg, et al. 2003. “Infection and Risk of Ischemic Stroke:
      Differences Among Stroke Subtypes,” Stroke, 34:452-57.

Pérez-Guzmán, C., M.H. Vargas, F. Quiñonez, N. Bazavilvazo, and A. Aguilar. 2005. “A
       Cholesterol-Rich Diet Accelerates Bacteriologic Sterilization in Pulmonary
       Tuberculosis,” Chest, 127:643-51.

Pollock, Linda. 1990. “Embarking on a Rough Passage: The Experience of Pregnancy in Early
       Modern Society,” in Women as Mothers in Pre-Industrial England. Valerie Fildes (editor).
       London.

Reinhard, C., W.S. Paul, and J.B. McAuley. 1997. “Epidemiology of Pediatric Tuberculosis in
      Chicago, 1974 to 1994: A Continuing Public Health Problem,” American Journal of
      Medical Sciences, 313:336-40.

Sauvant, M.P., and D. Pepin. 2002. “Drinking Water and Cardiovascular Disease,” Food and
      Chemical Toxicology, 40:1311-25.

Sen, P., T. Khanna, P. Mahajan, S.K. Bhattacharya, and K. Saha. 1987. “Effect of Typhoid
        Endotoxin on Cardiovascular System of Some Animals,” Indian Journal of Experimental
        Biology, 25:181-86.




                                               35
Sherson, D., and F.J. Lander. 1990. “Morbidity of Pulmonary Tuberculosis Among Silcotic
      and Nonsilicotic Foundry Workers in Denmark,” Occupational Medicine, 32:110-13.

Sidney, S., C. Quesenberry, M.C. Sadler, et al. 1991. “Risk Factors for surgically Treated
       Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia in a Prepaid Health Care Plan,” Urology, 38:13-19.

Song, L., W. Yan, T. Zhao, M. Deng, S. Song, J. Zhang, and M. Zhu. 2005. “Mycobacterium
       Tuberculosis Infection and FHIT Gene Alterations in Lung Cancer,” Cancer Letters,
       219:155-62.

Stevenson, T.H.C. 1921. “The Incidence of Mortality Upon the Rich and Poor Districts of
       Paris and London,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 84:90-99.

Sykes, W.H. 1850. “Statistical Account of the Labouring Population Inhabiting the Buildings
       at St. Pancras, Erected by the Metropolitan Society for Improving the Dwellings of the
       Poor,” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 13:46-61.

Szreter, Simon. 1988. “The Importance of Social Intervention in Britain’s Mortality Decline c.
        1850-1915: A Reinterpretation of the Role of Public Health,” Social History of Medicine,
        1:1-37.

Szreter, Simon. 1997. “Economic Growth, Dispruption, Deprivation, Disease, and Death: On
        the Importance of the Politics of Public Health for Development,” Population and
        Development Review, 23:693-728.

Terry, C.E. 1911. “Extermination of the House Fly in Cities, Its Necessity and Possibility,”
       American Journal of Public Health, 2:14-22.

Thayer, W.S. 1904. “On the Late Effects of Typhoid Fever on the Heart and Vessels: A Clinical
      Study,” American Journal of Medical Sciences, 127:391-422.

Tocque, K., R.P. Convrey, M.A. Bellis, N.J. Beeching, and P.D. Davies. 2005. “Elevated
      Mortality Following Diagnosis with a Treatable Disease: Tuberculosis,” International
      Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 9:797-802.

Townsend, Joseph H. 1913. “Anti-Typhoid Vaccination,” American Journal of Public Health,
      3:993-98.

Troesken, Werner. 2004. Water, Race, and Disease. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Troesken, Werner. 2006. The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster. Cambridge: MIT Press.


                                               36
Whipple, George C. 1908. Typhoid Fever: Its Causation, Transmission, and Prevention. New
     York: John Wiley and Sons.

Wilkinson, Robert J., Martin Llewelyn, Zahra Toossi, et al. 2000. “Influence of Vitamin D
      Deficiency and Vitamin D Receptor Polymorphisms on Tuberculosis among Gujarati
      Asians in West London: A Case-Control Study,” Lancet, 355:618-21.

Wu, A.H., E.T. Fontham, P. Reynolds, R.S. Greenberg, P. Buffler, J. Liff, P. Boyd, B.E.
      Henderson, and P. Correa. 1995. “Previous Lung Disease and Risk of Lung Cancer
      among Lifetime Nonsmoking Women in the United States,” American Journal of
      Epidemiology, 141:1023-32.

Zueblin, E. 1924. “Protein and Vitamin Therapy in Tuberculosis,” International Journal of
       Surgery, 37:293, 342, and 428.




                                              37
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics


                                                             1900                                     1915

           Variable                             mean    std dev          min    max     mean     std dev      min     max

           Total mortality ratea              1812.0     410.0       746.0     3100.0   1451.7     295.4     744.8   2464.9
           Cancer mortality rateb               60.0      16.8        21.3      117.0     89.8      22.1      38.5    160.7
           Kidney mortality ratec               84.9      34.8        32.4      213.2    117.3      45.2      55.8    260.0
           Heart mortality rated               144.7      41.0        54.8      273.1    154.1      47.7      51.8    314.6
           Stroke mortality ratee              174.8      57.5        69.8      369.1     83.4      27.7      26.1    159.7
           Tuberculosis mortality ratef        190.2      81.3        11.1      512.0    127.7      58.7      39.6    367.5
           Typhoid mortality rateg              39.4      23.3        10.0      131.9     13.3       9.1       0.0     37.1
           Population in 000s                  154.4     382.1       115.2      343.7    253.3     614.1      29.3   5620.0
           Persons per dwelling                  6.3       1.7         4.4       14.2      6.2       2.0       4.3     15.4

           Number of observations                             110                                     110


Notes:
a
  - Total mortality rate: deaths from all causes per 100,000 persons.
b
  - Cancer mortality rate: deaths from cancer per 100,000 persons.
c
  - Kidney mortality rate: deaths from kidney disease per 100,000 persons.
d
   - Heart mortality rate: deaths from heart disease per 100,000 persons.
e
  - Stroke mortality rate: deaths from stroke per 100,000 persons.
f
  - Tuberculosis mortality rate: deaths from tuberculosis per 100,000 persons.
g
  - Typhoid mortality rate: deaths from typhoid fever per 100,000 persons.



Sources: United States Census, 1900 and 1920 volumes; United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915 volumes.


                                                                    38
Table 2. The Lingering Effects of Tuberculosis


                            Cancer, 1915             Stroke, 1915      Kidney, 1915

    Variable                (1)*       (2)          (3)*      (4)     (5)*      (6)

    Persons per            -4.98      ...           11.4      ...     .435      ...
      dwelling, 1915       (9.25)                  (12.7)            (15.2)
    (Persons per            .448      ...          -.328      ...    -.510      ...
      dwelling, 1915)2     (.611)                  (.830)            (1.01)
    Total mortality          ...     .058a           ...    .052a      ...     .073a
      rate, 1915†                    (.008)                 (.011)             (.014)
    Tuberculosis rate,      ...      -.022          ...     -.134     ...       .078
      1915                           (.119)                 (.164)             (.209)
    (Tuberculosis rate,     ...      -.107c         ...      .001     ...       .065
      1915)2 (000s)                  (.382)                 (.001)             (.682)
    Population (000s),      .050c    .038d         -.067c   -.029    -.065d    -.043
      1915                 (.022)    (.021)        (.030)   (.029)   (.038)    (.034)
    Persons per             15.5e      ...         -8.05      ...     -21.5      ...
      dwelling, 1900       (11.4)                  (16.2)            (19.0)
    (Persons per           -1.04e     ...           .014      ...      1.59     ...
      dwelling, 1900)      (.759)                  (1.05)            (1.26)
     Total mortality         ...     -.033a          ...    -.032b     ...     -.017e
      rate, 1900‡                    (.006)                 (.010)             (.011)
    Dependent              .480a      .444a        .186a     .237a   .970a      .731a
      variable, 1900§      (.104)    (.093)        (.043)   (.049)   (.084)    (.093)
    Tuberculosis rate,       ...      .270b          ...     .273c     ...      -.104
      1900                           (.089)                 (.120)             (.148)
    (Tuberculosis rate,     ...      -.588b         ...     -.604c    ...        .305
      1900)2 (000s)                  (.206)                 (.261)             (.325)
    Population (000s),      .078c    .025d          .101c     .039   .100e       .062
      1900                 (.038)    (.015)        (.049)   (.046)   (.061)    (.056)

    Adjusted R2             .227      .536         .289      .490    .600       .672
    No. of obs.              103       110          103       110     103        110

Notes: continued on next




                                              39
Notes to Table 2.

A constant term is included in every regression, but is not reported.

a
    - significant at the .001 level (two-tailed test).

b
    - significant at the .010 level (two-tailed test).

c
    - significant at the .050 level (two-tailed test).

d
    - significant at the .100 level (two-tailed test).

e
    - significant at the .100 level (one-tailed test).

† - the total mortality rate in 1915 is measured as deaths per 100,000 persons from all causes
except tuberculosis and cancer in regression (2); except tuberculosis and stroke in regression
(4); and except tuberculosis and kidney disease in regression (6).

‡ - the total mortality rate in 1900 is measured as deaths per 100,000 persons from all causes
except tuberculosis and cancer in regression (2); except tuberculosis and stroke in regression
(4); and except tuberculosis and kidney disease in regression (6).

§ - the lagged value of the dependent variable refers to death rate from cancer in 1900 in
regression (2); the death rate from stroke in 1900 in regression (4); and the death rate from
kidney disease in 1900 in regression (6).

* - excludes the following outliers: Quincy, IL; Augusta, GA; Elmira, NY; Auburn, GA;
Yonkers, NY; New Britain, CT; Bayonne, NJ; and Passaic, NJ.



Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915 volumes.




                                                         40
Table 3. The Lingering Effects of Typhoid Fever


                                           Dependent variable, 1915

                         Kidney Disease    Heart Disease      Cancer    Stroke
  Variable                    (1)               (2)             (3)       (4)

  Total mortality                 .074a            .101a        .043a    .044a
   rate, 1915†                   (.012)           (.017)       (.008)   (.010)
  Typhoid rate, 1915               .827             .456         .684     .399
                                 (1.05)           (1.44)       (.727)   (.914)
  (Typhoid rate,                  -.024            -.023        -.015    -.029
    1915)2                       (.029)           (.040)       (.020)   (.025)
  Population (000s),              -.042            -.053       -.052c   -.037e
    1915                         (.032)           (.045)       (.022)   (.028)
  Total mortality                 -.009           -.039a       -.027a   -.030a
    rate, 1900‡                  (.008)           (.012)       (.005)   (.008)
  Dependent                       .742a            .602a        .525a    .273a
    variable, 1900§              (.087)           (.091)       (.100)   (.050)
  Typhoid rate,                  1.11b            .998d        -.474d    -.202
    1900                         (.378)           (.517)       (.262)   (.358)
  (Typhoid rate,                 -.008a           -.007d        .003e     .058
    1900)2                       (.003)           (.004)       (.002)   (.287)
  Population (000s),               .061             .090         .083     .050
    1900                         (.052)           (.072)       (.036)   (.045)

  Adjusted R2                    .698             .496         .402      .397
  No. of obs.                     110              110          110       110

Notes: continued on next page.




                                           41
Notes to Table 3.

A constant term is included in every regression, but is not reported.

a
    - significant at the .001 level (two-tailed test).

b
    - significant at the .010 level (two-tailed test).

c
    - significant at the .050 level (two-tailed test).

d
    - significant at the .100 level (two-tailed test).

e
    - significant at the .100 level (one-tailed test).


† - the total mortality rate in 1915 is measured as deaths per 100,000 persons from all causes
except typhoid and kidney disease in regression (1); except typhoid and heart disease in
regression (2); except typhoid and cancer in regression (3); and except typhoid and stroke in
regression (4).


‡ - the total mortality rate in 1900 is measured as deaths per 100,000 persons from all causes
except typhoid and kidney disease in regression (1); except typhoid and heart disease in
regression (2); except typhoid and cancer in regression (3); and except typhoid and stroke in
regression (4).

§ - the lagged value of the dependent variable refers to death rate from kidney disease in 1900
in regression (1); the death rate from heart disease in 1900 in regression (2); the death rate
from cancer in 1900 in regression (3); and the death rate from stroke in 1900 in regression (4).

Sources: United States Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915 volumes.




                                                         42
Figure 1. Possible Relationships Between Lagged and Contemporaneous Disease Rates

Source: see text.




                                          43
Figure 2. Persistence in Mortality Rates: 1900-1915

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915 volumes.


                                                                  44
Figure 3. Tuberculosis and Housing Density, 1900

Sources: United States Census, 1900, and United States Mortality Statistics, 1900.



                                                                    45
Figure 4. Cancer in 1915 and Housing Density in 1900

Sources: United States Census, 1900, and United States Mortality Statistics, 1915.



                                                                    46
Figure 5. Cancer in 1915 and Tuberculosis in 1900

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.




                                                               47
Figure 6. Estimated Relationship: Cancer in 1915 and Tuberculosis in 1900*

* Based on full-blown regression model.

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.



                                                               48
Figure 7. Estimated Relationship: Stroke in 1915 and Tuberculosis in 1900*

* Based on full-blown regression model.

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.


                                                               49
Figure 8. Stroke in 1915 and Tuberculosis in 1900: Raw Data

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.



                                                               50
Figure 9. Heart Disease in 1915 and Typhoid in 1900: Raw Data

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.



                                                               51
Figure 10. Kidney Disease in 1915 and Typhoid in 1900: Raw Data

Sources: United States, Mortality Statistics, 1900 and 1915.




                                                               52
