                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHY DO EUROPEANS SMOKE MORE THAN AMERICANS?

                                             David M. Cutler
                                            Edward L. Glaeser

                                          Working Paper 12124
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12124


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Both authors thank the National Institute of Aging. Mark Lurie and Elina Onitskansky provided superb
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by David M. Cutler and Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Why Do Europeans Smoke More than Americans?
David M. Cutler and Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 12124
March 2006
JEL No. I1, J1, P5

                                            ABSTRACT

While Americans are less healthy than Europeans along some dimensions (like obesity), Americans
are significantly less likely to smoke than their European counterparts. This difference emerged in
the 1970s and it is biggest among the most educated. The puzzle becomes larger once we account
for cigarette prices and anti-smoking regulations, which are both higher in Europe. There is a
nonmonotonic relationship between smoking and income; among richer countries and people, higher
incomes are associated with less smoking. This can account for about one-fifth of the U.S./Europe
difference. Almost one-half of the smoking difference appears to be the result of differences in
beliefs about the health effects of smoking; Europeans are generally less likely to think that cigarette
smoking is harmful.

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu
    I.       Introduction


Americans have one of the lowest smoking rates in the developed world. As Figure 1
shows, 19.1 percent of adult Americans smoke, as opposed to 34 percent of Germans or
Japanese and 27 percent of the French or English. The American smoking rate is 10
percent less than the average among developed nations shown in the figure. This is the
lowest rate in this sample apart from Sweden. This remarkable abstinence is all the more
remarkable because there are many other areas where Americans are not notable for the
healthy behavior. For example, among the same sample of countries, America has easily
the highest obesity rate (see Figure 2), and our consumption of alcohol per adult is in the
mean of the sample.1 In this essay, we try to understand why smoking is so low in the
United States.


America’s abstinence from tobacco is not some long-standing aspect of U.S. culture;
rather, it is very recent. As Figure 3 illustrates, over the 20th century, cigarette smoking
in the U.S. saw a remarkable rise from 267 cigarettes per capita in 1914 to over 4,300
cigarettes per capita in 1963 before plummeting to just over 2000 per capita today.
Through the 1960s, the U.S. had much higher per capita tobacco consumption than any
Western European country. Figure 4 plots smoking rates per adult in 2000 on smoking
rates in 1980 across countries. The line is the 45 degree line, so the distance between the
point and line shows the extent that smoking declined between 1980 and 2000. America
had the largest drop of any non-Scandinavian country in the sample.


We examine three potential explanations for the low level of smoking in the U.S. relative
to other developed countries. First, we ask whether the effective price of cigarettes,
which reflects both taxes and other regulations on tobacco, is higher in the U.S. Second,
we look at whether higher American income levels might explain the lower level of U.S.
cigarette consumption, if better health is a luxury good. Third, we ask whether


1
  This fact might suggest that American obesity and smoking are, in fact, negatively linked, where
reductions in smoking led to higher obesity. There is little evidence to support this view. In general, across
people there is no correlation between smoking and obesity (Cutler and Glaeser, 2005) and across countries
the correlation is also essentially zero.
differences in beliefs about the consequences of smoking might be responsible for
American exceptionalism.


It is clearly not the case that low cigarette smoking in the U.S. is the result of higher
cigarette prices. Cigarettes are, on average, 37 percent cheaper in the U.S. than in the
European Union. For example, the average price per pack in the United Kingdom2 is
$6.25 while the average price per pack in the U.S. is $3.60. The average tax per pack is
86 cents in the U.S. and 206 cents in France. Using standard estimates of the elasticity of
cigarette consumption with respect to price, these facts suggest that holding everything
else constant, Americans would smoke 20 percent more than Europeans. Cross-national
results on regulation are similar. If anything, tobacco consumption in the U.S. is less
regulated than in most European countries, and controlling for regulation only makes
American exceptionalism more extreme.


The relationship between income and cigarette consumption across countries is non-
linear. Cigarette consumption first rises with income and then declines. Our model in
section 2 suggests that this can be interpreted as the confluence of two opposing effects:
higher income levels make it easier to afford more cigarettes, and also increase the costs
of death and disease. Within country estimates of income elasticities are much smaller
than these cross-country estimates. As such, the ability of income differences to explain
smoking differences between the U.S. and Europe depends primarily on one’s beliefs
about micro vs. macro estimates of income elasticities. If one believes that there is a
social multiplier so that macro estimates are indeed many times higher than micro
estimates, and the estimated macro estimates are correct, then income differences can
explain roughly one-quarter of the U.S./Europe difference. If one believes that the micro-
estimates are correct and the macro estimates are spurious reflections of omitted
variables, then income differences can, at best, explain one tenth of the U.S/Europe
difference.



2
  These are legal prices. There may be some smuggling of cigarettes in the UK, which we do not account
for.
Finally, we turn to differences in beliefs about the health effects of smoking between the
U.S. and Europe. Public opinion surveys suggest that Americans have some of the
strongest beliefs that cigarettes are extremely harmful. Furthermore, there is an
extremely strong negative correlation across individuals between beliefs about the harms
of smoking and smoking, and a somewhat weaker correlation between the same variables
across countries. Of course, cognitive dissonance (Akerlof and Dickens, 1982) suggests
that this relationship might exist because smokers like to think that their habit isn’t
harmful. To address this possibility, we look only at beliefs among non-smokers, and
again find a relationship between beliefs and smoking. Even among non-smokers, the
US has some of the strongest anti-smoking beliefs.


A simple decomposition suggests that these belief differences can explain between one-
quarter and one-half of the difference in smoking rates between the U.S. and Europe. We
present some evidence suggesting that these differences in beliefs are themselves the
result of concerted government action emphasizing the harms of smoking.


In the next section, we present a brief model that sets out the potential causes of lower
cigarette consumption in the United States. In Section III, we review the evidence on
price, tax and regulation differences between the U.S. and Europe. Section IV examines
the relationship between income and cigarette consumption, showing that up to one-
quarter of the difference between the U.S. and Europe can be explained by higher income
in the United States. Finally, Section V discusses the causes and consequences of
differences in beliefs about the health consequences of smoking. The last section
concludes.


   II.       Theoretical Determinants of Smoking


In this section, we present a simple model of cigarette consumption, beliefs and income,
and use the model to theories we shall test. We assume a discrete time model where
individuals receive income Y in each period. Individuals discount the future with
discount factor β . To focus on the key issues, we assume there is no borrowing or
lending between periods and the only decision in each period is whether or not to smoke.
Smoking is a one-zero choice that carries financial cost of PC and yields utility of S,
which differs across individuals.


In each period, the probability of surviving until the next period is believed to δ for non-
smokers and δ − ∆ for smokers. These beliefs can be changed, but we assume they are
the same for everyone at a point in time. The utility flow if dead is normalized to zero.
The flow of utility for non-smokers is U(Y) and the flow of utility for smokers equals
U (Y − PC ) + S . The stationary nature of this problem means (somewhat
counterfactually) that individuals will always make the same decision about smoking
                                                                      U (Y − PC ) + S
each period. Total expected discounted utility for smokers equals:                    and
                                                                      1 − β (δ − ∆)
                          U (Y )
for non-smokers equals           . Smokers trade off the flow benefits of enjoying
                         1 − βδ
cigarettes against both the cash costs of smoking and the costs in terms of lost health.
With these assumptions, Proposition 1 follows:


Proposition 1: There exists a value of S>0, denoted S*, at which individuals are
indifferent between smoking and not-smoking. Individuals with values of S greater than
S* strictly prefer smoking and individuals with values of S less than S* strictly prefer not
smoking. The value of S* is rising with PC , β , δ and ∆ .


The value of S* suggests that the population will be split between those who smoke and
those who don’t smoke based on the heterogeneous preference for tobacco. If S is
distributed with a cumulative distribution F(S) and density f(S), then the share of people
who smoke will equal 1-F(S*), and an increase in S* will cause smoking to fall by –
f(S*).


The comparative statics of the model are straightforward. Since greater mortality risk is a
primary cost of cigarette consumption, people who are more patient and value the future
more will smoke less. Rising prices will generally cause fewer cigarettes to be
consumed. Higher taxes on cigarettes will raise prices and should reduce consumption.
Some regulations, as bans on smoking indoors, may also act to raise the effective cost of
consuming cigarettes, though regulations could matter through other channels as well.


The comparative statics on δ can be seen as reflecting the complementarities across
health risks. When individuals have a low probability of survival (i.e. a low value of δ ),
then the health costs of smoking are discounted heavily, and smoking becomes more
attractive. If one is likely to die from other reasons, one tends to worry less about the
harms from smoking.3 The comparative static on ∆ can be interpreted as either relating
to the actual impact of cigarette smoking on health or to the perceived impact of cigarette
smoking on health. As individuals perceive that cigarettes are more harmful, they will
smoke less.


The comparative static on income is somewhat more complex:


                                                                        1 − βδ + β ∆ U ′(Y − PC )
Proposition 2: The value of S* is rising with Y if and only if                      >             .
                                                                           1 − βδ       U ′(Y )
                                     U ′(Y − PC )           U " (Y )
If lim Y →0 U ′(Y ) = ∞ , lim Y →∞                = 1 and −          is strictly increasing with Y,
                                        U ′(Y )             U ′(Y )
                                                    ∂S *                     ∂S *
then there exists a value of Y below which               < 0 and above which      > 0.
                                                    ∂Y                        ∂Y


Income has two important effects on consumption, which work in opposite directions.
Higher levels of income mean that the cash cost of cigarettes is less important; thus, there
will be higher smoking as people get richer. Countervailing this, however, is that the
value of life increases with income and this will lead to less smoking. Under some cases
– when the health effect becomes relatively more important as income rises – these two
effects can lead to a non-monotonic relationship between income and cigarette
consumption. This will be the case if, for example, U(.) is a power function.


3
  The heavy use of cigarettes among soldiers during wartime may be one particular example of this
phenomenon.
To further investigate the comparative static on beliefs about the harms of smoking, we
examine how beliefs about smoking interact with other characteristics of individuals.
Our next proposition describes how changes in ∆ affects different groups sorted along
other margins.


Proposition 3: An increase in ∆ will cause a greater decrease in smoking among: (i)
those with higher income; (ii) those with a higher baseline probability of survival ( δ );
and (iii) those who are more patient (a higher value of β ).


Proposition 3 tells us that if there is a change in beliefs about the mortality risks of
smoking then we should expect to see a greater reduction in smoking among people who
are rich, patient or likely to live long lives if they don’t smoke. The intuition behind
these results is that the value of living longer is greater for those who value the future
highly, or who are likely to live or who get more utility from living. Thus, information
suggesting a way to live longer will be adopted more readily by those groups.


This effect is very different from the effect of an increase in prices. Because rich people
care relatively more about survival and less about additional cash outlays than the poor,
prices should have a smaller impact on the rich than on the poor. Price increases will
have the same effect on people who differ only in discount rates or baseline levels of
survival. We state this, and related results, formally in proposition 4.


Proposition 4: An increase in the price of cigarettes, PC , will cause a greater decrease in
the share of the less rich that smoke. Cigarette price increases will have the same effect
on people with different discount rates or different baseline levels of survival.


Propositions 3 and 4 offer a general test of whether differences in smoking between the
U.S. and Europe differ because of beliefs or prices. If beliefs differ, then we should
expect the reduction in U.S. smoking to be concentrated among the wealthy, patient and
healthy. If prices differ, then we should expect differences in smoking to be concentrated
among the poor and we should expect no differences in groups on the basis of health or
patience.


Finally, we extend the model to allow for social interactions in smoking. We assume that
utility from smoking equals S + g • Sharesmo ker s where S is an individual specific taste for
smoking and g is a constant which reflects the impact of having other smokers to interact
with. Smoking interactions might occur because of social norms (smoking among non-
smokers becomes stigmatized) or because of habit persistence in tobacco consumption
(being around smoke increases the desire to smoke). It is straightforward to show that:


As in Propositions 3 and 4, we assume that there is always someone who smokes and
someone who doesn’t smoke, and that S − S > g , where S and S are the upper and
lower bounds of the taste for smoking. This implies that:


Proposition 5: The share of the population in a country that smokes will be declining
with PC , β , δ and ∆ , and the negative impact of these variables on smoking will be
larger with g. Assuming that the distribution of tastes for smoking is uniform within the
                           [ ]
population on the interval S, S and that there is always someone who smokes, the

                                                         S−S
impact of any other variable across groups will equal         > 1 times the impact of
                                                        S−S−g
these variables within groups.


As is usual, positive complementarities cause there to be a social multiplier, so that
exogenous characteristics that affect smoking become quantitatively more important
Becker and Murphy, 2000, Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 2003). As a result,
within country estimates of coefficients may understate the importance that these
coefficients can have on cross-country smoking patterns.
Our model suggests a relatively straightforward empirical implementation. We estimate
equations for smoking at the individual and group level, relating the smoking decision to
income, prices, and beliefs about the harms of tobacco. The regression is of the form:


(1) ShareSmo ker = α + β Pr ice Pr ice + β Belief Belief + β Income Income


This specification then implies that:


       Difference in ShareSmo ker = β Pr ice (Pr iceEU − Pr iceUS ) + β Belief ( Belief EU − Belief US )
(2)
       + β Income ( IncomeEU − IncomeUS )


Our objective is to provide estimates of the differences in cigarette prices, beliefs about
cigarette risks, and income between the U.S. and the European Union, as well as to
estimate the impact of these variables on the share of the population that smokes. With
these estimates we can decompose the difference in smoking patterns between the U.S.
and Europe.


      III.     Data


Data on tobacco consumption are plentiful, but not always consistent. Almost all
countries have some data on tobacco consumption, typically from national surveys. We
use these data as much as possible. A compendium of such data is kept by the World
Health Organization.4


For some of our analyses, we wish to examine subgroups of the population, for example
by income or education. While most surveys will have such data, tabulations of national
data frequently do not contain such detail. In addition, we want to know about beliefs
about the harms of smoking, which are measured far less frequently. For these analyses,
we use the Eurobarometer survey in 1994, matched with the US National Survey of Drug


4
    See especially the World Health Organization’s Health for All Database, http://www.euro.who.int/hfadb.
Use and Health of the same year. Unfortunately, Eurobarometer did not survey all
countries. Thus, we are restricted to 14 European countries in these analyses.


In addition, average smoking rates from the Eurobarometer data are somewhat different
from average smoking in official national data. For the 14 countries with both sources of
data, the correlation coefficient is 0.50. The greatest difference is in Denmark, where
official data from a survey conducted by PLS Consult and the Danish Council on
Smoking and Health show substantially smoking rates that are 11 percentage points less
than the Eurobarometer data. It is possible that differences in specific questions or
samples explain these differences, though we cannot be sure without access to the raw
data. Other large differences are in France, Finland, Italy, and the Netherlands. We use
the reported national data as we can, to ensure the largest possible sample size, and use
the Eurobarometer data for questions involving socioeconomic aspects of smoking or
beliefs about the harms of smoking. Fortunately, the two estimates are relatively similar
when we substitute one for the other..


As shown below, income has a large and non-linear effect on smoking. When we
examine bivariate relationships between smoking and other factors (prices, regulations, or
beliefs), it is important to have a relatively homogeneous sample of countries by income.
Within Europe, the major income outlier is Greece, with a per capita income that is 60
percent below the European average ($10,607 in Greece versus $25,858 in Europe in
2000) and 25 percent below the next lowest country (Spain, at $14,138). For this reason,
we omit Greece from many of our regressions, though we present raw data for Greece in
the tables and show the country in the figures.


   IV.     Differences in Prices, Taxes and Regulation between the U.S. and Europe


A long economic literature on smoking has focused on the impact of cigarette prices on
smoking. This literature began by using time series data within the U.S. (Schoenberg,
1933) and expanded to looking at cross-state variation created by differences in excise
taxes (Maier, 1955). More modern estimates have become increasingly sophisticated and
relate cigarette smoking to either lagged or expected cigarette prices (Baltagi and Levin,
1986, Becker, Grossman and Murphy, 1994). The most compelling estimates follow
Lyan and Simon (1968) and use within state variation, examining the response of
consumption to a change in the state excise tax on cigarettes.5


Lyan and Simon (1968) estimate the price elasticity of smoking at -.51. Chaloupka
(1991) estimates long run price elasticities between -.27 and -.36 for the entire
population. As Proposition 4 in the previous section suggests, Chaloupka finds higher
price elasticities for poorer members of society. Becker, Grossman and Murphy (1994)
estimate short-run price elasticities ranging from -.36 to -.44 and long-run price
elasticities ranging from -.73 to -.79. Gallet and List (2002) perform a meta-analysis of
papers on cigarette demand and find a mean price elasticity of -.48. While there is a
considerable range from -.27 to -79, these estimates all suggest that differential cigarette
prices can explain differences in cigarette consumption over time and space.


The first two columns of Table 2 show prices and excise taxes across developed countries
in 2000 (in US dollars). The last column reports the price of cigarettes relative to the cost
of 1 kilogram of bread – the normalization correcting for value added taxes on other
commodities that might distort consumption decisions. These prices are the price of the
cheapest national brand, and do not account for any smuggling or non-market
transactions. Stories of such transactions are present in some countries abound. For
example in 2002 the Italian police allegedly broke up a smuggling ring that smuggled
three million Euros worth of cigarettes from Romania into Italy each month.6 However,
data on illegal sales are not generally available.


The table makes clear that price differences cannot explain why Americans smoke less
than Europeans. Nominal cigarette prices are higher in the US than abroad, but prices
relative to other commodities are lower. At least part of this is because the tax on
cigarettes is much lower in the US than in much of Europe. Indeed, cigarette prices are

5
  These results seem reasonably persuasive despite the possible endogeneity problem – high taxes might be
put in place when states are experiencing an exogenous decline in cigarette smoking.
6
  See http://www.crji.org/arhiva/e_020312.htm
generally higher in Europe than in the US. Relative to other commodities, prices in the
US are 37 percent lower than in Europe. With an elasticity of -.5, this implies that
smoking should be nearly 20 percent greater in the U.S.


As Figure 5 shows, there is little correlation across countries between the cost of
cigarettes (measured relative to the cost of bread) and cigarette consumption across
developed countries. Indeed, the U.S. has both relatively low prices and relatively low
consumption. The regression line is slightly positive, although not statistically
significant. While it is possible that forces like greater smuggling of cigarettes in Europe
than in the U.S. might mean that our price estimates overstate the differences across
countries, the graph makes it clear that it is extremely unlikely that the U.S. actually has
much higher cigarette prices than other countries.


Cash outlays are one component of cigarette costs; the time cost is another. Evans,
Farrelly and Montgomery (1999) have shown that workplace bans on smoking have a
significant impact on cigarette consumption within the U.S. The bans are effective, at
least in part, because they raise the cost of smoking. We also calculated a regulation
index within the U.S. based on the number of types of places where cigarette smoking is
banned: government workplaces, private workplaces and restaurants. We assign a 1 to
each state where smoking is prohibited, a 0.5 to each state where smoking is restricted to
specific areas, and a 0 if there is no regulation. As a simple summary measure, we sum
the presence of a ban in the three settings. The data to construct the regulatory index
come from the Center for Disease Control.


As Figure 6 shows, there is a negative 38 percent correlation coefficient between this
regulation index and the share of smokers in a state. A statistically significant negative
relationship result persists even when we control for a wide range of other controls
including tobacco prices and income. As such, it is at least possible that greater
regulation of smoking in the U.S. might be a cause of the lower smoking rate in America.
To make cross country comparisons, we look at the same government regulations across
European countries. Data on cigarette restrictions come from the World Health
Organization Tobacco Control Database. While there are some discrepancies between
these reports and what we know about regulation in the U.S., we have decided to use the
WHO estimates rather than to create our other alternative measures. These measures are
generally corroborated by the World Bank data as well.7


Table 3 lists the principle forms of regulation on tobacco usage in public places in the
United States and the European nations. In each case, we give the country a 1 if smoking
is prohibited in that setting, a 0.5 if there are partial restrictions or voluntary agreements,
and 0 if there is no regulation. It is apparent that the U.S. is not particularly regulatory.
The U.S. does have some regulations on consumption in public places, but most
European countries do as well. While it is possible that U.S. regulations are more
seriously enforced than their European counterparts, and certainly the US has private
restrictions on smoking in workplaces that may be less prevalent in other countries, the
U.S. doesn’t stand out relative to the other countries in formal regulations. Indeed, the
average of the index for the European Union is 1.97, compared to the value of 1.0 in the
U.S. Since the U.S. is less regulated than the European Union, it seems hard to believe
that this variable explains less American smoking.


Figure 7 shows the relationship between our regulation index and smoking rates across
countries. As the regression lines shows, there is no statistically significant relationship
between the two. A literal interpretation of this regression suggests that regulations are
irrelevant for smoking decisions. Of course, the evidence provided by Evans et al. (1999)
and the US states provides far more compelling results that regulation does matter.
Rather, we interpret the cross-country results as suggesting that measurement of
regulations and their enforcement at the country level are so noisy that it is impossible to
say anything cleanly about the role of regulation in smoking. While our conclusions thus
need to be interpreted with some care, the U.S. does not appear to tax or regulate tobacco



7
    See http://www1.worldbank.org/tobacco/brieflist_db.asp
consumption particularly highly, making these explanations unlikely to account for the
lower smoking rate in the US.


   V.      Income and U.S./Europe Differences


We now turn to the relation between income and smoking across countries. There is a
rich body of evidence on the income elasticity of demand for cigarettes. Unfortunately,
estimates from this literature differ substantially from study to study (Gallet and List,
2002). Given that our model suggests a possible non-monotonic relationship between
income and cigarette consumption, the lack of a clear consensus on the income elasticity
of smoking is not so surprising.


Early estimates of the income elasticity of smoking were based on national time series or
cross-state information. For example, Maier (1955) reports generally positive income
elasticities using cross state data. Gallet and List (2002) report 24 papers estimating
income elasticities for tobacco using state or provincial data; the median income elasticity
across these estimates is .3.


We have several ways to estimate the income elasticity of smoking. One method is with
international data. Income and smoking rates are available for 75 countries. Figure 8
shows the relation between smoking and the log of per capita income in those countries.
The regression line allows for a quadratic relationship, as suggested by the model. The
quadratic fits reasonably well:


Share Smoking = − 76.5+ 26.9 ln(GDP) − 1.65 ln(GDP) 2 ;                       R2=.20.
                     ( 30.5 )   ( 7.36 )     (.43)




where ln(GDP) is the logarithm of per capita GDP in 2000 in U.S. dollars and standard
errors are in parentheses beneath coefficient estimates. The maximum predicted value is
reached at an income of $3,200. The effect of a 1 log point increase in per capita GDP is
-7.7 at the income of the U.S. Even with its high income, however, the US is a negative
outlier; smoking is lower in the US than one would expect by income alone. The residual
for the US is about -6 percent.


We can get a similar estimate of the income elasticity of spending using data from US
states. Figure 9 shows that the correlation between per capita income and smoking across
states within the U.S. is negative. A one log point increase in income is associated with a
7.8 percent decrease in the smoking rate in a univariate regression. This is very similar to
the international data.


Individual-based estimates of cigarette consumption show weaker estimates. For
example, Gallet and List (2002) report ten papers estimating the income elasticity of
demand for tobacco using individual data, with the median elasticity estimate across
those papers being .06, which is both small and positive.


In Table 1, we show smoking rates across income quartile within the U.S. and Europe.
We also show smoking rates by broad education category. Smoking declines with
income (or education) in the United States. The difference is large; smoking rates for
those in the top quintile are one-third lower than smoking rates for those in the bottom
quintile. In Europe the relationship between smoking and income is flat. As a result, the
gap between the U.S. and Europe is smallest among poorer individuals and greatest
among the rich.


Using the U.S. data, we estimate a non-linear income elasticity, where a discrete variable
that takes on a value of one for regular smokers is regressed on country dummies and the
logarithm of income and the logarithm of income squared.8 The probit regression yields
the estimate:


Smo ker = .330 ln( Income) − .024 ln( Income) 2 + Country Dummies ;
             (.372 )             (.019 )




8
 Only monthly income is asked about in the Eurobarometer data. To get a more precise income elasticity,
we use the annual data available in the U.S.
There are 15,213 observations. The coefficients on income and income squared are not
statistically significant. They are also somewhat smaller than the national data. An
increase in incomes of $10,000 per person would reduce smoking rates by 2.1 percent.


It is not completely clear what income elasticity to use for the US-Europe comparison.
We consider first the elasticity in the international data. The mean income of the
European countries that we have included is about $25,000 dollars in 2000. The U.S.
income in the same year is about $36,000, for a difference of about 36 percent. Using the
equation above, this translates into a predicted difference in smoking rates of 2.6 percent
(roughly .36*-7.7), or one-quarter of the total difference in smoking between the US and
Europe.


Our individual level estimates of the income elasticity of smoking are smaller than the
macro estimates, so calculations using the micro estimates suggest that the income
differences can explain even less of the cross-country differences.9 Indeed, since the
median income elasticity estimate shown by Gallet and List (2002) is positive, using that
estimate would make the puzzle even larger.


    VI.      Differences in Beliefs about the Health Consequences of Smoking


Finally, we turn to the impact of beliefs about smoking on smoking rates. We start our
analysis with survey evidence on beliefs about the health consequences of smoking,
leaving aside for the moment where those beliefs come from. In 1994, the
Eurobarometer survey asked respondents whether they “tend to agree or disagree:
smoking causes cancer and death”. We code people who “tend to agree” as believing that
smoking is harmful. To match this with U.S. data, we used the 1994 National Survey of
Drug Use and Health, which asks “how much people risk harming themselves physically
and in other ways when they smoke one or more packs of cigarettes per day: no risk,



9
 The non-linear relationship means that inequality should also be considered when looking at the smoking
differences across countries. We leave this for future work.
slight risk, moderate risk, or great risk?” For comparability with the Eurobarometer
questions, we consider people who think that smoking has a moderate or great risk.10


These particular survey questions are obviously imperfect. Cancer is only one health
consequence of smoking. In many cases, the relevant question is not whether smoking
causes cancer but rather the increased probability of developing cancer that results from
smoking behavior. Nonetheless, this is the best data that we have.


Table 4 shows the distribution of beliefs across countries about whether smoking causes
cancer. The first column reports the share of the entire population believing that smoking
causes cancer. The U.S. has one of the highest rates of believing that smoking is
harmful; 91 percent of Americans report believing that smoking causes cancer. Given the
high proportion of Americans that believe in UFOs and the literal truth of the bible, this
must represent one of the most remarkable instances of the penetration of scientific
results in the country. Beliefs about the cancer-causing role of cigarettes in some
European countries, like Finland, Greece, Norway, and Portugal, are almost identical to
those in the U.S., but in other places beliefs are far weaker. For example in Germany
only 73 percent of respondents said that they believed that smoking causes cancer.


One possible interpretation of this data is that exogenous trends in smoking affects beliefs
about the harms of cigarettes, through a form of cognitive dissonance. Smokers may
persist in believing that cigarettes don’t cause cancer because their habits are more
justifiable if they refuse to believe that there are health consequences of their actions. To
address this, columns 2 and 3 show beliefs about the harms of smoking among non-
smokers and smokers respectively. This concern does not appear to be evident. Both
smokers (83 percent) and non-smokers (94 percent) in the US strongly believe that
smoking By contrast, 52 percent of German smokers and 84 percent of German non-
smokers shared that belief. Beliefs appear to be specific to the society, much more than o
the individual who smokes or not.

10
  It is not entirely clear what level of risk corresponds to “tend to agree” in the Eurobarometer data. One
might also include those who believe there is a slight risk of smoking. In this case, the beliefs about the
harms of smoking would be higher still in the United States.
An added piece of evidence supporting the view that Europeans and Americans differ in
their beliefs about smoking is the differential relationship between income and smoking
in the US and Europe. The model above emphasized the cross-effect between beliefs and
income. If smoking is thought to be harmful, then we should particularly see high
income people avoid smoking, because they have a greater demand for healthy life. This
is exactly what table 1 shows; in comparison to Europe, it is the richer groups of the US
population who smoke the least.


We use several methods to quantify the impact that these beliefs differences have on the
smoking rate. We begin with time series evidence and then turn to cross-individual,
cross-state and cross-country evidence. Lung cancer did not become prevalent in the US
until cigarette use became relatively common. As seen in Figure 3, this occurred in the
first third of the 20th century. Thus, scientific evidence about the link between smoking
and cancer dates from that era. The first published article alleging a link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer appeared in the American Journal of Cancer in 1932
(McNally, 1932). The article was relatively speculative, though; more concrete evidence
linking cigarettes and cancer was published eighteen years later by Wynder and Graham
(1950) in the Journal of the American Medical Association. This was followed by a 1954
Sloan-Kettering study that reported experiments where tar from cigarettes had caused
cancerous tumors in mice (Sloan-Kettering, 1954).


Popular knowledge about the harms of smoking almost certainly dates from Readers’
Digest, which ran an article in 1952 titled “Cancer by the Carton.” The news was picked
up by other newspapers and media outlets, including even Edward R. Murrow’s (a
particularly famous smoker) See It Now television program. These early reports and the
related publicity created the first cigarette cancer scare in the early 1950s. The 1950s saw
nascent public beliefs form about the harms of smoking. In a January 1954 Gallup
survey, 41 percent of people answered ‘yes’ to the question “Do you think cigarette
smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, or not?”
Figure 3 shows the time path of cigarette smoking during this time period. From 1933 to
1952, cigarette smoking rose every year. Indeed, between 1920 and 1952, cigarette
consumption fell only during the bleakest years of the great depression (confirming the
positive income elasticity of cigarette consumption at lower income levels). Between
1952 and 1954, cigarette smoking took its first dramatic drop. From 1952-1953 smoking
dropped by 3 percent, followed by an additional 6 percent the following year. While it is
possible that this drop was due to something other than changing beliefs about the health
risks of cigarettes, contemporary observers certainly thought that the decline in smoking
was the result of the health scare. For example, the treasurer of the American Tobacco
Company said in 1954 that “there is a tendency to ascribe the drop in cigarette
consumption almost entirely to the so called ‘cancer scare’.” (New York Times, May 7,
1954, p.35).


The reaction in the marketplace proceeded along several dimensions. On the one hand,
manufacturers and the public responded by making cigarettes somewhat safer. Use of
filtered cigarettes rose from less than 2 percent in 1952 to more than 20 percent in 1955.
Edward R. Murrow on the air linked the rise of filtered cigarettes to heightened fears
about the dangers of cigarettes. On the other hand, the cigarette industry fought back
through advertising. Using their vast advertising budgets and spending on their own rival
research (which unsurprisingly found that cigarettes were harmless), cigarette companies
were able to overcome the negative publicity associated with these early studies.
Smoking rose again from 1954 through 1963.


Increasing evidence in the medical community showed the harms from smoking, and in
1964, the Surgeon General issued his famous warning about the health consequences of
smoking. In 1966, the Federal Trade Commission required cigarettes to be sold with a
label warning that “cigarettes may be hazardous to your health.” Both the federal
government and private groups like the American Cancer Society mounted campaigns
meant to increase awareness of the health consequences of smoking. The fruits of this
campaign are apparent in public opinion surveys. In 1960, 50 percent of Americans
believed that cigarette smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer. By 1969, the share
was 71 percent (Cutler and Kadiyala, 2003). One sees this in the consumption data as
well. In 1964 alone, cigarette smoking fell by 3 percent, and smoking was down by 8
percent by 1970.


Since the 1950s, beliefs about the harms of smoking have cemented. The Gallup
Organization (Gallup, 1981) documented a rising belief that smoking was dangerous. By
the 1980s, Viscusi (1992) finds that people actually overestimated the health risks of
smoking. As noted above, over 90 percent of Americans now believe that smoking
causes cancer.


A strong circumstantial case links the decline of smoking to the expansion of information
about the harms of smoking. In addition to figure 3, data on the share of people who
have ever smoked show a decline beginning in cohorts coming of smoking age after
1964. Other evidence about the link between perception and smoking comes from
individual correlations between beliefs and actions. Smoking rates among those who
believe that smoking a pack or more of cigarettes per day has a great risk are only 23
percent, compared to 52 percent among those who do not believe that link.11 If beliefs
causally affect smoking (and not the reverse, as with cognitive dissonance), it suggests a
large impact of beliefs on actions.


One way to get around the reverse relationship between smoking and beliefs is to
consider subsets of the population where beliefs are not reflective of actions.
Specifically, we consider how smoking rate in a state or country is related to the beliefs
of non-smokers about the harms of smoking. Of course, if beliefs are formed through a
social learning process, then the beliefs of non-smokers in high smoking states may
reflect the influence of other variables that are related to smoking. But we do not have
any obvious alternative to this strategy.




11
   In a probit regression, where we also control for age, gender, race education and income, the effect of
believing that smoking is a great risk drops to 27 percent.
Figure 10 shows cross-state data on smoking rates and the share of non-smokers who
believe that smoking is a great risk.12 There is a clear negative relation between the two.
A one percent increase in the share of non-smokers who think that cigarettes cause cancer
is associated with a 0.6 percent decrease in the share of people who smoke cigarettes.
This cross- state relationship is robust to controlling for income, price, a regulation index,
education and a dummy variable for states that produce tobacco. The coefficient on
beliefs drops only to .5 including all of these controls.


We complement the analysis across US states with cross-country evidence. Figure 11
shows the relationship across countries between the share of non-smoking respondents
who believe that cigarettes cause cancer and the share of smokers.13 The regression line
is negative and roughly the same magnitude as the state data; a one percent increase in
the share of the population that thinks that cigarettes causes cancer is associated with a
.47 percent decrease in the share of the population that smokes. Because of the small
number of observations, the coefficient is not statistically significant.


If one assumes that beliefs are formed independently of smoking rates, we can use these
estimates and ask how much of the difference between U.S. and European cigarette
consumption is associated with differences in beliefs. The difference in beliefs between
the U.S. and Europe is about 7 percentage points overall and 4 percent among non-
smokers. Using the state level estimate of the impact of beliefs on smoking or the
international evidence, the more widespread belief about the harms of smoking explains
between 2 and 4 percent lower smoking rates in the US – the former taking only the
difference in beliefs among non-smokers and the latter taking the difference in beliefs
overall. These translate into 20 and 40 percent of the total smoking difference across
countries. On the whole, our evidence suggests that differences in beliefs are the most
important factor explaining the differences in smoking between the U.S. and Europe.




12
    Note that the mean differs from Table 4 because we use only the share of people reporting that smoking
is a great risk, rather than a great or moderate risk. We do this to highlight the certainty of beliefs.
13
    We use Eurobarometer data for smoking rates, since we are using the beliefs data from that survey.
     VII.   Conclusion


There is a dramatic difference in smoking rates between the U.S. and Europe. This
difference is largest for the most educated and richest members of the two regions, but
applies throughout the distribution. This difference is not longstanding, and it exists
despite the fact that along many other dimensions (witness obesity) Europeans are far
healthier than Americans.


There is no evidence that this difference is the result of cigarette taxes or direct
government regulation of cigarettes. Cigarettes are taxed more highly in Europe than in
the United States. Some of the difference between the U.S. and Europe – perhaps a
quarter – is the result of higher U.S. incomes. There appears to be something of smoking
Kuznets curve where cigarette consumption first rises and falls with income. Both the
US and Europe are on the downward slope of the Kuznets curve, where higher incomes
are associated with less smoking.


The most important factor, however, appears to be differences in beliefs about the health
consequences of smoking between the U.S. and Europe. Ninety-one percent of
Americans think that cigarettes cause cancer; only 84 percent of Europeans share that
view. Using different estimates of the relation between beliefs and cigarette
consumption, we estimate that this difference can explain between one-quarter and one-
half of the total smoking difference between the U.S. and Europe. Moreover, the history
of cigarettes within the U.S. suggests that American beliefs about smoking seemed to
come about only after substantial information about the harms of smoking were presented
– first by private researchers, then by the Federal government. ‘Soft paternalism’14 is a
major factor in lower rates of smoking.


The possibility of a feedback from smoking to beliefs about smoking suggests that the
impact of this information may be even larger than we have estimated. In areas where


14
   We distinguish information campaigns from ‘hard paternalism’, including regulating smoking and
raising taxes.
fewer people smoke, non-smoker sentiment might be stronger, leading to a further
reduction in cigarette use.


As a final thought, it is worth wondering why the U.S., with its lower propensity towards
regulation and paternalism generally, had more effective interventions in the changing of
beliefs about smoking. U.S. smoking history suggests that entrepreneurial actions on the
part of anti-smoking interest groups were quite important. Initially, the American
Medical Association and later organizations specifically focused on cancer and heart
disease effectively used the market for ideas both directly to influence beliefs and
indirectly, by influencing the government. By contrast, European pressure groups were
much weaker and less effective at influencing public opinion and policy. According to
this view, while greater U.S. entrepreneurship and economic openness led to more
smoking during an earlier era (and still leads to more obesity today), it also led to faster
changes in beliefs about smoking and ultimately less cigarette consumption.
                                       References

Akerlof, George, and William Dickins, “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive
Dissonance.” American Economic Review, 72(3), June 1982, 307-19.

Baltagi, Badi H., and Dan Levin, “Estimating Dynamic Demand for Cigarettes Using
Panel Data: The Effects of Bootlegging, Taxation and Advertising Reconsidered” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 1986, 68(1), February 148-155.

Becker, Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin M. Murphy, “An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction,” The American Economic Review, 1994, 84(3), June, 396-418.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy, Social Economics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2000.

Chaloupka, Frank J., “Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking”, Journal of
Political Economy 1991, 99(4), August, 722-742.

Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser, “What Explains Differences in Smoking,
Drinking, and Other Health-Related Behaviors?” American Economic Review, May 2006.

Cutler, David M., and Srikanth Kadiyala, “The Return to Biomedical Research:
Treatment and Behavioral Effects,” in Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel, eds., Measuring
the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2003.

Evans, William N, Matthew C. Farrelly, and Edward Montgomery, “Do Workplace
Smoking Bans Reduce Smoking?” The American Economic Review, 1999, 89(4),
September, 728-747.

Gallet, Craig A., and John A. List, “Cigarette Demand: a Meta-Analysis of Elasticities,”
Health Economics, 2003, 12(1), October, 821-835.

Gallup, George. “Smoking Rates Decline as More Perceive Health Hazard,” Gallup
Organization Mimeograph, 1981.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose Schenkman, “The Social Multiplier”,
Journal of the European Economics Association, 2003, 1(2), 345-353.

Guindon, GE, S Tobin, and D Yach, “Trends and Affordability of Cigarette Prices:
Ample Room for Tax Increases and Related Health Gains.” Tobacco Control 2002, 11
(1): 35–43.

Lyon, Herbert L., and Julian L. Simon, “Price Elasticity of the Demand for Cigarettes in
the United States”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1968, 50(4),
November, 888-895.
Maier, Frank A., “Consumer Demand for Cigarettes Estimated from State Data,” Journal
of Farm Economics, 1955, 37(4), November, 690-704.

McNally, William D. “The Tar in Cigarette Smoke and its Possible Effects.” American
Journal of Cancer 1932; 16:1502-1514.

Schoenberg, Erika H., “The Demand Curve for Cigarettes”, Journal of Business, 6, 1933,
15-33.

Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, “Progress Report VIII,” 1954.

Viscusi, W. Kip, Smoking: Making the Risky Decision: New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992.

Wynder, Ernst L., and Evarts Graham, “Tobacco Smoking as a Possible Etiologic Factor
in Bronchiogenic Carcinoma: a Study of 684 Proven Cases.” JAMA, 1950;143:329-36.
Appendix: Proofs of Propositions

                                          β∆U (Y )
Proof of Proposition 1: At S = S * =               + U (Y ) − U (Y − PC ) , the utility from
                                          1 − βδ
smoking and not smoking are equal. Since the utility from smoking is monotonically and
continuously increasing in S, and the utility from not smoking is independent of S, for
values of S>S*, smoking strictly dominates not smoking and for values of S<S*, not
smoking strictly dominates smoking.


                                ∂S *                      ∂S *     ∆U (Y )
Differentiation then yields          = U '(Y − PC ) > 0 ,      =            > 0,
                                ∂PC                        ∂β    (1 − βδ )2
∂S * β U (Y )           ∂S * β 2 ∆U (Y )
    =         > 0 , and     =            > 0.
 ∂∆ 1 − βδ               ∂δ   (1 − βδ )2



                                                      ∂S * (1 − βδ + β∆ )U ′(Y )
Proof of Proposition 2: Differentiation yields:           =                      − U ′(Y − PC )
                                                       ∂Y         1 − βδ

                                          β∆     U ′(Y − PC )
which is positive if and only if 1 +           >              . Further differentiation then
                                        1 − βδ      U ′(Y )

           d U ′(Y − PC )   U " (Y − PC )U ′(Y ) − U ' (Y − PC )U " (Y )
yields                    =                                              , which is strictly negative
          dY    U ′(Y )                      U ′(Y )
                                                     2



     − U " (Y − PC ) − U " (Y )                            U " (Y )
if                  >           . This is always true if −          is strictly decreasing in Y.
      U '(Y − PC )    U ′(Y )                              U ′(Y )

The assumption lim Y →0 U ′(Y ) = ∞ guarantees that for some value of Y sufficiently close

          U ′(Y − PC ) 1 − βδ + β ∆                               U ′(Y − PC )
to PC ,               >             , and the assumption lim Y →∞              = 1 guarantees
             U ′(Y )      1 − βδ                                     U ′(Y )

                                                 1 − βδ + β ∆ U ′(Y − PC )
that for some sufficiently high value of Y,                  >             .     Thus, there must
                                                    1 − βδ       U ′(Y )
                                1 − βδ + β ∆ U ′(Y − PC )
exist a value of Y at which                 =             . Monotonicity then implies that
                                   1 − βδ       U ′(Y )
                                      ∂S *                                         ∂S *
for levels of Y greater than that,         > 0 and for levels of Y less than that,      < 0.
                                      ∂Y                                            ∂Y
Proof of Proposition 3: Within any two groups, the impact of an increase in ∆ on the
                                                         ∂S *              βU (Y )
share of the group that smokes will equal − f ( S *)          = − f ( S *)         . If S is
                                                          ∂∆               1 − βδ
                                             βU (Y )
uniformly distributed then this becomes              times a negative constant.
                                             1 − βδ
Differentiation shows that this quantity is clearly greater for groups with more income,
higher values of β and higher values of δ .


Proof of Proposition 4: Within any two groups, the impact of an increase in PC on the

                                                         ∂S *
share of the group that smokes will equal − f ( S *)          = − f ( S *)U '(Y − PC ) . If S is
                                                         ∂PC

                                          (Y − PC ) times a negative constant. This is
uniformly distributed then this becomes U '

declining in Y and independent of β and δ .


                                       β∆U (Y )
Proof of Proposition 5: Now S * =               + U (Y ) − U (Y − PC ) − g • Share smo ker s . Across
                                       1 − βδ
                                                                              − 1 ∂S *
population subgroups the derivative of the share smoking will equal                    holding
                                                                             S − S ∂x

                                                          (Y − PC )
                                                        −U'                 −1      ∆U (Y )
Sharesmo ker s constant, which yields derivatives of                   ,                       ,
                                                            S −S           S−S    (1 − βδ )2
 −1       β∆U (Y )        − 1 β U (Y )
                     and               for PC , β , δ and ∆ respectively. Across
S−S      (1 − βδ ) 2
                         S − S 1 − βδ

                             S −S*
countries Sharesmo ker s =         , so the equation can be solved to yield:
                              S −S

         S−S     β∆U (Y )                               gS
S* =                      + U (Y ) − U (Y − PC ) − g •      . The derivative of the share of
       S − S − g 1 − βδ                                S −S
                                                             − 1 ∂S *
cigarette smokers with respect to any variable equals                 , which equals
                                                            S − S ∂x
  (Y − PC )
−U'                 −1      ∆U (Y )                −1      β∆U (Y )              −1     βU (Y )
              ,                             ,                           and
  S −S −g         S−S−g    (1 − βδ )   2
                                                S − S − g (1 − βδ )
                                                                    2
                                                                              S − S − g 1 − βδ

for PC , β , δ and ∆ respectively.         All of these are decreasing in g, so as g gets larger
the impact of all of these variables on aggregative smoking consumption will increase.
Furthermore, the ratio of the relationship between these variables across subgroups within
country to the relationship between these variables and smoking across countries will
         S−S
equal         > 1.
        S−S−g
                                                                    percent
                                           G
                                         G re




                                                       0
                                                           5
                                                               10
                                                                    15
                                                                         20
                                                                              25
                                                                                   30
                                                                                        35
                                                                                             40
                                           er ec
                                              m e
                                             Ja any
                                      N
                                       et S pa
                                         he p n
                                            rla ain
                                           Ire nd
                                      Sw N la n s
                                         itz orw d
                                         D erla ay
                                           e n
                                     Lu B nm d
                                        xe elg ark




Source: World Health Organization.
                                          m iu
                                             b m
                                           A our
                                             u g
                                            Fr stri
                                     N
                                      ew anca
                                          Ze U e
                                             al K
                                                an
                                         A It d
                                           us a
                                                  ly
                                           Fi tral
                                             nl ia
                                           C an
                                             an d
                                                ad
                                          Sw U a
                                              ed S
                                                 en
                                                                                                  Figure 1: Smoking Rates in Developed Countries, 2000
                                                                                                              percent




                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                  35


                                                                                         U
                                                                            Lu Au           S
                                                                              x      s   U
                                                                            N em tra        K
                                                                             ew b l
                                                                                            i
                                                                                  Ze ou a
                                                                                      a g r
                                                                                   C la n
                                                                                     an d
                                                                                   I ad
                                                                                G rela a
                                                                                   er n
                                                                                      m d
                                                                                   F i an
                                                                                      nl y
                                                                                        a
                                                                                      Sp nd
                                                                                  B a
                                                                                    el in
                                                                             N Swgiu
                                                                              et
                                                                                 he ed m
                                                                                          e
                                                                                D rlan n
                                                                                   en d
                                                                                       m s
                                                                                    F r ar
                                                                                       a k
                                                                                   A nc
                                                                                      us e
                                                                                         tr
                                                                                            ia
                                                                             Sw N Ita
                                                                                     o
                                                                                 itz rw y  l
                                                                                    e r ay
                                                                                       la
                                                                                     Ja nd
                                                                                        pa
                                                                                                                                       Figure 2: Obesity Rates in Developed Countries, 2000




                                                                                             n
Source: OECD Health Statistics. Data are for about 2000 in all countries.
                               Figure 3: Cigarette Smoking in the United States

                     5000

                     4500

                     4000

                     3500
cigarettes / adult




                     3000

                     2500

                     2000

                     1500

                     1000

                     500

                       0
                        1900    1910   1920   1930   1940   1950   1960    1970   1980   1990   2000



                     Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
                                        Figure 4: Smoking Rates in 1980 and 2000

                              60
2000 smoking rate (percent)




                              50

                              40
                                                        Germany
                                                                                           Denmark
                              30

                                               Finlan
                              20
                                                          Sweden   US
                              10
                                   10        20              30            40         50             60
                                                        1980 smoking rate (percent)



                              Source: World Health Organization.
                                  Figure 5: Cigarette Smoking and the Relative Price of
                                                        Tobacco

                         40
                                              Greec
                         35
                                                      Norway
Smoking rate (percent)




                         30
                                                                                          UK
                         25
                                              Portugal
                         20
                                     US     Swede
                         15                 n

                         10

                         5

                         0
                              0       1       2          3           4          5   6     7    8
                                                               Relative Price



                         Source: World Health Organization. Regression excludes Greece.
                        Figure 6: Smoking and Regulations in US States

               40

               35
                                                                         South Dakota
               30
Smoking Rate




               25

               20

               15
                                                                           Utah
               10
                5

                0
                    0        0.5          1          1.5             2   2.5            3
                                           Index of Regulations


               Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
                        Figure 7: Smoking and Regulations Across Countries

               40
                                                                                Greece
               35

               30
Smoking Rate




               25

               20
                                     US
               15

               10
                5

                0
                    0          0.5        1        1.5          2         2.5            3
                                          Index of Regulations


               Source: World Health Organization. Regression excludes Greece.
                       Figure 8: Smoking and Income, International Data

               60

                                               Turkey
               50
                                                    Serbia/Montenegro
                                  China
               40
smoking rate




               30


               20
                      Moldova                                               US
                                                                     Hong
                                 Nigeria                             Kong
               10


               0
                100                   1000                   10000               100000
                                              GDP / capita



               Source: World Health Organization and World Bank.
                                    Figure 9: Smoking and Median Income, States

                            40

                            35
                                                                                  District of
                                                                                  Columbia
                            30
   Smoking rate (percent)




                            25

                            20

                            15
                                         Utah
                            10

                            5

                            0
                            20000   25000       30000      35000       40000   45000            50000
                                                  Median income per capita



        Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Census Bureau. The
regression line is estimated using the logarithm of per capita income as the dependent
variable.
                                 Figure 10: Smoking and The Beliefs of Non-Smokers About
                                               the Harms of Smoking, States

                           40

                           35
                                                                                  Arkansas
  Smoking rate (percent)




                           30

                           25                                                                New Jersey
                                           Hawaii
                           20

                           15
                                                                           Utah
                           10

                           5

                           0
                                65             70               75                 80                 85
                                        Share of Non-Smokers Believing Smoking Causes Cancer



       Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and National Survey of Drug
Use and Health.
                          Figure 11: Smoking Rates and Beliefs About Smoking,
                                          Cross Country Data

                    45
                                                            Denmark
                    40
                                                                             Greece
                    35
  percent smoking




                    30
                    25
                                                                      US
                    20
                    15
                    10
                     5
                     0
                         80            85              90               95            100
                               Share of Non-Smokers Believing Smoking Causes Cancer

       Source: Authors’ tabulations of Eurobarometer survey data and National Survey
of Drug Use and Health. Regression excludes Greece.
              Table 1: Smoking Rates in Developed Countries (percent)
                Smoking Rate        Rate by Income Quartile       Rate by Education
               Official Survey                                   >12       <12
                                            nd     rd
Country         2000     1994     Top     2      3     Bottom years        years
Austria          29       --       --      --     --      --         --       --
Belgium          30       30       30      35    30       28        30        30
Denmark          31       42       34      48    44       38        42        46
France           27       37       37      36    37       37        41        34
Finland          23       30       --      --     --      --         --       --
Greece           38       36       41      41    40       22        44        31
Germany          35       32       36      33    30       27        34        32
Ireland          32       30       32      28    32       30        26        35
Italy            24       30       28      32    29       28        33        29
Luxembourg       30       29       25      21    36       36        29        29
Netherlands      32       40       36      35    38       45        43        39
Norway           31       34       --      --     --      --        32        44
Portugal         21       25       32      24    28       11        37        22
Spain            34       34       30      38    38       24        42        31
Sweden           19       --       --      --     --      --         --       --
Switzerland      31       --       --      --     --      --         --       --
UK               27       31       20      32    32       33        22        36

European          30        33       32      34     35      30        35        33
average
US                19        23       21      24     29      31        22        25
Source: Official smoking data for 2000 are from the World Health Organization’s Health
for All Database, and are generally compiled from national surveys. All other data are
authors’ tabulations. European data are from Eurobarometer and are for the population
aged 15+ in 1994. US data are from the National Survey of Drug Use and Health and are
also for the population aged 15+ in 1994. Germany is West Germany, and the UK
includes Northern Ireland. The European average is for countries that have complete
data (e.g., excluding Norway).
          Table 2: Cigarette Prices in the US and Europe
                    Price after tax
                    of local brand                   Price Relative
Country                 (US$)           Tax (US$)       to Bread
Austria                  3.04              2.22            1.5
Belgium                  2.93              2.20            1.5
Denmark                  4.00              3.36            1.9
Finland                  3.35              2.45            1.0
France                   2.75              2.06            1.1
Germany                  2.75              1.98            1.9
Greece                   1.64              1.20            1.7
Ireland                  4.47              3.35            1.9
Italy                    1.93              1.41            0.9
Luxembourg               1.90               --             0.9
Netherlands              2.56              1.84            1.7
Norway                   6.48              5.05            2.7
Portugal                 1.77              1.43            1.7
Spain                    1.15              0.83            1.2
Sweden                   3.64              2.51            1.5
Switzerland              2.80              1.46            1.2
UK                       6.25              4.88            6.7
European average         3.22            2.39             1.9

US                       3.60            0.86             1.2
Sources: World Health Organization “The Tobacco Atlas” 2002.
Guindon, Tobin, Yach 2002. The UK includes Northern Ireland.
The European average is for all countries with complete data.
          Table 3: Cigarette Regulation in the US and Europe
                                          Smoke Free Workplace
Country                 Total     Government Private Restaurants
Austria                  2.0           1.0          1.0      0.0
Belgium                  2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Denmark                  1.0           0.5          0.5      0.0
Finland                  2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
France                   2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Germany                  1.5           0.5          0.5      0.5
Greece                   2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Ireland                  3.0           1.0          1.0      1.0
Italy                    3.0           1.0          1.0      1.0
Luxembourg               0.0           0.0          0.0      0.0
Netherlands              2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Norway                   3.0           1.0          1.0      1.0
Portugal                 2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Spain                    1.0           0.5          0.5      0.0
Sweden                   2.5           1.0          1.0      0.5
Switzerland              1.0           0.5          0.5      0.0
UK                       0.5           0.0          0.0      0.5
European average       1.97         0.76       0.76       0.44

US                     1.05         0.49       0.25       .31
Sources: World Health Organization, Tobacco Control Database, CDC
State database. Data are for around 2000. UK includes Northern
Ireland.
          Table 4: Belief Differences Across Countries
                       Percent Believing Smoking is Harmful
Country                 Total        Non-Smokers       Smokers
Belgium                   78              85             63
Denmark                   85              91             78
Finland                   91              95             81
France                    82              89             72
Germany                   73              84             52
Greece                    91              96             83
Ireland                   85              91             73
Italy                     77              85             57
Luxembourg                86              92             73
Netherlands               81              87             72
Norway                    90              94             83
Portugal                  92              94             84
Spain                     84              86             78
UK                        87              92             75
European average         84              90             73

US                       91              94             83
Sources: Authors tabulations. European data are from
Eurobarometer and are for 1994. US data are from the General
Social Survey and are for 1994. Germany is West Germany. UK
includes Northern Ireland.
