                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM AND LABOR SUPPLY


                           Alan L. Gustman

                         Thomas L. Steinmeier



                        Working Paper No. 1212




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1(\cZC
                    L'J)L'   R.--.LLU
                                   t1-4-... ktVL1U
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1983




A paper submitted in fulfillment of Grant No. R.A.—82—501 from the
Office of Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Original Project title:
T'A Simulation of the Labor Market Effects of Possible Changes in
the Structure of Social Security." The research reported here is part
of the NBERt5 research project in Government Budgets. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1212
                                               October 1983



                Social    Security Reform and Labor Supply

                                 ABSTRACT




      A structural life—cycle retirement model with an improved specifi-

 cation over previous models is used to analyze and compare the long—run

 labor supply effects of the rules for Social Security in place in 1972,

 1977 and 1983, and for an actuarially fair system. The effects of sepa-

rate provisions from the 1983 amendments are examined. These include

the raising of the normal retirement age to 67, the increase in the de—

layed retirement credit to 8 percent, and the lowering of the reduction

rate for earnings over the test amount to one dollar for every three

dollars of earnings.




Alan L. Gustman                                   Thomas L. Steinmeier
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                 Texas Tech University
Hanover, NB 03755                                 Lubbock, TX 79409
                                 I.   tntroduction

        The Social Security System has undergone an evolution in the last

decade, largely as a result of changes in the general environment in

which the system operates. One of these external changes was the

advent of substantially higher rates of general inflation during the

late 1960's and the 1970's. The system had been originally conceived,

and up until that time had operated, in an environment in which

inflation was either non—existent or was at fairly low levels for

almost all of the time. The rules governing the calculation of Social

Security benefits had been written without paying close attention to

the distinction between real and nominal quantities. With the coming

of higher    inflation   rates these rules caused the calculations of

benefits    to   behave in ways that were different from what had been

originally intended. To remedy this situation, the Social Security

amendments passed in 1977 altered the method for calculating benefits

so that the calculations were done largely in real terms, making the

system less susceptible to wide variations in the general rate of

inflation.

        A second major external change, which became increasingly apparent

during the late 1970's and early 1980's, was in the demographic

composition of the American population. This change            had major
iinpl ica tions for the financial vi abi   1 ity of the   sy stern over   the   long
term.     Up until that time, most recipients of Social        Security benefits

appear    to have received substantially greater returns on their Social
Security    contributions than they could have gotten in the private

markets, a situation which was made possible for a while by the low
                                 —2



ratio of recipients to wage—earners contributing into the system. The

recent increase in the number of individuals in the older age brackets,

in combination with the gradually declining retirement age which

increases the proportion of those individuals drawing benefits and

reduces the proportion contributing to the system, has made it

impossible to mantain the high level of returns to recipients without

rather substantial increases in the taxes levied on the working

population. The Social Security amendments of 1983 have addressed this

problem by delaying by one—half year the indexing of benefits and by

moving the normal retirement age up to 67, both of which will have the

effect of reducing the general level of benefits. These amendments

also changed certain provisions of the Social Security rules which it

was felt discouraged individuals from continuing to work and thereby

continuing to contribute to the system.

     In addition to responding to problems created by inflation and

demographic changes, the Social Security Amendments of 1977 and 1983

have also substantially changed the incentives for individuals to

continue working in later years rather than to retire. A number of

studies have analyzed the manner in which these incentives are affected

by such measures as the early retirement penalty, the delayed

retirement credit, the automatic benefit recomputation, the earnings

test, and benefits provided to wives and to widows.'

     A more   di f ficult issue arising from these amendments——an issue


        Recent discussion of some of these incentives include Sammartino
 (1982), Clark and Gohmann (1983), and Cordon (1983).
                                 -'3




 that is the subject of this paper——is how the changing incentives have

affected the labor supply and retirement decisions of older

 individuals. tn order to assess these effects, it is necessary to have

 some quantitative estimates of the relations shaping individual

retirement decisions.

     The most common studies of retirement behavior are based on

reduced—form equations. These studies relate the retirement date to a

group of variables which describe the individual's characteristics and

the nature of the opportunities facing the individual. Unfortunately,

it is usually impossible to include enough explanatory variables in

such studies to enable them to trace through in any but the crudest way

the separate effects of the many actual and potential changes in Social

Security rules on retirement behavior.1 Estimates of structural

models, which are more difficult and less common than estimates of

reduced—form models, attempt to establish the nature of the underlying

preference structures which govern retirement decisions. Structural

estimates can conceptually be used to analyze the effects on retirement

behavior of almost any potential change in Social Security, but

previous estimates of structural models have employed simplifying

assumptions which have limited their usefulness for this kind of




       In most cases, the only variables in the reduced—form models
which reflect the Social Security rules are a Social Security wealth
variable and the so—called Social Security delta (the change in Social
Seurity wealth associated with additional work effort). For a
discussion of the weaknesses in currently avai lable reduced—form
estimates of retirement equations, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1984).
                                —4



analysis.' Accordingly, these models must be regarded as just the

beginning of our attempts to understand the manner in which Social

Security affects labor supply and retirement behavior.

     The present work attempts to analyze the effects of several actual

and potential changes in Social Security rules using a recent improved

structural life—cycle retirement model which has been estimated and

described in Gustman and Steinmeier (1983a). The model allows

individuals to choose among full—time work, part—time work at a lower

hourly wage, and full retirement. Hours in part—time work are fully

variable within any one year, and the individual who chooses part—time

work can vary the number of hours from year to year. The individual

chooses when to leave full—time work, whether or not to work part—time

and if so, how much, and when to retire completely. These choices are

assumed to be made so as to maximize lifetime utility subject to a

lifetime budget constraint. Such a model can consider the effects of a

number of dimensions of Social Security, including changes in the

retirement age, the penalty for early retirement, the credit for



        The pathbreaking work of Gordon and Blinder (1980) assumes that
hours of work are continuously variable between zero and full—time at a
constant wage, an assumption which is contradicted by the observation
that many individuals quit a full—time job and take a partial
retirement job at a lower wage, even though they are not facing
mandatory retirement or strong incentive effects due to private
pensions. Mitchell and Fields (1983), at the other extreme, constrain
 the choice to be between ful I—time work and complete retirement.
 lurtIess and Moffitt (1983) model the decision to retire  parlially, but
 they assume that an individual who partially  retires works the same
number of hours in each year thereafter as they do in   their first year
of partial retirement. For further discussions of the problems created
by the specifications adopted in these and other structural retirement
models, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1983a and 1983b).
                                 —5



 delayed retirement, the earnings test amount, the rate at which

 benefits are reduced for earnings above the test amount, and the

 general level of benefits. (Since our original model was estimated for

 a population of white males who were not self—nployed, the analysis

 contained here pertains only to this group. We are currently

 estimating a version of the model for a sample of nonwhite males.)

      This paper is organized along the following lines.    The next

 section briefly outlines the life—cycle retirement model used in the

 study and indicates the parameters that are estimated for this model.

 Section III presents the results of simulations for this model,

 contrasting the effects of the 1972, 1977, and 1983 Social Security

 amendments, and comparing these with the effects of a hypothetical set

of rules which would provide the same level of benefits as the 1983

rules, but which would be actuarially neutral. The following section

analyzes the effects of the individual components of the rules changes

in the 1983 amendments and assesses which of these components are

likely to have important effects on retirement behavior. Section V

considers how sensitive these results are to assumptions about the

general inflation rate, the real wage levels, and potential reactions

of pension plans to changes in the Social Security rules.     The

simulations in Section VI explore the effects of a group of

hypothetical changes which could have been considered in lieu of the

changes which were actually passed in 1983. Section VII notes the

possibility of substantially better than fair actuarial returns to

wives under the 1983 rules and investigates whether these returns might

be exploited to encourage additional work effort by older individuals.
A final section briefly summarizes the results and discusses some of

their implications and limitations.



                II. A Life—Cycle Model of Retirement Behavior

     The theoretical model used in this study is a variation on the

standard life—cycle model, altered to reflect important features of the

work choices actually facing older individuals. Earlier work (Gustman

and Steinmeier, 1983b) found that most individuals in their prime

working years reported that they could not cut their hours below full—

time in the jobs they currently held. Further investigation using

individuals from the Retirement History Survey established that there

was a significant wage drop among individuals who reported themselves

as not retired at all in one survey year and as partially retired in

the next survey two years later (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1982). The

wage drops were observed whether or not the individuals changed jobs in

the process, although the drops were larger for individuals who did

have to change jobs in order to retire partially.

         These observations led us to postulate a model in which

 individuals choose between two types of work. If an individual is

willing to work full—time in a job, he can obtain a higher wage than he

could     receive for part—time work. In a sense, one of the compensations
 for part—time work is the opportunity to choose the amount of work the
 individual wishes to do rather than being constrained to work full—
 time.     In this setting, the individual chooses time paths for labor

 supply and consumption so as to maximize the lifetime utility function

 given by
                                        -.7




                            U =     fu[C(t), L(t), t] dt

subject to   the budget constraint



      f e C(t) dt =               +I    e [woo + w(t)H(t)J                dt


where COt) is consumption at time t, LOt) is leisure at time           t, r is

the real interest rate, and WF, W, HF, and H are the real wage rates

and labor supply to full—time and part—time work, respectively, with

                      1 —           —
the relation L(t) =
                            HF(t)       FI(t). Other   constraints in the model

limit the values of L(t) to range between 0 and 1 and require full—time

work if the individual receives WF(t).

     The function g in the budget constraint relates the individual's

compensation, including the effects of Social Security——i.e., his net

compensation——to his compensation before Social Security. The function

g is illustrated in Figure 1. Between the origin and point A in the

figure, the individual's earnings are below the         earnings   test amount,
and the Social Security rules do not affect the individual's level of
                                 —8




                              Figure 1.


    The Effects of Social Security Rules on Annual Compensation.




Compensation
Including
Social
Security
Effects




                                               C




                                                               Conipensat ion
               0                                               Before Social
                                                               Security Effects
                                   —9



compensation.' Between points A and B in the figure, the income is

above the earnings test amount. An individual over the early

retirement age is subject to a benefit reduction for every dollar of

earnings above the test amount. For instance, under 1977 rules the

individual loses one dollar of benefits for every two dollars of

earnings above the limit. This loss in benefits is at least partly

offset by the fact that the individual's later benefits will be raised

as a result of forgoing present benefits, either by a reduced early

retirement penalty or an increased delayed retirement bonus. The slope

of the function between A arid B reflects the net result of the lost

current benefits and the increased future benefits. Above point B, the

individual has exhausted his benefits, and further earnings are not

subject to the effects of a benefit reduction. In this range, the

individual may again keep all of any incremental earnings. Above point

C in the diagram, another consideration comes into play.     In this

range, the individual has reached an earnings level high enough that he

is substituting current earnings for a previous year's earnings in the

calculation    of the average monthly earnings and the primary insurance

     1
          In drawing the function without a vertical intercept, the
diagram  implicitly attributes any Social Security benefits for which
the individual may currently be eligible to the decisions made in
previous years. Symmetrically, a choice to be above point A in the
diagram will affect benefits in future years, but these changes are
attributed to current compensation. For the current period labor
supply decision, however, it makes no difference whether or not a
vertical intercept is included, since in a diagram o. current period
income versus current period labor supply, the indifference curves are
vertical displacements of each other, with the implication that a
vertical displacement of the current period budget constraint will not
affect the amount of labor supplied. For a proof of this proposition,
see Gustrnan and Steinmeier (1983c).
                                    -.10




amount. (Actually, point C might occur to the left of point B, a

possibility we do not illustrate, but do consider in our simulations.)

The individual finds that above point C, not only does he get to keep

an additional dollar of earnings, but also the earnings produce later

benefits in the form of increased future Social Security benefits.            The


slope of the function in this range reflects both effects and is

greater than unity.

     The utility function used in the empirical work is of the

following CES specification:


                                                        X+6
             u[C(t), L(t), t] =   sign()<[C(t)]       + e     [L(t)] )




where      is a vector of explanatory variables which affect the relative

weight of leisure in the utility function at time t, B is the

associated vector of parameters which is presumed to be constant across

both time and individuals,        is a time—invariant stochastic term

affecting the relative weight of leisure for the individual, and ó

 (with < 1) is a time—invariant stochastic term defining the curvature

of the indifference curves. In this specification, which follows that

 used by Gordon and Blinder, the within—period elasticity of

 substitution is calculated as C =         11(1—6).
        The j);lralneters for the model are the elements of    i   (including a

 cons tant and coef fici cots for age , health sti tus and vintage) and
 parameters characterizing the distributions of the stochastic terms.
 These parameters have been estimated by a maximum likelihood estimation
             which is discussed in Appendix A.         That appendix, which is
 procedure
                                 -ii




 available on request, also discusses the specification for the

 distribution of the stochastic terms and presents the estimated

 parameter values.



          III. The Evolution of Social Security Rules and Their
                Effects on Retirement Behavior, 1972—1983

     Using estimates of the model just discussed, this section

 investigates the effects of various changes in the Social Security

rules from 1972 to the present. These include the major revisions

introduced into the system by the 1977 amendments and the more recent

revisions legislated this year (1983). Since it is generally felt that

the most recent revisions go a long way toward making the system

actuarially fair, this section also investigates the hypothetical

effects which would occur if the remaining traces of actuarial bias

were removed from the system.

     The simulation procedure employed to obtain the results in this

and subsequent sections is described in detail in Appendix A, which, as

noted, will be made available upon request. The simulations are

intended not so much to reflect the effects of the system on the

cohorts receiving Social Security today, or in past years, as to

indicate the long—term effects of changes in the system on a

hypothetical cohort which is held constant across the v;irious   sets   of

rules considered. The most important consequences of this outlook are

that the average monthly earnings are calculated with 35 years of

earnings and that no maximum is applied to the earnings, which

implicitly assumes that any maximum is high enough so that it does not
                                —12




affect a large number of individuals. The simulations thus exclude two

different transitory effects which arose during the 1950's and 1960's——

the first arising because the average monthly earnings calculations in

those years included a relatively low number of years, and the second

because in several years during that period the maximum creditable

earnings were low enough to affect a significant number of workers.

     For the simulations, the manner in which Social Security rules

influence work incentives includes the effects operating through the

individual's own benefits and, if he is married, through his wife's

benefits and any potential widow's benefits for which she may

eventually be eligible. Where appropriate, benefits are reduced if the

individual begins to collect the benefits before the normal retirement

age and increased if the individual works beyond the normal retirement

age and has earnings above the earnings test amount. In some cases an

individual will find that it is actuarially advantageous to postpone

collecting benefits even though he or she is eligible to do so.

Individuals are assumed to postpone collecting benefits under such

circumstances. The consequences of this possibility are discussed in

more detail in Section VII.

      In discussing how the different sets of Social Security rules

 affect retirement behavior, it will be helpful in the presentation to

 pick one set of rules as a base case and to compare the effects of the

 other sets of rules to it.   Since later sections will focus on the

 effects of the 1983 rules relative to the 1977 rules, the results for

 the 1977 rules will prove to be a convenient choice for a base. Figure

 2 provides a general overview of the   retirement   behavior which arises
                 -— -    Simulated Petirement Decisions of Older Workers UndeIL
                                        the 1977 Social SecurityPules. .           .1




                                                                     Fully
                                                                    Retired




                              5'

             Percent of
             Labor F or ce




                             .31




                              2(




                                                  World iw,
                                              l"iil l—tUiie




                                   61        63               65              67   69

                                                              Age



I. I   In,
                                 -14



in   the simulations with the 1977 Social Security rules.' The most

noticeable aspect of the table is the dramatic decline in the number of

individuals who continue to work during the period between age 61 and

age 69, with almost three—quarters of the individuals working at the

earlier age and fewer than one—sixth of the individuals working at the

later age. The percentage of individuals who are working part—time is

in the 7—8 percent rate up until age 64 and rises to the 10—12 percent

range for the three—year span between 65 and 67. Between 64 and 65 the

decline in the percentage of individuals who continue working is

relatively steeper; this corresponds to the well—documented peak of

retirement activity at age 65, which is the normal retirement age for

Social Security as well as for many private pension plans.

       Figure 3 illustrates the simulated effects of three sets of Social

Security rules on retirement activity relative to that which would have

occurred with the 1977 rules. The alternating        dashed and dotted

lines refer to the 1972 rules, the dashed line to the 1983 rules, and

the solid line to a set of rules similar to the 1983 rules but omitting

the earnings test. The three panels in the figure indicate the effects

of the various sets of rules on the percentage of individuals working

 full—time, working part—time, and fully retired, respectively.    The

values in the figure refer to the deviation in the percentage of

 individuals in the particular retirement state from the percentage that

 would have occurred with the 1977 rules. To illustrate, the dashed



        This and subsequent figures are based on Appendix Tables B.l—
 B.7, which present numerical results for all the simulations and are
 also available upon request.
                                                      15
                                                   Figure 3

                            Simulated Retirement Behavior of Older Workers Under
                                   Alternative Social SecurityRules.




                Percent
               Working
               Full—time
               Relative
                             ::,,i11:
               tol977
               Rules.        -2

                             —4                                                    +6


                                                                                   +4


                                                                                   +2
                                                                                          Per cent
                                                                                         14 orking
                                                                                   o      Part —time
                                                                                         Relative
                                                                                         to 1977
                                                                                   —2    Rules:


                                                                                   —4 .

                                                          .
                                                                                   —6




             Percent
             Full Retired
             Relative
             to 1977
             Rules'



                                       —--4



                                              63                  67          69
                                                                                           1.egend
                                                        Age                         •   : 1972 Rules
                                                                                    —   — 1.983 Rules
         L...i..Li•1.±            -,               .1
                                                                                          1983 Rules wit1
I:trI%   ii,, Iii, Ii                                                                     no earnings tes:
                                   -16




line in the upper panel of the figure reaches a value of 5.8 percent at

age 65, meaning that under the 1983 rules, the percentage of

individuals working full—time will be 5.8 percentage points higher than

under the 1977 rules. From Figure 2 it can be seen that 24.3 percent

of the individuals would be working full—time under the 1977 rules.

Thus by implication, 30.1 percent would be working full—time under the

1983 rules.

     Figure 4 presents the information in a manner which emphasizes the

number of individuals who retire at different ages. These values are

calculated as the difference between the percentage of individuals who

are retired at a particular age and the percentage who were retired one

year previously. For example, from Figure 2, 40.7 percent of the

individuals are working full—time at age 64 and 24.3 percent are

working full—time at age 65. The difference of 16.4 percent represents

the percentage of individuals who retire from full—time work at age 65.

That value is plotted in Figure 4 along the dotted line (representing

 the 1977 Social Security rules) at age 65.

        The major labor supply effects of the evolution of Social Security

 rules over the period can be characterized fairly easily. Compared to

 the 1972 rules, the introduction of the 1977 rules appears to have

 generally decreased the percentage of individuals working full—time and

 increased the percent;lge ret i red between 61 mid 69. They      hid

 relatively    little effect on the distribution of ages at which

 individuals    left full—time jobs or left work altogether in this age

 range,   however, and   in particular they had no   effect   in reducing the


 peak   of retirement activity   at age 65, as   illustrated in   Figure 4. The
                                                         17



                     •


                         •
                                                  {J Figure
                                                              4
                         --•• Simu1ated.fletireont Dèisioñs: of. 'ldêr
                                 H A1tertative Social Secuity Ri.ties
                                                                         Workers :Uñde'
                                                                               i....
                           L                                               •




                                                         F'
                                10
        Percent of
        Labor Force
        Retiring From:
        Full—time
        Work at
                       5
        Indicated
        Age:



                                0
                                     61       63              65                       69
                                                          Age


                               15




                               10
       Percent of
       Labor Force
       Fully Retiring
       at Indicated
       Age
                                5




                               .0
                                    61       63           65         67

                                                         Age
                                                                                                Legend

                 .                                                                              1972 Rules   :




                                                                                            — — 1983 Rules
   Li. :.i:....J                                                                                1983 Rules wiLl;
to (lb. Its It                                                                                  no Earnings Tes
                                    -.18




1983 rules, when they take full effect, should have a fairly small

impact on the number of people working full—time or the number retired

before age 65, but at age 65 and thereafter the percentage of

individuals working full—time will be noticeably increased and the

percentages working part—time or retired will both decline. This is

reflected in Figure 4 as a dramatic decline in the peak of retirement

activity at age 65, both for individuals retiring from full—time jobs

and individuals retiring from work altogether. As shown by the solid

lines in the two figures, the 1983 rules have an impact that is close

to the impact that would be observed if the rules were actuarially

fair, in the sense that the earnings test were entirely eliminated.

That is, if individuals were allowed to accept Social Security payments

regardless of whe.ther or not they were working, there would be

relatively little change from the retirement behavior under the 1983

rules.

     The general decline in retirement ages brought about by the 1977

rules appears to have been caused by changes in the manner in which

average   monthly earnings (ANE) and the primary insurance amount (PtA)
were calculated. Up until 1977, the PiNE       calculations   had been done

strictly   in nominal terms. With the introduction of the 1977 rules,

however, all earnings before the age of 60 were adjusted up to that age

by an index of average monthly earnings, while earnings after that age

 continued to   be entered in the ave rage in nom i tm I te ntis.   Thi s index ing

 of the earnings calculation had the effect of increasing the value of
 ANE, with two consequences. First, the indexing of the earnings
 figures for earlier years would have made it less likely that current
                                       —19




earnings would displace an earlier year from the calculations, and if

it did, the substitution would have increased th average less than

without indexing. Secondly, the higher average would have placed the

individual in higher brackets in the PIA formula for which the marginal

impact of a given increase in AME would have been less than before.

Thus, under the 1977 amendments, the combination of a smaller increase

in AME coupled with a smaller marginal impact on PIA lessened the

amount by which current work would increase future benefits through the

AME and hence would have lowered the incentives for continued work.

This effect was reinforced by the fact that the marginal effect of AME

on PIA in the highest bracket fell from 20 percent under the 1972 rules

to 15 percent under the 1977 rules.

       Countering this encouragement toward earlier retirement, but not

to a very great degree, were 1977 rules changes in the penalties for

retiring before age 65 and in the credits for retiring after age 65,

which had the effect of encouraging later retirement throughout the age

range. For retirement after 65, the 1977 rules introduced a 3 percent

increase in future benefits for each year after 65 that an individual

did not collect benefits. This had the effect of reducing the size of

the   penalty for working later and encouraging a later retirement than
otherwise. For retirement before 65, the 1977 rules started to index
the value of   any   penal ty for   early   retirement,   a   value   which under the

previous rules   had not been indexed. This had the effect of increasing

the real value of any penalty for early retirement and hence of

encouraging later retirement. The magnitude of this effect, as brought

Out   in the debate between Burkhauser and Turner (1981) and Blinder,
                                   -2 0




Gordon    and Wise (1981), depends on the inflation rate and its
associated nominal discount rate. The simulations here are performed
under the assumption of a relatively moderate inflation rate (the
average    rate over the 1947—1982 period), and hence the indexing of the

early retirement penalty only moderately encouraged later retirement.

In any case, the 1977 changes in the early retirement penalties and the

delayed retirement credit were swamped by the changes in the method of

calculating the AME and the PIA, both in terms of their effects of the

work incentives provided to the individuals in the sample and in terms

of the response of the individuals to these changed incentives.

     In comparison to the 1977 rules, the 1983 rules recently enacted

can be expected to have relatively little impact on individuals under

age 65, but a much sharper    impact thereafter. Between the ages of 65
and 68, the new rules should ultimately cause the number of individuals

working full—time to be 4 to 6 percentage points higher than they would

otherwise be. These increases are coming on top of a relatively small

base of individuals still working in this age range, so in percentage

terms the increases in full—time work appear to be fairly substantial.

For example, the increase of 4.3 percentage points in the number of

66—year—olds working full—time represnts an increase from 18.4 percent

to 22.7 percent of the 67—year—olds who are working. [n other words,

the number of 66—year—olds who are working full—time will increase by

about one—quarter, with similar if not larger figures applying to the

other age categories above age 65. Looking at the result in terms of

the number of individuals retiring at different ages, the 1983 rules

should cause the peak in retirement from full—time work at age 65 to
                                 -21




 fall by more than one—third, from 16.4 percent to 10.1 percent.

      Although a detailed examination of the individual components of

 the 1983 changes will be postponed until the next section, the

 principal element responsible for this increase in post—65—year—olds

 still working full—time is not hard to spot——namely, the increase in

 the delayed retirement credit from 3 percent to 8 percent. This

 figure, which also applies to any widow's benefits for which the

 individual's spouse may ultimately be eligible, causes the Social

Security system to be about actuarially fair until the late sixties or

early seventies. The only individual for whom the system is not fair

in this age range is an individual who has a spouse over 67.    In this

case, if an individual works enough to cause benefits to be lost to the

earnings test, the spouse will lose benefits also, and in the Social

Security rules there is no provision for a spouse over this age to

recover any lost benefits through increases in later benefits. Even in

this case, however, the system will not be seriously unfair. For

reasons discussed in Section VII, the 1983 rules will foster, for

almost everyone over 65, a considerably greater degree of encouragement

for full—time work.

     To investigate further the proposition that the 1983 rules had

taken the Social Security system most of the distance toward actuarial

neutrality, we turn to the results of a simulation which was done using

the 1983 rules, but eliminating the earnings test. With no earnings

test, the early retirement penalties and the delayed retirement

credits, along with their associated actuarial biases, become
                                 -'22




irrelevant for the work decision because the work decision and the

decision as to whether or not to accept Social Security benefits become

two separate issues. The results, as illustrated in Figures 3 and 4,

indicate that the removal of the last traces of actuarial influence on

the work decisions causes some further increase in full—time work, as

might be expected, but the increase is fairly minor in comparison with

the changes resulting from the 1977 and 1983 rules changes.   The clear

implication is that there is very little further potential for

increases in full—time work effort induced by additional changes in the

Social Security system, removing the last traces of the effects of

actuarial bias on work effort.



      IV. Effects of the Separate Components of the 1983 Changes

     The new 1983 legislation changed a number of elements of the
                                                                  which
Social Security system. The major provisions of the legislation

are investigated in this paper include:   (a) the eventual increase in

                                               associated increase in the
the age of normal retirement to 67, with the

 penalty for retirement at 62 to 30 percent, (b) the eventual increase

 in the delayed retirement credit to 8 percent per year for benefits

 that are lost after the normal retirement age, (c) the reduction in the

 rate at which benefits are lowered for earnings over the test amount to

 one dollar of benefits foregone for every three dollars in earnings

 over the test amount (this provision applies only to individuals over

 the normal retirement age), and (d) the delay by six months in the
                                   -P23




 inflation   adjustment to benefit levels.1 The effects of the first

three of these provisions are illustrated in figures 5 and 6, which are

analogous to Figures 3 and 4 presented earlier. The effects of the

delay in the inflation adjustment were very small, never exceeding two—

or three—tenths of a percentage point. In order to avoid further

cluttering in the graphs, the results of this change were       included.

       Both the increase in the retirement age and the increase in the

delayed   retirement credit reduce the peak in retirement at age 65 and
increase the number of individuals who are working full—time at 65 and
66,   largely because both of these measures bring the Social Security

system much closer to actuarially fair at these ages. The effects of

the two measures are different for individuals 67 and over, however.

For the increase in the delayed retirement credit, individuals over 67




       Another provision of the recently passed amendments, the taxa-
tion of half of the benefits if total income exceeds a given income
level, could not be simulated very well within the context of the
present model. The given income level is high enough so that very few
individuals in the sample would be affected on the basis of labor earn-
ings alone, and the model is probably not very robust in terms of simu-
lating non—labor income. For further discussion on this last point,
see Gustman and   Steinmeier (l983a).
                                                               :Figure5.
                                   Effects ofthe Separate 1983 Rules Changes on the
                                       imulated Retirement Behavior bf Older Workers

                                                    ...:..!                       :.

                                     +4        ...J...:


                                     +2
           Percent
                                                                                                                   • — 5—

                          .
           Working
           Full—time                    o
           Relative
           to 1977
           Ru1e                         -2.



                                      ._4.


                                                                                                                   •
                                                                                                                                     +4..
                                        -6.




                                                                                                                                            Percent


                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                            Working
                                                     L.                                                            •   —— — ,. 0..          Part—time
                                                                                                                                            Relative
                                                                                                                   —————
                                                                                                                                                1977
                                                                                                                                            •,Rules



                                        +6-


                                   L.                                 I:..                                                      L..L
                                  .. .+2.                                            I.

                                                                                                  -
                Percent
                Fully Retired
                ReTlativeH
                tol77                               —                                                     ————
                                                                                                           t__•____ 5.,,
                            H
                                                                                 \;5 51       5,
                                ....l......4         i........L...H

                                                                                                                                 69
                                         661                  63                     65                       67
                                                                                                                           ..                        •H
                                                                                                                                                     I




                            •




                          Legend
                                                                      H      .
                                                                                   Age
                                                                                          •
                                                                                              H
                                                                                                      .   .
                                                                                                              .;       .

                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                .H              •.       .

            _.Incrase delayedretirTfleflt bonus to 87 per year.
                                               normal retirEflent ae to 67, with 3O% penalty forretirmeit at 62.
                                                •
                                                          .




            L              thcrease                                                                            L
                                                              iOn rate . .$l for every $3 over the test aunt-.
tsar,'. I,, tI,i I,n Ii
                  •
                           J. •0

                                          H         J
                                                                    H. Hr±fur.e..i:.
                                              .H':j the
                                        •Effectsof                      Sparat 1983Ru1es Changs on the
                                               Siirnjlated Retirement Behavior of Older                             Workers.



                                              15        .                                H

                                                                    H       H


                                                                                             /
                                                                                              /'\.
                                              10
                                                                                    :/                't


                      Percent of
                      Labor Force                               /                                     \.'
                      Retiring from
                      Full-time
                                                                                                                     \
                      Work at
                                    .5                      .




                      Indicated
                      Ages




                                          •0                             .          I            I         I    I        I      I
                                                   61                   63                       65            67        .     69
                                                                                             Age



                                          15




                                                                                              \

                                                    /
                      Percent of
                                          •10
                                                                                        / ..,. \
                      Labor Force
                      FuTfly    Retiring
                      at     Indicated
                      Age




                                          :0.                                   •
                                                                                                       .




                                          •        61                   63                   65                67              69



                                                                        .                              ,

                                     Legend
                                   increase normal retirement ae to 67, with 30%:penaity foL':retirelnent                           at 62.,
              •                    Increase (lelayeciretirenient bonus to 8% per year.
              ——                   Redue benefit reduction rate to $1 for every $3 over the test amount.
1ILIII'%   tb tI• I,t, It
                                   26




will continue to work full—time more than they otherwise would. An

increase in the normal retirement age to 67, on the other hand, will

cause a new peak of retirement to occur at that age, but work activity

after this age will be little affected. It is evident from comparing

the effects of the individual components to the overall effects of the

1983 changes that the dominant effect arises from the increase in the

delayed retirement credit. The reason for this result is fairly clear:

if the delayed retirement bonus rate is increased to a level comparable

to the early retirement penalty rate, it makes relatively little

difference what age is formally designated as the normal retirement

age, since the incentive effects on either side of that age are

approximately the same.

      The reduction in the rate at which benefits are lowered to one

dollar for every three dollars in earnings over the test amount serves

to dilute the actuarial penalties per hour worked for additional work.

For instance, if the effect of the delayed retirement credit were to

raise future benefits by forty cents for each dollar of benefits lost

to the earnings test,   and if the wage were   $10 per hour,   then the

actuarial penalty per   hour of additional work would be $3 (calculated

as   $10 times 0.5 times the 0.6 penalty rate) with a one dollar for

every   two dollars reduction rate, but only two dollars   with a one

dollar for every three dollars   reduction rate. This change has the

same general effects as the combined changes (which are approximately

actuarially neutral), both in terms of the reduction in the peak of

 retirement   activity at 65 and the increase in full—time work
 thereafter. But the magnitude of the effects from this        change alone is
                                     27




less than half the magnitude of the effect of the combined changes.

     As for the delay in the inflation adjustment, an important reason

why this provision has so little effect on retirement and work activity

is that under moderate inflation assumptions, benefits are affected by

only a relatively small amount. Furthermore, this measure is

essentially a uniform reduction in benefit levels. Hence, there are no

strong intertemporal labor substitution effects which would shift the

peaks and valleys in retirement activity.



                       V. Sensitivity of the Findings

     Three   additional sets of simulations were undertaken to assess how
sensitive the comparison between the effects of the 1977 rules and the
1983 rules is to various assumptions about the environment in which the

comparison   is   made. Figure 7  illustrates the results of these
simulations.      For reference, the solid lines in the figure indicate the
previous results. The aim of this section is to determine how much any
changes   in assumptions will cause the results to deviate from these

lines.

     The first set of simulations makes the comparison between the two

sets of rules using an inflation rate that is 5 percentage points

higher than the inflation rate used in the previous simulations. A

second pair of simulations investigates how the results might be

different for an individual whose wage rates, pension benefits, and

other real quantities were adjusted upward to levels that might pertain

to individuals who would be age 65 in the year 2000. Neither of these

changes in assumptions appears to have a very significant impact on the
                                    -P28




measured effects of the 1983 changes in the Social Security rules. The
most noticeable difference is that under either change, slightly fewer

people would be working full—time and slightly more would be working

part—time betwen the ages of 65 and 68. These deviations are very

small in comparison with the overall effects of the 1983 rules changes,

however. Accordingly, it would appear that the results reported in the

previous sections are fairly robust with respect to these kinds of

changes in assumptions.

     A third set of results in Figure 7 seeks to establish how the

comparison between the 1977 and 1983 rules would be affected if private

pension plans change their normal retirement ages to match the changes

in the Social Security normal retirement age. More specifically, the

dashed lines in the figure make the assumption that if a pension plan

had previously specified age 65 as the normal retirement age, that age

will be increased to 67 when the 1983 Social Security rules take

effect.1 This change in assumptions does make a noticeable difference,

 increasing full—time work at ages 65 and 66 by 3 to 4 percentage points

 in comparison to the previous results. This would serve to shift the

 remaining peak in retirement activity at age 65, as illustrated in

 Figure 4, to age 67. As the bottom two panels in Figure 7 show, the

 increase in full—time work would come partly at the expense of part—

 time work and partly at the, expense of full retirement.


        1                               plans may   be changed to offset rather
            We are aware that pension
 than   to augnient the inccnL ives created by changes in Sc i a I Seciir i ty.
 Such changes are one implication of the literature   which relates pen-
 sion plan provisions to the goal of designing   ahor market contracts so
 as to raise labor productivity over  the life cycle. See, for example,
 Lazear (1982) and Blinder (1982). This   literature  suggests that the
 net effect of changes in the provisionS of Social Security legislation
 will be weaker than those indicated in our analysis.
                                                                  29
                                                      Figure 7

                                     Effects of the 1983 Rules
                                     Simulated Retirement
                                     Workers in Alternative
                                                                       I \.      Changes on the
                                                                                   Behavior of Older
                                                                                      Environments.
                                      +6       -H
                                      +4


                                      +2
                     Percent
                     Working           0
                     Full—time
                     Relative
                     to 1977
                                      —2
                     Rules

                                      -4                                                            +6

                                      —6                                                            +4


                                                                                                    +2---
                                                                                                            Percent
                                                                                                            Working
                                                                                                     0      Part—time
                                                                                                            Reat lye
                                                                                                            to 1977
                                           I
                                                                                                    -2      Rules
                                                                            —;
                                      +6                                                            —4



                                      +4

              L. .                    +2
                     Percent
                     Fully Retired
                     Relative      -0.
                     to 1977:
                     Ru1e


                                                        H...
                                                                    \: ,
                                                       63              65          67          69
                                                                    Age

                       — Under high inflation regime.
                                   111(1 ividual .s aged 65 in year 2000.
                        ..L-
                               Withprivate- pension   plans matching -the increase- in   normal retirement age.         -J

hart-—I   iii iii,
                                    •3O



        VI.    Alternative Potential Changes in the Benefit Structure

     This section investigates the effects of several alternative

changes to the Social Security rules which might have been made instead

of or in addition to those that were actually adopted in 1983. Figure

8 illustrates the results of the simulations undertaken for this

purpose. The base of comparison is, as in the other figures presented

above, the set of rules under the 1977 amendments. It is evident from

only a quick glance at the figure that none of the changes explored in

this section has a very large effect on retirement and labor supply

behavior      in comparison with the changes examined in previous sections.
     The changes illustrated in Figure 8 are as follows: (1) In the
first   simulation, the penalty for early retirement at age 62 is

increased to 30 percent, holding the other rules of the system to the

1977 set of rules. This change seems to have so little effect largely

because the early retirement penalty rate under the 1977 law was

already approximately actuarially fair, and with the increased penalty,

individuals would simply evade a more than fair actuarial reduction by

delaying registration for benefits. (2) The second simulation

investigates the effects of eliminating early retirement completely.

Since the actuarial adjustment between the early and normal retirement

ages is rarely strongly unfair under the 1977 rules, this change too
                                                              H
                                          Effets
                                           L
                                                              of Alterat1ve'RulesIchanges on the Siulated
                                                 .LRet1rernentBehav1or of10lderWorkets..
                                                                                                                              .




                                                                                            .i                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                    .   .:

                                          +4


                                          +2         .
                                                                          -.                     --
                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                         -.
                    Percent
                   Working                               -?
                   Full-time                                                        ...     .
                   Relative
               Ito 1977,
               I: Rules                   —2                                    .




                                          _4.        .            .                   .
                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                         .             +6   -




                                         - —6                                                                                          +4


                                                                                                                                       +2
                                                                                                                                                    Percent
                                                                                                                                                    Working
                                                                                                                                                    Part—time
                                                                                                                                            -

                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                    Relative
                                                                                                                                                    to 1977
                                                                                                                                       —2           Rules


                                     • +6                                                                                              —4



                                     -
                                          +4                                                                                           —6



                                -.        +2
                  Percent
                  Fully Retired
                  Relative-
                  to 1977
                  Ru1e      -
                                     .
                                          -0
                                                                  r.___—                                  -
                                          —4


                                         -—6
           I
                            .                   61                    •

                                                                                      •   65                    67                69
                                                                          6,3
                           Legend                                                         Age
                                  penalty for early retirement to
                           Increase                                                                       10%   per year.
                                   early ret irement.
                    — —' Allow early retirement at age 60 with 66
                                                                                                          2/3%of full benefits.
           I
                       'Impose•30 tax On one—half of-benefits.
8 r.-% I       Ii- Iii I
                                 -31




would apparently have had little effect on labor supply.1 (3) The

third simulation allows individuals to begin collecting benefits at age

60, with the early retirement penalty rate remaining at 6 2/3 percent

per year. Because individuals considering retiring at age 60 or 61

would have to give up relatively fewer benefits (they would be eligible

to collect only 66 2/3 percent and 73 1/2 percent of the PIA's,

respectively) in order to secure an increase of 6 2/3 percent of the PIA

                                                           would be more
in all of their future benefits, postponing the benefits




        The increase in full—time work at 61 and 62 in this simulation
 is an artifact of the manner in which the simulations were done. More
 specifically, all individuals were started in the simulations at age
 25, and under these circumstances all individuals would begin replacing
 years in their average monthly earnings calculations, and
                                                             would hence
 experience a reduction in the returns to continuing  ftill—timc  work, two
                                                            if the  early
 years before the
                  early retirement age (this assumes that
 retirement age were to change, the number of years  used in  the  average
 monthly earnings calculations would change
                                            accordingly). In the other
 simulations reported in this paper, a similar effect can be found, but
 the impact of this effect is before age 60, which fa Is outside the
 range for which the simulations are illustrated in the figures.
                                  -32




than actuarially fair for most individuals, and hence the change would

have almost no effect because almost no one would find it advantageous

to begin   collecting at the earlier date.   (4)   In the last simulation of

this section, one—half of the benefits are taxed at a uniform 30

percent rate, which is the equivalent of a reduction in benefits to 85

percent of the levels they would otherwise be. Such a tax could be

expected to raise full—time work at most ages by a few tenths of a

percentage point, with a corresponding decline in full retirement and

relatively little effect on part—time work. This result suggests that

any change in the benefit structure which has the effect of raising or

lowering benefits uniformly are unlikely to change labor supply and

retirement behavior by much, primarily because they do not create large

substitution incentives between years.



       VII. Better than Fair Actuarial Returns in the 1983 Rules

     The Social Security amendments of 1983 contain one implication

which was rarely mentioned in the public debate, but which nevertheless

follows from the manner in which the rules were changed. Specifically,

under the 1983 rules many wives will have very strong incentives to

delay registering for Social Security benefits even if they are

eligible for the benefits and the husbands are not working sufficiently

that any benefits would be lost to the earnings test. The incentives

reflect the fact that under the 1983 rules, for the first couple of

years after they attain early retirement age, for most wives actuarial

returns to delaying registration are much better than fair.

    To illustrate, consider a 62—year—old wife who is deciding whether
                               -.33




or not to postpone registration for another year. With      five   years of

reduction at 8 1/3 percent per year, the amount she would be eligible

to collect at age 62 would be just 58 percent of her full benefits.           If

she delays until age 63, she gives up this amount and gets in return an

increase of 8 1/3 percent of the full benefits from age 63 on——that is

to say, all her future benefits are increased by 14.3 percent

(calculated by dividing 8 1/3 percent by .58). If her husband is the

same age, then for each dollar of benefits postponed during her 62nd

year, she may expect to recover about $1.77 in discounted future

benefits. Analogous figures for other ages are shown in the top part

of Table 1. The age differential between the wife and her husband

enters because after the husband dies, the wife becomes eligible for

widow's benefits, and any decision on whether or not   to   postpone

registering for wife's benefits will have no effect on her potential

widow's benefits, The general story told in the top half of the table

is that there are very strong incentives to postpone registering at age

62, fairly strong incentives at age 63, and somewhat milder incentives

at age 64. The bottom half of the table presents the corresponding

figures for actuarial returns under the 1977 rules. As the figures

indicate, for most wives there is a mild inducement to postpone

registration until 63 under the 1977 rules, but in general the

incentives to postpone registration at any given age under the 1977

rules are not nearly as strong as the incentives under the 1983 rules.

     As long as it is actuarially advantageous for the wife to postpone

registering and she in fact does so, the labor supply decisions of the

husband do not cause the wife to lose benefits. Once the       wife   does
                                  .34




                                 Table 1

Returns from Delaying Acceptance of Wife's Social Security Benefitsa


                             A. 1983 Rules

                                                      Wife's Age
                                 62             63        64        65     66

                        —2                               1.26      1.08   0.94
                        —1                     1.45      1.23      1.06   0.92
Age differential         0      1.71           1.43      1.22      1.05   0.91
                                        •

between }usband          1      1.66           1.39      1.18      1.02   0.88
and wife                 2      1.60           1.34      1.14      0.98   0.85
                         3      1.55           1.30      1.10      0.95   0.82
                         4      1.50           1.25      1.06      0.91   0.78
                         5      1.44           1.20      1.02      0.87   0.75



                             B. 1977 Rules

                                            Wife's Age
                                 62             63        64

                        —2                               1.03
                        —1                     1.16      1.01
Age differential         0      1.33           1.15      1.00
between husband          1      1.29           1.11      0.97
and wife                 2      1.25           1.08      0.93
                         3      1.21           1.04      0.90
                         4      1.17           1.00      0.87
                         5      1.12           0.96      0.83




a The figures in the table are calculated as the ratio between the in-
crease in the present discounted value of future benefits and the amount
of benefits foregone if the wife postpones registering for benefits at
the indicated age. The real interest rate used in the calculations is
0.01.
b
  This differential is positive if the husband is older and negative if
the wife is older.
register for benefits, the work decisions of the husband do affect the

benefits of the wife if he earns more than the test amount, since she

cannot collect benefits for a larger fraction of the year than he does.

In short, if the wife is subject to less than actuarially fair returns,

it will lower the net returns for continued work by the husband, but

the reverse is not true, for if the wife faces a better than

actuarially fair return, she can collect this return simply by delaying

registration regardless of the work decisions of the husband.

       With such high actuarial returns for a wife in her early sixties

who postpones registration, it is possible to ask whether these returns

can be used to induce the husband to continue working. The mechanism

would be to allow the wife to postpone registration only if the husband

cont   inued to work. With this       question in mind, a simula tion was done

which   permitted     wives to postpone benefits only if the husband were

losing benefits to the earnings test. The results of this simulation
                                  1
are illustrated in Figure 9.           It is clear that such a change would




        1
            In   this simulation, a further change in   the rules was made to
permit individuals to begin receiving any increased benefits immediately
rather than waiting until age 67, regardless of whether or not the
individual had registered. Otherwise, the wife of an individual whose
full—time earnings were insufficient to cause his benefits to be
exhausted by the earnings test would find that by regisLering and
collecting part—year benefits, the return on her remaining benefits may
well be negative even though the returns from simply postponing
rcgist ration were posit ive. 'this ci feet , which arises from theuntil
                                                                    fact
 that once a person registers for benefits, he or she must wait
 age 67 before the benefits are adjusted, runs contrary to the spirit of
 the simulation, so the effect was suppressed by allowing individuals to
 receive     any increased benefits immediately.
                                  TJT1TL :TFfure9 TfTH
                              •
                                  EffetsofTyingthe Wf's PostponementiofBeefjts
                                                             to the Husband's Continued. Work

                                                                                                                      .   .


                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                  I               .

                                                                  I;       ..                   .                 f
                                                                                                                  H


                                   +2                                               ,




                                                                                                                              :
             Percent
             Working
             Full—time.
             Relative
         j•to 1983
         i.Rules



                                   -4,                                                                                                     +6


                                                                                                                                           +4


                                                                                                                                          +2
                                                                                                                                                Percent
                                                                                                                                                Working
                                                                                                                                            0   Part—time
                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                Je1t lye
                                                                                                                                                to 1983
                                                                                                                                           —2   Rules
                          •                  I       .
                                                                                            .       .


                                  +6...                                     •
                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                          —4


                                  +4.                    •    i        .
                                                                                                                                      ——6

                                  +2
           Percent
           Fully Retired
           Relative                0                                                                                                  5
           to 1983
           Rules
                                  —2


                                  —4




                                                                            63                              65            67          69
                                                                                                            Age

                                         I
                                                 •



[IN   ci liii' In, Ii
                                -.37




indeed work in the direction indicated, but the magnitude of the

effects are not very large, increasing full—time work by only slightly

more than a percentage point at 62 and 63 and less thereafter.   The

reason for this rather weak result is that although the returns are

high per dollar of benefits that the wife loses, the returns per dollar

income that the husband earns are considerably less. For instance, if

a husband with a 62—year—old wife earns an additional dollar of income

over the test amount, the wife's benefits are reduced by less than 14

cents, first because his benefits are reduced only 33 cents per dollar

of income, and second because her benefit reductions are porportional
                                -38




to his, and her benefits are less than half of his (.58 percent of

one—half the PIA versus at least seven times the full PIA). When

account is taken of the fact that some fraction of the husband's full—

time earnings will be below the earnings test, the apparently large

actuarial returns to the wife may serve to increase the husband's full—

time compensation by only 5 percent or so. The net result is that

tying the wife's postponement to the husband's continued work provides

only a very mild additional inducement to further work and generates

only a small increase in full—time work effort.



                     VIII. Summary and Conclusions

     The simulations of this paper have suggested that the rules

changes specified in the recent Social Security legislation will have

two principal effects. First, the peak of retirement activity at age

65 will be reduced somewhat and spread over later years. Second, while

total work activity at 65 will be increased slightly, the fraction of

individuals over 65 working part—time will fall relative to the

fraction working full—time. This has evident implications for other

groups who are competing with older workers for full—time or part—time

jobs. The rules changes largely eliminate the effect on labor supply

of actuarial penalties arising from the Social Security system, and as

a result it appears that almost exactly the same results with regard to

labor supply and retirement behavior could have been obtained by

eliminating the earnings test entirely. Under either set of

circumstances, the only real influence that Social Security rules would

have on labor supply would be the effects arising if additional work
                                  .39


displaces earlier years in the calculation of ÂME.
     There are several qualifications which should be kept in mind
while   interpreting these results. Most importantly,. these results

refer to the long—run effects of a change in the rules, and as noted at

the outset, apply only to white males who are not self—employed. In

addition, individuals in the sample are presumed to average 35 years of

earnings, with no maximum, in the ÂME calculations, a situation which

will eventually be true for most people but is not necessarily true for

the actual cohorts eligible for benefits today. Also, the model and

the simulations assume that a uniform set of rules are in force for any

particular simulation, and that these rules are correctly perceived by

individuals. The paper has not attempted to ask questions pertaining

to the reactions of individuals who had thought that they would be

subject to one set of rules but find out in the middle of their life

cycles that they will in fact be subject to another.    It is not that we

view this as an uninteresting question. But the model used in the

paper is not as robust as one would like in terms of answering

questions about unanticipated change, and it is not easy to see how to

get around this problem without the availability of data sets that have

 somewhat better consumption data than is available in the RHS.'       Nor

does the model allow individuals to make mistakes in their maximizing

 calculations.

        Another important qualification is that the simulations indicate
 how older workers might change their labor supply in the face of the

 various Social Security rules changes, but it does not consider whether

 this change in supply would change the wage offers of the individuals


        1See Gustman and Steinmeier (1983a) for further discussion of
 this point.
                                    —40




 and through this the amount of work they actually do. Moreover, only

 one potential change in the pension structure offered by the firms was

 considered. In short, this paper looks at the supply side of the

 market for these workers and indicates how the supply curve might move.

 It does not consider either the demand side of the market or the

 ultimate effects on wages and labor supply after a new equilibrium has

 been reached. This shortcoming is particularly serious in markets

where older workers make up a significant part of the labor force, as

 in the market for part—time work.

     An additional qualification is that the simulations are done using

the actual pension coverage that was found for the sample for the

Retirement History Survey. Pension coverage today is considerably

greater than it was for the individuals in that sample. Since most

pensions are not even as actuarially fair as the 1972 or 1977 Social

Security rules, much less as the system will be after the changes

mandated by the recent legislation, there is the possibility that

retirement behavior may be driven more by features of the pension and

less by the nature of the Social Security system than has been

indicated   by these simulations.
     A futher qualification is that in the simulations, the spouse is
presumed to draw the wife's benefits rather than drawing any benefits

for which she might be eligible on her own. This is probably not a

major qualification, however, since both under the 1977 rules and the

1983 rules the wife's actuarial return to delaying the receipt of

benefits is either close to fair or better than fair until she reaches

the normal retirement age. By the time she reaches normal retirement
                                -'41




age and begins to be a potentially signficant factor in the husband's

labor supply calculations, however, the husband in most cases will have

already reached a decision either to retire or to work part—time at a

level where he is influenced in only a minor way by Social Security

considerations. That is to say, inmost cases the incentives created

by the wife's benefits do not play a major role in the husband's

calculations, so that it probably does not matter a great deal whether

the model treats her as drawing benefits as a wife or drawing benefits

in her own right, if she is eligible to do so.

     A related qualification has to do with the benefits a widow is

eligible to draw. Unlike the wife's benefits, the widow's benefits

enter in a more prominent manner into the calculations of the marginal

benefit of additional work, because the amount the husband's benefits

are reduced or augmented by the early retirement penalty or the delayed

retirement credit are likely to be the limiting factor to the amount

that the widow will be eligible to receive. Accordingly, any decision

of his which would affect the amount by which his benefits are reduced

or augmented will change the widow's benefits. The question which

arises with respect to widow's benefits is the extent to which the

husband takes account in his labor supply calculations of the potential

benefits to be received by his widow after he is no longer around.

Since the widow's benefits are always an additional positive inducement

in the marginal labor supply decisions, a failure to include fully the

widow's benefits in his calculations would probably induce an

individual to retire at a slightly earlier age than these simulations

might indicate.
                                       -P42




      A final qualification has to do with the fact that the model

 employed in these simulations takes no account of any potential

 liquidity constraint facing an individual. The degree to which older

 individuals are really liquidity—constrained is not completely evident.

On the one hand, models such as this would predict that most

 individuals should enter their retirement years with a positive level

of assets as long as the expected Social Security and pension receipts

 fail to replace completely the former wage. On the other hand, for

many individuals these assets take the form largely of housing, which

is not a very liquid asset. If individuals are postponing retirement

simply because they are liquidity—constrajned, then most of the effect

of this constraint should show up as an increased amount of retirement

around age 62, when individuals first become eligible for benefits

under the system. However, simulations previously done using a closely

related model for individuals during the actual sample period seemed to

do an adequate job of explaining the bunching of retirement at age 62

even without invoking liquidity constraints as a part of the model.'

Further, even if liquidity constraints do cause some amount of bunching

of retirement at age 62, this should not strongly affect the results of

most of these simulations, since the recent changes in the Social

Security rules and all but two of the hypothetical changes considered

in th i s paper do not   entail a cli a uge in   ilie age at wli i   ci   i ud i v   id   ua is


can first obtain benefits, and so relieve their liquidity constraints.

This consideration might inject a note of caution, though, in

interpreting those simulations that do entail a change in the early

retirement age.


     'See Gustrnan and Steinmejer (1983a) for a discussion of these results.
                                -43




     On a final note, the Social Security system is closer to actuarial

neutrality under the 1977 rules than it was a decade ago, and after the

recent legislation takes effect, it will be very close to being

completely actuarially neutral. Under these circumstances, it will be

difficult to change the various formulas in the Social Security system

to make them better than actuarially fair so as to encourage later

work, since under the current rules the individual is always free to

collect better than actuarially fair returns simply by delaying

registration for benefits. In order to use the Social Security system

as more of an inducement to work .than it is now, it will be necessary

to change the rules so that an individual eligible to collect benefits

must start collecting them unless the husband continues to work, and to

make returns for delaying benefits for this reason more than

actuarially fair. This would probably have to entail further increases

in the early retirement penalty and the delayed retirement credit for

the husband, however, since our findings indicate that simply tying the

postponement of benefits to continued work will not be sufficient to

increase work effort by much under the 1983 rules, even with the

apparent high actuarial returns to women.
                                     -44



                                 References


Blinder, Alan S. "Private Pensions and Public Pensions: Theory and

     Fact." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.

     902. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June

     1982.

Blinder, Alan S., Gordon, Roger and Wise, Donald. "Rhetoric and

     Reality in Social Security Analysis——A Rejoinder." National Tax

     Journal 34 (December 1981): 473—478.

Burkhauser, Richard V. and Turner, John. "Can Twenty-Five Million

     Americans Be Wrong?——A Response to Blinder, Gordon and Wise."

     National Tax Journal 34 (December 1981): 467—472.

Burtless, Gary and Moffitt, Robert A. "The Effect of Social Security

     on Labor Supply of the Aged: The Joint Choice of Retirement Date

     and Post—Retirement Hours of Work." Mimeographed. February 1983.

Clark, Robert L. and Gohmann, Stephen A. "Retirement and the Acceptance

     of Social Security Benefits." Mimeographed. 1982.

Gordon, Roger H. "Social Security and Labor Supply Incentives."

     Contemporary Policy Issues (April 1983): 16—22.

Gordon, Roger H. and Blinder, Alan S. "Market Wages, Reservation Wages

     and Retirement." Journal of Public Economics 14 (1980): 277—308.

Gustman,   ALan L. and   Steinmeier, Thomas L.   "A Structural Ret irl9nent

     Model."   Mimoegraphed.    Hanover, N.H.: May l983a.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "Minimum hours Constraints

     and Retirement Behavior." Contemporary Policy Issues (April

     1983b): 77—91.
                                45



Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "Partial Retirement and the

    Analysis of Retirement Behavior."     Industrial and Labor Relations

    Review (January 1984, forthcoming).

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinineier, Thomas L. "Partial Retirement and

     Wage Profiles for Older Workers." National Bureau of Economic

     Research Working Paper no. 1000. cambridge, Mass.: National

     Bureau of Economic Research, October 1982.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L. "Structural Retirement

     Models." Final Report to the U.S. Department of Labor. Washing—

     ton: April l983c.

Lazear, Edward. "Pensions as Severence Pay." National Bureau of
                                                          Mass.: National
     Economic Research Working Paper 944. Cambridge,

     Bureau of Economic Research, July 1982.
                                            "Economic Incentives to Retire:
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Fields, Gary S.
                                                  Bureau of Economic
     A Qualitative Choice Approach." National

     Research Working Paper no. 1096. Cambridge, Mass.: National

      Bureau of Economic Research, March 1983.

 Sammartiflo, Frank. "The Timing of Social Security Acceptance by Older

      Men: Examining the Financial Incentives." Technical Analysis

      Paper No. 24, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy and

                                            Department   of Health and Human
      Evaluation. Washington, D.C.: u.s.

      Services, January 1982.
                                     Appendix A

      Specification, Estimation, and Simulation of a Life-Cycle
                     Model of Retirement Behavior



     In previous work we have specified and estimated a life-cycle struc-

tural model which is capable of addressing the question of labor supply

response to Social Security changes. This appendix will briefly sketch

the specification of the model and its estimation; a more complete de-

scription is contained in Gustman and Steinmeier (1983a). The last part

of this appendix will also indicate more precisely how the simulations

reported in the body of the paper were carried out.



     A. A Life-Cycle Model of Retirement Behavior. The theoretical

model used in this study is a variation on the standard life-cycle model.

In this model an individual can choose between full—tinie work or part-

time work at a lower waae. In this setting, the individual chooses time

paths for labor supply and consumption so as to maximize the lifetime

utility function given by


                   T
          U =     f u[C(t),   L(t), t] dt
                   0


subject to the budget constraint


              T                       T
          f       etC(t)dt    A0 +   50 etg[W(t)H(t)   +
                                                           W(t)H(t)]dt
              0


where the various variables have already been defined in the text. As
                                                                            A-2




MaCurdy (1981) has shown, the problem may be reduced to the problem of

maximizing the following quantity at each moment in time



           u[C(t), L(t), t] + k S(t)



where k is a parameter whose value is constant across time and S(t) is

the discounted value of savings at time t, defined as



           S(t) =   et   {[w (t)H   (t) + w(t)H(t)]   -   c(t))

In this problem, the individual generates utility during the current pe-

riod in three ways: directly through consumption, directly through lei-

sure, or indirectly through savings which are then converted to direct

utility in other periods. At each moment in time the individual chooses

how much to consume and how much to work in which type of job, and

thereby how much leisure he will have and how much savings he will gen-

erate, so as to maximize the utility, both direct and indirect, generated

during the period. In this formulation, the parameter k has a natural

interpretation as the marginal utility of discounted savings either gen-

erated or used during the period. Its value depends upon the wage of-

fers and the shape of the utility function throughout the entire life

cycle,   and it is thus the vehicle   through which deci Si OflS and opportuni -

ties in other periods affect the choices in the current period. The ap-
propriate value of k is the value such that when the above maximization
problem is solved at each moment in time, the volume of savings generated
and used over the life cycle just satisfies the budget constraint, which
                                                                                    A- 3




may be written in terms of S(t) as


                   T
          A0 + f        S(t)dt   =   0
                   .0




     To complete the specification, it is necessary to choose a specific

parametric form for u which specifies how the explanatory variables and

stochastic terms affect utility and to specify the nature of the paramet-

ric distributions for the stochastic variables. The utility function

used in the empirical analysis is the CES function:


                                                                X B+
          u[C(t), L(t), t] =             sign ()   {[C(t)]   + et_ [L(t)]ó}


where 5 and    are time—invariant individual stochastic variables related

to the within-period elasticity of substitution between consumption and

leisure and to the relative weight attached to leisure, respectively.                 5


is assumed to come from an exponential distribution



          f(o) =   ye6), < i
where y is a positive parameter defining the distribution. The normal

distribution is used for the stochastic distribution of :




                   n(p5, o)



with the parameter p providing a means by which 5 and               may be corre-

lated.
                                                                             A-4




     B. Estimation Procedure. The maximum likelihood estimation proce-

dure is based on the fact that for a given set of values for the parame-

ters of the model , an observed set of retirement decisions by a particu-

lar individual is consistent with only a limited range of values for the

stochastic variables. To illustrate the technique, consider an indi-

vidual who is observed to be fully retired, working part-time, or working

full—time as of a specific date. For a given set of parameter values,

his observed behavior is consistent with only a subset of possible

values for 6 and E, as illustrated in the top panel of Figure A.l. For

example, all combinations of values of 6 and E      in   the area denoted as

which includes high values of c signifying a large weight on leisure in

the utility function, imply in the model that the individual would be re-
                                                             denoted as      in-
tired as of the specific date. Similarly, the region

cludes generally low values of c, signifying that the individual places

relatively little value on leisure, and combinations of 6 and c in this

region    imply that the individual would be working full-time as of the
 date. Finally, for individuals with a sufficiently iow elasticity of
 substitution between consumption     and leisure and with an intermediate

 value   of c such that they fall in the region c2 in the diagram,        the model


 implies   that they would be working part-time as of the date.
                   regions can be defined for an individual who   is   observed   in
         Similar
                                                           typical case involv-
 several different years. Figure A.lb illustrates a
 ing observations in three different years.       In this diagram, the right-

 hand inverted Y separates the (6,c) plane into three parts according to

 whether the individual would be fully retired, working part-time, or

 working full-time in the first year.       The remaining inverted Ys define
                                                                                   A-5

I' i yi r   A.1        (I        I     S          t. i   i ab 1   rre pnncl i nc
                  ()        I   'u I       I rm'nt (jwtlcu




                                              e
                                                                         A-6




similar areas for the other two years. These inverted Y's will be to

the left of the original inverted V due to the effect of the time-

dependent explanatory variables in        in the utility function, which will

cause the individual to place a relatively greater weight on leisure as

he grows older. This, in turn, implies that the region for which the in-

dividual will be fully retired will be larger in the second and third

years than in the first year, and the region for which the individual

will be working full-time will be smaller. In combination, the three in-

verted V's defined in this manner divide the (6,c) plane into a series

of regions corresponding to various retirement sequences. For instance,

the region FPR defines a region of values for 6 and c for which the in-

dividual would be working full-time in Year 1 and part-time in Year 2,

and would be fully retired in Year 3.

     To calculate the probability that individual i would have chosen

                                                                      which
the observed retirement sequence S, first find the region c25()

defines the combinations of 6 and c which would have caused the indi-

vidual to have followed the observed retirement sequence S•        Note that

the boundaries of this region depend explicitly on the parameter vector

,   since   these parameters in part determine how the individual will be-

have when confronted with a given time path of wages.       The probability

 that the stochastic variables would have taken on values in the region

        and hence would have generated the sequence S. is:



                                    f(5, c; y, c, p) dEd6
             Pr(S1;6) =ff    (i3)
                           Si —


 where 0 is a vector of all of the parameters to be estimated (0, y,
                                                                        A-7



arid p) and where the joint probability density function f of the stochas-

tic variables       and E depends on the parameters y, c and p, as noted ex-

plicitly in the function. The likelihood function of the sample is cal-

culated as the product of the probability for each observation in the

sample:


                     N
                =
          (e)
                    i=l   Pr(S;   a)




where N is the number of individuals in the sample. Maximum likelihood

estimates of the parameters of the model are found by maximizing this

likelihood function with respect to the parameters. On the assumption

that the specification of the model is correct, these estimates are

known to have optimal properties for large samples.



     C. Empirical Specifications. The data set used in this study is

the Retirement History Survey (RHS), a random longitudinal sample of ap-

proximately 11,000 households. The RHS consists of households whose

heads were between the ages of 58 and 63 in 1969. Detailed question-

naires were administered to these households every two years from 1969

through 1979. This study uses the survey results through 1975, which

were the latest results available at the time the study was begun. Due

to the complexity of the estimation and simulation procedures, the sam-

ple actually actually used for this paper is formed by taking every

tenth household from the RHS, and the sample is further restricted to

white males who were not self-employed when working full-time. Observa-

tions are dropped if critical information is missing, although a major
                                                                       A-8




effort is made to impute missing information if at all possible.

      In view of the complexity of estimating an optimal control model

a parsimonious choice is made for the set of explanatory variables to be

included in the vector X.,.   The explanatory variables used in the em-

pirical analysis include a constant, age, a dummy variable equal to

unity if the individual has previously experienced a long-term health

problem, and vintage. The coefficients associated with these variables

are                        For positive values of    and 132 (the coeffi-
             2' and 13g.
cients of age and the health dummy variable, respectively), the utility

function for an individual places an increasing emphasis on leisure over

time, which eventually causes retirement in the model.

      The model requires two time paths for wage offers, one for the wage

offer for full-time work and one for the offer for part-time work. It

should be evident that whereas we have called WF(t) and W(t) 'wage of-

fers," what is really required for the estimation and simulations is a

measure of total compensation for additional work, including the wage

      se as well as any increases in pension values and Social Security

values attributable to the additional work. In order to impute the time

paths for wages p se, separate wage equations are imputed for full-

time work and for part-time work. From whatever information can be ex-

tracted from the data about an individual's job history, a pair of wage

offer curves is constructed using available information about the indi-

vidual's wages as an indication of the general height of the curves and

allowing the profile of the wage paths to be determined by the tenure

and experience variables in the wage equations. For full-time work, the

pension component of compensation is calculated on the basis of availa-
                                                                         A-9



ble information on normal and early retirement ages, tenure in the job,

and the level of benefits. With no information available about the type

of pension, all pensions are treated as though they were of a defined

benefit type with payments proportional to years of service and with re-

ductions for early retirement which are imputed from industry data re-

ported by Hatch etal. (1981). The Social Security component of compen-

sation is based on the set of rules in force during the sample period,

including the effects of the automatic benefit recomputation as stressed

by Blinder, Gordon, and Wise and the effect of the lack of indexing of

the early retirement penalty as stressed by Burkhauser and Turner

(1982).l The calculations use the individual's actual covered wages

through age 55 and imputed wages thereafter, since after that age the

Social Security earnings records increasingly fail to reflect potential

earnings for those who partially or fully retire.

     The retirement sequences used in the estimation procedure are

formed on the basis of a question which asked the respondents whether

they considered themselves to be completely retired, partially retired,

or not retired at all. For most individuals, the retirement sequence

consists of a set of four observations (one observation every two years

from 1969 to 1975).   In cases where the individual dropped out of the

sample etierh because of death or refusal to answer the questionnaire,



       Due to the additional complexity that would have been created in
the estimation program, the effect of recomputing the AME is calculated
only for full-time work and not for part-time work. This implicitly as-
sumes that annual earnings from partial retirement work are low enough
that they do not replace any years already used in the AME calculations,
or alternatively, that the effect of a change in AME is not an important
part of the Social Security component of part-time compensation relative
to either effect.
                                                                     A-lO




the retirement sequence includes fewer than four observations. The es-

timation procedure described above can be used for any number of obser-

vations on retirement status, and hence it is possible to use whatever

observations are available for each individual in the data set. Indi-

vidual responses are taken at face value except for some cases where an

individual classified himself as partially retired even though he was

fairly clearly fully retired for purposes of labor-force participation.

Problems arise in a few cases wherein individuals went backwards along

the sequence of full-time work, part-time work, and full retirement,

since regression along this sequence would in general not be generated

by any combination of the stochastic terms within the context of the

model. For such individuals, the estimation procedure uses whatever in-

formation in the retirement sequence that provides useful information

about the slope and curvature of the individual 's indifference curves

between consumption and leisure and ignores those parts of the sequence

which contain little such information but would require a considerably

more complicated model (involving perhaps the reactions of individuals

to unexpected occurrences) to explain adequately.



     D. Parameter estimates. Table A.l presents the parameter esti-

mates obtained by applying the estimation procedure described above.

All of the parameters with the exception of the coefficient on vintage

 are highly significant at any conventional level , and
                                                        the small stan-

 dard errors indicate that most of them are determined quite precisely.

 Three of these parameters have particularly important implications about

 the manner in which individuals behave. First, the value of y implies
                                                     A—li




                       Table A.1
              Parameter Estiniates.a

              -y                0.61
                               (0.04)
              0
                   C
                                0.99
                               (0.02)
                               —8.78
                               (0.22)
              r)               —5.02
                               (0.10)
                                   0.2].
                               (0.01)
                                   0.8
                               (0. 10)
                                0.06
                               (0.03)


REst. iii   te are based   on 478    observat mis.
Est imat'd standard trrors are in parentheses.
                                                                      A-l2




that the median value of the elasticity of substitution between consump-

tion and leisure in the utility function is 0.87, which is just on the

inelastic side of unity. Within the context of the life-cycle model

used in the estimation procedure, this value reflects in part the rather

weak correlation between the age of retirement and the general level of

lifetime wages (a high value of the substitution elasticity, for exam-

ple, implies a strong negative correlation between them) and in part the

relative proportion of the sample who showed themselves to be willing to

accept a lower hourly rate of pay in return for being able to work part-

time   (a high value of the substitution elasticity would indicate that
                                                          The estimated
very few people would be willing to make this trade-off).
                                                                   and
value is considerably lower than the value of 10 found by Gordon
Blinder, who did not use any information on the choice of full-time work

versus part-time work at a lower wage in their study.    The second impor-

tant parameter is 1l the parameter which determines the rate at which

the leisure term is gaining weight in the utility function as the indi-

vidual ages, and hence the rate at which the indifference curves between

consumption and leisure are becoming steeper over time. The value of

this parameter indicates that the indifference curves become steep

fairly rapidly, increasing their slope by 23 percent per year.1 In

large measure, this rather rapid rate reflects the fact that among the

 individuals who do in fact work part-time, the length of the period that

 they spend in part-time work is typically fairly short. If the indif-



       1
        The percentage figures in this paragraph are calculated as 100
 (ec - 1), where c is the estimated coefficient value.
                                                                              A-13



ference curves were becoming steeper only slowly, then one would expect

that many of the individuals who work part—time would do so for a rela-

tively long period of time, and it      is   this consideration which leads the

estimation procedure to its rather high estimate of the effect of age on

the slopes of the curves. The third critical parameter is , which in-

dicates the degree of heterogeneity of individual preferences regarding

the weight of the leisure term in the utility function. The estimated

value of 0.99 suggests that there is a high degree of heterogeneity among

individuals, with a single standard deviation in the stochastic prefer-

ence variable representing a change of 169 percent in the slope of an in-

difference curve at a given age. This large variation in individual

preferences combined with the relatively smaller yearly effects of age

on the slope of the indifference curves causes individuals to retire

over a range of ages beginning in the mid-50's and extending into the

70 s.




        E. The Simulation Method. The simulations are performed as fol-

lows. For each individual in the sample, the value of the vector               and

the wage paths WF(t) and W(t) are calculated according to the procedure

described above. The individual will retire, according to the life-

cycle model, at some age R whose value depends on the stochastic varia-

bles ó and .     Let       be the set of all combinations of         and E   which

imply that this individual would retire at age R. Then the probability

that    an individual with the characteristics indicated by         and facing

the wage paths WF(t) and W(t)    will   retire at age R is found by integrat-
ing the   probability density function for c5 and      over   the region c1(R).
                                                                     A-14



          f(R) =            f(5,e) dcd6
                   ffc(R)

For the entire sample, the simulated percentage of individuals who re-

tire at a given age R is found by taking the average value of f(R) over

the sample:




          f(R) = il f(R).


The same procedure can be used to calculate the distribution of any other

statistic of interest concerning the simulated retirement decisions of

the sample.

     The simulations are based on a set of assumptions about the Social

Security system that are intended no so much to reflect the effects of

the system on the cohorts receiving Social Security today as to indicate

the long—term effects of changes in the system. More specifically, the

Social Security system which is used in the simulations includes the fol-

lowing features:   Cl) The number of earnings to be included in the AME

calculations is found by subtracting 27 from the age when individuals

were first eligible to begin drawing early retirement benefits. No

maximum is applied to the earnings, which implicitly assumes that the

maximum is high enough that it does not affect a large number of indi-

viduals. Earnings in part—time work are assumed to be sufficiently low

that they will not affect the AME computations, an assumption which is
                                                              likely to be
made to simplify the computations and which is particularly

 true in cases when earnings from earlier years are indexed. (2) The PIA

 is based on a calculation made at the early retirement age using the
                                                                           A-l5



rates and bend points for the appropriate year. No maximum or minimum

is applied to this calculation. Afterwards, the benefits are assumed to

be adjusted upward to reflect any increases in the cost of living and any

increases in the AME calculations. (3) Benefits are reduced for each

month before the normal retirement age that the individual registers for

benefits, with a recalculation done at the normal retirement age to re-

flect   any time during which the individual lost benefits due to the earn-
ings test. After the normal retirement age, future benefits are      in-
creased for every month's worth of benefits that are lost to the earn-
ings test.      The individual is presumed to make an actuarial calculation

and to postpone accepting benefits until it is no longer actuarially ad-

vantageous for him to do so. At this point he registers for benefits as

soon as his earnings fall to a level which would allow him to collect

them,   and any earnings after that point are subject to the earnings
test.1 Earnings above the earnings test cause benefits to be reduced        by



         Even   though it would be actuarially advantageous to give up an
entire year's worth of benefits if he did not work,     an individual at age
62   who decides to work enough so that most of his benefits would be post-
poned may find it advantageous to postpone registering altogether. The
reason is that if the individual postpones registering, any increase in
benefits will take effect immediately, whereas if the benefits are regis-
tered for and then foregone, increases in future benefits will not ac-
crue until the normal retirement age. However, this effect is likely to
be rather small in comparison with other changes in incentives occurring
because of the Social Security system (i.e., the wife reaching normal re-
tirement age and hence losing permanently any foregone benefits, or the
husband reaching normal retirement age and facing a very sharp drop in
the actuarial return to foregone benefits). Furthermore, it would con-
siderably complicate the solution of the life-cycle model to take ac-
count of this effect because the decision depends on future labor supply
decisions. For these reasons, the effect is not considered in the simu-
lation, and instead it is assumed that once the actuarial rate falls be-
low unity and the individual's earnings fall to the point where he can
begin drawing benefits, he does so.
                                                                       A-16




a fraction of earnings above the test amount. (4)   All   wives are as-

sumed to make their calculations as if they were eligible for one-half

the husband's PIA, with the benefits reduced for each month before the

normal retirement age that the wife registers for the benefits. The

wife is presumed to postpone benefits until the point in time where it

becomes actuarially disadvantageous to delay any further, and then to

register. After she registers, her benefits in any particular year are

reduced because of the effect of the earnings test, but if she is below

the normal retirement age some of the lost benefits will be recovered

via increases in future benefits. (5) A widow is eligible, starting two

years before the early retirement age, for benefits that are reduced for

each month before the normal retirement age that she registers for the

benefits. She also is presumed to delay the registration until it be-

comes actuarially disadvantageous to do so further. Her benefits are

limited to the amount her husband would have been eligible to receive,

including any early retirement penalties and/or delayed retirement

credits, as long as the benefits would not fall below 82.5    percent of
the primary insurance amount for this reason.

     In addition to the assumptions regarding Social Security that are

used in the simulation, the following other assumptions and adjustments

are also made. First, the growth rates of real and nominal wage rates

are presumed to be equal to the 35-year average growth rate during the

period 1947-1982, and the real interest rate used in the calculations is

presumed to be approximately equal to the growth rate of real wages.

Secondly, in order to simulate the effects of the Social Security changes

at approximately today's wage levels, all nominal wage and pension quan-
                                                                      A-17



titles are adjusted upward to levels appropriate for an individual who

would be 65 in 1985. Finally, in order to reflect an important change

in the law since the period of the Retirement History Survey, the wage

streams constructed for the purposes of the simulation presume that if

the individual faced a mandatory retirement age before 70, the value of

the mandatory retirement age for the purposes of the simulations is

changed to 70.
Appendix B
                                       TabI B.1

  Simulations of the Effects of Various Sets of Social Security Rules.

                    percent retiring, by age
                       from full— from all      working working       fully
                       time work    work       full—time part-time   retired

                                A. Under 1972 Rules.
   age
    60                    6.6       5.4           78.7       5.1       1.6.2
    61                    6.5       5.8           72.2       5.8       22.0
    62                   10.0       8.6           62.2       7.1       30.7
    63                    9.3       8.5           52.9      8.0        39.1
    64                    9.7       9.1           43.2      8.6        48.2
    65                   16.4      12.8           26.7     12.2        61.1
    66                    6.5       7.1           20.3     11.6        68.1
    67                    5.8       6.5           14.5     10.9       74.6
    68                    4.2       5.4           10.2      9.7       80.1
    69                    3.5       4.8            6.7      8.5       84.8
    70                    1.0       2.8            5.7      6.7       87.6
                a
average age              62.6      63.8
                                B. Under 1977 Rules.
   age
    60                    8.5       6.5           74.4      6.6       19.0
    61                    6.9       6.3           67.5      7.2       25.3
    62                    9.7       8.6           57.8      8.3       33.9
    63                    8.4       8.1           49.4      8.7       41.9
    64                    8.7       8.6           40.7      8.7       50.6
    65                   16.4      13.1           24.3     12.0       63.7
    66                    5.9       6.9           18.4     11.1       70.5
    67                    5.4       6.2           13.0     10.3       76.7
    68                    3.9       5.3            9.1      9.0       81.9
    69                    3.1       4.3            6.0      7.7       86.3
    70                    1.2       2.8            4.8
average   age            62.3      63.4

   age
                                C. Under 1983 Rules.
    60                    8.2       6.3           75.1      6.4       18.5
    61                    6.8       6.1           68.3      7.1       24.6
    62                    9.7       8.5           58.6      8.3       33.1
    63                    9.1       8 .4          49.5      9.0       41.5
    64                    9.3       9.0           40.2      9.11      50.4
    65                   10,1       9.3           30.1     10.2       59.7
    66                    7.5       8.0           22.7      9.7       67.6
    67                    4.0       5.2           18.6      8.4       73.0
    68                    5.6       6•3           13.0      7.7       79.3
    69                    4.0       4•9            9.1      6.8
    70                    3.5       4.2            5.6
average   age            62.5      63.7
                         Table B..l (continued)


          percent retiring, by age
                                          percent   percent   percent
              from full—    from all      working working      fully
              time work       work       full-time part—time retired

              D. Under 1983 Rules, but with no Earnings
                               Test.
  age
    60            8.2        6.3           75.1       6.4      18.5
    61            6.8        6.1           68.3       7.1      24.6
    62            9.6        8.4           58.7       8.3      33.0
    63            8.2        7.9           50.5       8.6      40.9
    64            8.6        8.4           41.9       8.7      49.4
    65           11.1       10.0           30.8       9.8      59.4
    66            6.9        7.4           24.0       9.2      66.8
    67            5.5        6.2           18.5       8.4      73.1
    68             5.0       5.9           13.5       7.5      79.0
    69             3.7       4.7            9.8       6.6      83.6
    70             4.4       5.0            5.4       6.0      88.6

average age       62.6      63.7


    a
      These averages are calculated from the distributions of retirement
    ages ranging between 56 and 72, and not simply from the 10 year
    age range reported in these tables.
                                  TabTh B.2

      Simulations of the Effects of the Individual Components of the
                1983 Changes in the Social Security Rules.


              percent retiring, by age
                                           percent   percent     percent
                  from full— from all      working   working      fully
                  time work    work       full—time part—time    retired

          A.    Increase Normal Retirement Age to 67, with a 30%
                Penalty for Retirement at Age 62.
   age
    60                8.3       6.4           75.0        6.4      18.6
    61                6.9       6.1           68.2        7.2      24.6
    62                9.7      8.5            58.5        8.3      33.2
    63                9.1      8.4            49.4        9.0      41.6
    64                9.3       9.0           40.1        9.3      49.6
    65              10.1       9.2            30.0       10.2      59.8
    66               7.4       8.0            22.6        9.6      67.8
    67               8.9       8.1            13.7       10.4      75.9
    68               4.0       5.3              9.7       9.1      81.2
    69               3.4       4.5              6.3       7.9      85.8
    70               1.3       2.9              5.0       6.3      88.7
average age         62.4      63.6

          B.    Increase Delayed Retirement Bonus to 8% per Year.
   age
    60               8.5       6.5            74.4        6.6      19.0
    61               6.9       6.3            67 • 4      7.2      25.4
    62               9.7       8.6            57.7        8.3      34.0
    63               8.4       8.1            49.3        8.7      42.0
    64               8.6       8.6            40 •   7    8.7      50.6
    65              10.3       9.6            30.4        9.5      60.1
    66               7.3       7.7            23.1        9.0      67.9
    67               6.0       6.5            17.1        8.4      74.5
    68               5.2       6.1            11.9        7.5      80.6
    69               3.8       4.7             8.1        6.6      85.3
    70               2.6       3.7             5.5        5.6      88.9
average age         62.5      63.6
          C.    Reduce Benefit Reduction Rate to $1 for Every $3
                in Earnings over the Earnings Test Amount.
   age
    60               8.5       6.5            71,./t      6.6      19.0
    61.              6.9       6.3            67.5        7.2
    62               9.7       8.6            57.8        8.3      33.9
    63               8.4       8.0            /i9.4       8.7      41.9
    64               8.7       8.6            40.7        8.7      50.6
    65              14.2      11.9            26.5       1.1.0     62.5
    66               6.6       7.5            19.8       10.2      70.0
    67               5.4       6.1            14.4        9.5      76.1
    68               4.1       5.4            10.3        8.2      81.5
    69               3.3       4.3             7.0        7.2      85.8
    70               1.8       3.1             5.3        5.8      88.9
average age         62.3      63.5
                          Table B.2 (continued)


          percent retiring, by age       percent   percent   percent
              from full- from all        working working     fully
              time work       work      full-time part-time retired

         D. Delay Inflation Adjustment by One-half Year.
  age
                  8.4         6.5          74.6       6.5      18.9
   60
                  6.9         6.3          67.6       7.2      25.2
   61
   62             9.7         8.6          57.9       8.4      33.7
   63             8.4         8.0          49.5       8.7      41.8
                  8.6         8.6          40.8       8.8      50.4
   64
                 16.4        13.0          24.4      12.1      63.5
   65
                  6.0         6.9          18.5      11.2      70.3
   66
                  5.4         6.2          13.1      10./4     76.5
   67
                  3.9         5.3           9.2       9.0      81.8
   68
                  3.1         5.3           6.1       7.8      86.1
    69
                  1.2         2.8           4.9       6.2      88.9
    70

average age      62.3        63.5
                                  Table 1.3

     Simulations of the Effects of Potential Changes in Social Security
                                Rules.


              percent retiring, by age
                                              percent   percent   percent
                  from full— from all         working working     fully
                  time work     work       full—time part-time retired

   age    A. Increase Penalty for Early Retirement to 10% per Year.

    60               8.4        6.4            74.4       66       19.0
    61               6.9        6.3            67.5       7.2      25.3
    62                9.6       8.5            58.0       8.3      33.7
    63               8.2        7.9            49.8       8.6      41.6
    64               8.3       8.4             41.5       8.5      50.0
    65              17.2      13.6             24.3      12.1      63.6
    66               5.9       6.9             18.4      11.1      70.5
    67               5.4       6.1             13.0      10.4      76.6
    68               3.9       5.2              9.1       9.0      81.9
    69               3.1       4.3              6.0       7.8      86.2
    70               1.2       2.8              4.8       6.1      89.1
average age         62.3      63.5

          B. Eliminate Early Retirement.
   age
    60               6.4       5.5             76.6       5.4      18.0
    61               7.0       6.2             69.6       6.3      24.1
    62               9.5       8.6             60.1       7.2      32.7
    63              10.9       9.4             49.2       8.6      42.2
    64               8.3       8.3             40.9       8.6      50.5
    65              17.1      13.5             23.8      12.2      61;.0
    66               5.8       6.8             18.0      11.2      70.8
    67               5.4       6.1             12.6      10.5      76.9
    68               3.8       5.2              8.8       9.1      82.1
    69               3.0       4.3              5.9       7.8      86.3
    70               1.2       2.8              4.7       6.1      89.2
average age         62.3      63.5

          C. Allow Early Retirement at Age 60 with 66 2/3% of Full
              Benefits.
   age
    60               6.6       5.6             74.6       6.5      18.9
    61               6.8       6.2             67.8       7.1      25.1
    62               9.7       8.5             58.1       8.3      3:3.6
    63               8.3       8.0             49.8       8.5      41.7
    64               8.8       8.7             41.0       8.7      50.3
    65              16.2      13.0             24.8      11.9      63.3
    66               6.0       7.0             18.7      10.9      70.3
    67               5.4       6.2             13.3      10.1      76.6
    68               4.0       5.3              9.4       8.8      81.8
    69               3.2       4.3              6.2       7.6      86.2
    70               1.2       2.8              5.0       6.0      89.0
average age         62.3      63.5
                          Table B.3 (continued)


          percent retiring, by age                 percent   percent
                                         percent
              from full—    from all     working working     fully
              time work       work      full—time part—time retired

         D. Impose 30% Tax on One—half of Benefits.
  age
   60             8.2         6.3          75.1       6.4
   61             6.8         6.1          68.3        7.1     24.6
   62             9.7         8.5          58.6       8.4      33.0
   63             8.4         8.0          50.2       8.7      41.1
   64             8.8         8.6          41.4        8.9     49.7
   65            16.2        12.8          25.2       12.4     62.4
   66             6.1         7.1          19.0       11.5     69.5
   67             5.6         6.3          13.5       10.7     75.8
   68             3.9         5.2           9.5        9.4     81.1
   69             3.2         4.6           6.3        8.1     85.6
    70            1.3         2.9           5.0        6.5     88.5

average age      62.3        63.6
                                    Table B.4

     Simulations of the 1977 and 1983 Social Security Rules Under
                        a High Inflation Regime.


              percent retiring, by age
                                             percent   percent    per cent
                  from full- from all        working   working     fully
                  time work       work      full—time part-time   retired

                              A. Under 1977 Rules.
   age
    60                8.1         6.3           75.3        6.2     18.5
    61                6.7         6.0           68.7        6.9     24.4
    62                9.5         8.4           59.1        8.0     32.9
    63                8.2         7.8           51.0        8.4     40.6
    64                8.5         8.5           42 •   4    8.4     49.2
    65               15.0        12.6           27 •   4   10.8     61.8
    66                6.3         7.2           21.1        9.9     69.0
    67                5.6         6.2           15.6        9.3     75.1
    68                4.3         5.5           11.3        8.1     80.6
    69                3.5         4.5            7.8        7.0     85.2
    70               1.8          3.1            6.0       5.7      88.3
average age          62.5        63.6

                              B. Under 1983 Rules.
   age
    60                7.9         6.1           76.1       6.1      17.8
    61               6.6          6.0           69.5       6.7      23.8
    62                9.5         8.2           60.0       8.0      32.0
    63               8.8         8.2            51.2       8.6      40.2
    64               9.2         8.8            42.0       9.0      49.0
    65               9.1         8.9            33.0       9.2      57.8
    66               8.0         8.1            25.0       9.0     66.0
    67               4.1         5.3            20.9       7.8     71.3
    68               5.8         6.4            15.1       7.2     77.7
    69               4.3         5.2            10.8       6.3     82.9
    70               4.2         4.8             6.6       5.7     87.7
average age          62.8        63.8
                               Table B.5

    Simulations of the Effects of the 1977 and 1983 Social Security
         Rules for Individuals Who Would Be Age 65 in Year 2000.


          percent retiring, by age                          percent
                                         percent   percent
              from full— from any        working   working   fully
              time work      work       full—time part—time retired

                          A. Under 1977 Rules.
  age
    60            8.4         6.6          71.3      7.4      21.3
    61            6.9         6.6          64.4      7.6      28.0
    62            9.2         8.6          55.2      8.3      36.5
    63            7.9         8.0          47.3      8.3      44.4
    64            8.1         8.5          39.2      7.9      52.9
    65           15.2        12.9          21i.0    10.2      65.8
    66            5.7         6.8          18.3      9.1      72.6
    67            5.0         6.0          13.3      8.1      78.6
    68            3.9         5.0           9.4      7.0      83.6
    69            3.0         4.2           6.4      5.7      87.9
    70            1.2         2.5           5.2      4.4      90.4

average age      62.1        63.1

                          B. Under 1983 Rules.
   age
    60            8.2         6.4          72.0      7.4      20.6
    61            6.8         6.5          65.3      7.6      27.1
    62            9.1         8.4          56.2      8.4      35.4
    63            8.8         8.5          47.4      8.7      43.9
    64            8.7         8.8          38.7      8.5      52.8
    65            9.4         9.2          29.3      8.8      61.9
    66            7.0         7.8          22.3      8.0      69.7
    67            3.8         5.2          18.5      6.7      74.8
    68            5.2         6.0          13.3      5.9      80.8
    69            3.9         4.9           9.4      4.9      85.7
    70            3.4         4.0           6.0      4.3      89.7

average age      62.3        63.3
                                  Table B.6
     Simulation of the 1983 Social Security Rules Under Assumption
         That the Normal Retirement Ages in Private Pension
         Plans Will Change to Match The Social Security Normal
                         Retirement Age.

              percent retiring, by age
                                           percent   percent  percent
                  from full—   from all    working   woLkiug   Uuily
   age            time work      work     full—time part-time retired
    60               8.3        6.4           75.0     6.4     18.6
    61               6.9        6.1           68.2     7.2     24.6
    62               9.6        8.4           58.6     8.4     33.0
    63               9.0        8.4           49.6     9.1     41.3
    64               9.3        9.0           40.2     9.4     50.4
    65               6.5        7.1           33.7     8.8     57.5
    66               7.9        8.1           25.8     8.5     65.7
    67               7.2        7.3           18.6     8.4      73.0
    68               5.6        6.3           13.0     7.7     79.3
    69               4.0        4.9           9.1      6.7     84.2
    70               3.5        4.3           5.6      5.9     88.5
average age         62.6       63.7
                              Table 8.7

    Simulation of 1983 Social Security Rules Modified So That an
         Individual Can Only Postpone Benefits if He Continues
                               to Work.


          percent retiring, by age        percent   percent   percent
              from full- from any         working   working    fully
                                                              retired
  age

   60             8.1       6.2             75.5
   61             6.8       6.1             68.7       7.1      24.2
   62             9.0       8.0             59.8       8.1      32.1
   63             9.2       8.5             50.5       8.8      40.7
   64             9.5       9.1             41.0       9.2      49.8
   65            10.4       9.4             30.6      10.3      59.1
   66             7.8       8.2             22.9       9.9      67.2
   67             4.3       5.5             18.5       8.7      72.8
   68             5.6       6.3             13.0       7.9      79.1
   69             4.0       5.0              9.0       7.0      84.0


average age      62.6      63.7
