                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHY DOES DEMOCRACY NEED EDUCATION?

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Giacomo Ponzetto
                                            Andrei Shleifer

                                         Working Paper 12128
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12128


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government. Ponzetto thanks the Marco Fanno and
the Mario Gasbarri Foundations. We are grateful to Timothy Besley, Filipe Campante, Ruben Enikolopov,
Nicola Gennaioli, Elhanan Helpman, Elias Papaiouannou, Richard Posner, and Sidney Verba for comments,
and to Josh Gottlieb for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo Ponzetto and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Does Democracy Need Education?
Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo Ponzetto and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12128
March 2006
JEL No. D72, D74, H11

                                            ABSTRACT

Across countries, education and democracy are highly correlated. We motivate empirically and then
model a causal mechanism explaining this correlation. In our model, schooling teaches people to
interact with others and raises the benefits of civic participation, including voting and organizing.
In the battle between democracy and dictatorship, democracy has a wide potential base of support
but offers weak incentives to its defenders. Dictatorship provides stronger incentives to a narrower
base. As education raises the benefits of civic participation, it raises the support for more democratic
regimes relative to dictatorships. This increases the likelihood of democratic revolutions against
dictatorships, and reduces that of successful anti-democratic coups.

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Giacomo Ponzetto
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
ponzetto@fas.harvard.edu
I. Introduction

       The hypothesis that higher education leads to more democratic politics (Lipset 1959,

1960) has received a good deal of empirical support (Barro 1999, Glaeser et al. 2004,

Papaioannou and Siourounis 2005). However, the theoretical reasons for this relationship remain

unexplored.    In this paper, we investigate both theoretically and empirically why stable

democracies are so rare outside of countries with high levels of education.

       Our starting point is the connection between education and political participation. This

connection has been emphasized by Almond and Verba (1989, 1st ed. 1963), who see education

as a crucial determinant of “civic culture” and participation in democratic politics.         “The

uneducated man or the man with limited education is a different political actor from the man who

has achieved a higher level of education (p. 315).” Almond and Verba’s work has influenced

both political science (e.g., Brady et al. 1995) and sociology (e.g., Kamens 1988), and our work

can be seen as an elaboration of their ideas using theoretical and empirical tools of economics.

       Perhaps the most dramatic place to see the effect of education on political participation is

student activism. Students rioted against authority at Oxford, Bologna, and Paris even in the

Middle Ages. Martin Luther found the most immediate intense support from the students in

Wittenberg and other German universities. Students played key roles in liberal movements and

revolutions in Europe in the middle of the 19th century. “If the revolution had a core, it was the

young educated elite” (Randers-Pehrson, 1999, p. 145). Both Engels and Lenin complained that

students were unwilling to subject themselves to the leadership of the revolutionary – and not so

democratic – elites.   More recently, student demonstrations played a role in the overthrow of

Peron in Argentina in 1955, the downfall of Perez Jimenez in Venezuela in 1958, the resistance

to Diem in Vietnam in 1963, the resignation of the Kishi government in Japan in 1960, the anti-




                                                2
Sukarno movement in Indonesia in 1966, the downfall of Ayub Khan in Pakistan in 1969, the

October demonstration in Poland in 1956, the Hungarian Revolution in 1956, the Prague Spring

in 1968, and the toppling of the Rhee government in Korea in 1966. The Tiannamen student

uprising of 1989 failed to depose the Communist Party, perhaps because the students got little

support in generally uneducated China and were massacred by the troops. Most recently,

peaceful demonstrations in which students played a key part helped save democracy in Ukraine

against the aggrandizement by the ex-President who stole the election.

        It would be incorrect to conclude from these examples that students have a preference for

democratic government – perhaps because they value freedom, information, or elections -- rather

than for political participation.   The hep-hep anti-semitic riots in Bavaria in 1819 started when

“during an academic ceremony an aged professor who had recently come out in favor of civic

rights for Jews had to run for his life as angry students assaulted him.”      Mussolini enjoyed

substantial support from students in the young fascist movement.      Hitler likewise relied on the

Nazi students, who eventually seized control of the universities.     In Latin America, students

offered strong support to the Che Guevara led communist guerilla movement, no friends of

democracy. The evidence that students organize to participate in collective action – democratic

or anti-democratic -- is much more compelling than the evidence of their preference for

democracy. Our goal, then, is to explore more deeply the consequences of what we take to be

the primitive connection between education and participation.

        In Section II, we present some old and some new facts about education and democracy.

We show that more educated democracies are more stable than the less educated ones, that

higher education predicts transition from dictatorship to democracy but not the other way around,




                                                 3
and that the relationship between education and democracy holds within as well as across

countries. The evidence suggests that, consistent with Lipset, education causes democracy.

         In Section III, we motivate the basic assumption of our model, namely that education

leads to higher participation in a whole range of social activities, including politics. Using

micro-evidence from both the United States and other countries, we document the robust

correlation between many forms of civic activity, including political participation, and education.

         The correlation between education and civic activity is clear; the reasons for this

correlation are less obvious. In one view, schooling incorporates indoctrination about the virtues

of political participation. A second view holds that much of human capital is actually social

capital and that schools teach students to interact with one another. Indeed, at least two of the

three Rs (reading and writing) are skills for interpersonal communication.                           By improving

interpersonal skills, education facilitates civic involvement. A third hypothesis sees the more

educated as more effective at everything, including both work and civic activities, and therefore

as likely to spend more time on both at the expense of leisure. We review these theories and

assess them empirically in section III.

         Motivated by this evidence, we present a model of regime stability in Section IV. We

define democracies as regimes whose benefits are distributed among large numbers of citizens,

and dictatorships as regimes whose beneficiaries are few in number.1 Dictatorships offer sharp

incentives to their supporters because regime insiders earn large political rents. Democracies

offer weaker incentives because the political rents are shared among many people. Our core



1
 Following the Oxford English Dictionary, we think of democracy as popular government or government by the
people. Schumpeter (1942) defines democracy in terms of competition for votes, and that definition is accepted by
Huntington (1991) and Posner (2003). Because we consider competition between democracies and dictatorships, for
us the central difference is the distribution of political spoils in different regimes. Most precisely, democracy in our
model is government for the people.


                                                           4
assumption is that education raises the benefits of political participation. As a consequence,

relatively more people fight for the more inclusive regimes as human capital increases.

        In this model, the political success of a democracy hinges on having a large number of

supporters whose benefits of political participation are sufficiently high that they fight for it

despite the low personal incentives. Education supplies such supporters and stabilizes

democracy. Conversely, in countries with low levels of education, dictatorship is more stable

than democracy, because only dictatorships offer the strong incentives needed to induce people

to defend them. In the model in Section IV, countries with higher levels of education are more

likely both to experience a transition from dictatorship to democracy, and to withstand anti-

democratic challenges. Moreover, the size of the most successful challenger regime to an

existing dictatorship rises with the level of education.

        In addition to having some empirical support for its core assumption and delivering the

broad empirical predictions documented in Section II, the model has several new implications.

It predicts that, it general, education causes the more inclusive groups to dominate politics. It

also erodes the power of the incumbent, and can therefore lead to short run instability. In

particular, as education increases, groups challenging to existing regimes become progressively

larger -- small coups are replaced by large revolutions.              Although they remain to be formally

tested, these predictions are consistent with a broad outline of European transition to democracy.



II. The Empirical Relationship between Education and Democracy

        Across the world, the correlation between education and democracy is extremely high.2

Figure 1 shows the relationship between the Polity IV index of democracy (Jaggers and Marshall


2
 Alvarez et al. (2000), Barro (1999), Boix and Stokes (2003), Glaeser et al. (2004), and Papaioannou and Siourounis
(2005) also consider the relationship between income and democracy. The conclusion emerging from the


                                                        5
2003) and the years of schooling in the country in 1960 (Barro and Lee 2001). Across 91

countries, the correlation coefficient between these variables is 74 percent.

         In Table 1a-1c, we consider the effect of education on the stability of both democracies

and dictatorships. For a country to be included in this sample, we require Barro and Lee’s data

on schooling in the initial year, as well as Jaggers and Marshall’s (2003) continuous democracy

classification since the initial year. For this table, we classify all countries with Polity IV ratings

of or below 4 as dictatorships and those with ratings above 4 as democracies. The cutoff of four

roughly corresponds to the sample median in 1960. Following Glaeser et al. (2004), we classify

countries as well-educated if they have above 5.01 years of schooling in 1960 (the 75th percentile

in the sample schooling distribution in 1960), moderately educated if they have below 5.01 but

above 2.68 years of schooling (the 50th percentile of the sample schooling distribution in 1960),

and low-educated if the 1960 years of schooling are below 2.68 years.

         Table 1a covers the well-educated countries. In the first row, we count that 20 (out of 22)

of these countries were democracies in 1960. The only two well-educated dictatorships were

Hungary and Poland, which were non-democratic because of foreign occupation and whose

people rebelled against the Soviet-backed dictatorships. Of the 20 well-educated democracies in

1960, every one except for Uruguay (one of the least educated countries in this group) remained

democratic over the next 40 years. Both Poland and Hungary became democracies by 1990.

         The second row in Table 1a takes 1970 as the starting point and looks over the next 30

years.    22 out of 26 well educated countries were democracies in 1970, and four were

dictatorships. In this year, Argentina and Greece join Hungary and Poland as well educated

dictatorships. Of the 22 democracies, two lost this status by 2000. All four dictatorships circa

controversies is that income does cause transition to democracy, as well as its stability. Our focus, however, is on
education not income. Nor do we consider the consequences of democracy, see, e.g., Przeworski and Limongi
(1993) and Mulligan et al. (2004).


                                                         6
1970 turned democratic by 1990. The third row begins in 1980. While there are 9 well-educated

dictatorships in that year, all become democratic by 2000, and all 25 democracies stay

democratic for the next 20 years. Starting in 1990, we again see the permanence of democracies,

and the tendency of dictatorships to become democratic even within a decade. Averaging across

the starting years 1960, 1970 and 1980, the probability of a well-educated democracy remaining

a democracy twenty years later is 95 percent. The probability of a well-educated dictatorship

becoming a democracy within 20 years is 87 percent.

       In Table 1b, we turn to countries with moderate education. Three results are noteworthy.

First, the probability of starting out as a democracy is much lower. Only 11 of 17 countries with

this level of education are democracies in 1960, and only 7 out of 19 in 1970. Second, the

survival rate for democracies is lower. Averaged across the starting years 1960, 1970 and 1980,

the probability of a moderately-educated democracy remaining a democracy twenty years later is

down to 74 percent. Third, the likelihood that a dictatorship turns into a democracy is lower as

well. Averaged over 1960, 1970, and 1980, the twenty year democratization rate is down to 54

percent from the 87 percent level for high-education countries.

       In Table 1c, we examine countries with fewer than 2.7 years of education in the initial

period. Democracies in this group are rare indeed. In 1960, there are only four poorly-educated

democracies. Of these, only India (which is a striking outlier) and Venezuela survive over the

next forty years, and Venezuela’s democracy score has been falling since 1990. In 1970, there

are only three democracies with this little education. Only India survives over the next thirty

years. In 1980, there are four democracies with less than 2.7 years of schooling. Two of those

survive over twenty years. Finally, there are five democracies with less than 2.7 years of

education in 1990, only two of which survive over ten years. Averaged across the starting years




                                                7
1960, 1970 and 1980, the probability of a low-educated democracy remaining one twenty years

later is only 54 percent. We can make similar calculations for the democratization of low-

education dictatorships. Averaged over the starting years 1960, 1970, and 1980, the probability

that such a dictatorship democratizes is 26 percent.

       In sum, high-education democracies are more persistent than low-education ones, and

high-education dictatorships are more likely to democratize than low-education ones. But is this

relationship causal? Or is causality running from democracy to education? The evidence on

transitions from dictatorship to democracy helps answer these questions. Figure 2 shows the raw

correlation between the change in the Jaggers and Marshall (2003) democracy score and years of

schooling in 1960 (from Barro and Lee) for countries that had low democracy ratings (zero or

one) in 1960. This correlation is 66 percent. If we take the entire sample of countries and

regress the change in democracy on initial democracy and initial years of education, we estimate:


(1) Change in Democracy = 4.13− .98• Democracy in 1960 + .84• Schooling in 1960
                              (.48 )   (.09 )                (.15 )




       There are 65 observations in this regression and the R-squared is 67 percent. Initial

schooling, even in highly dictatorial regimes, strongly predicts becoming more democratic over

time. In contrast, democracy does not predict growth in schooling. We estimate:


(2) Change in Schooling = 2 .80 + .07 • Democracy in 1960 − .08 • Schooling in 1960
                             (. 28 )   (. 05 )                  (. 09 )




       There are 68 observations in this regression and the R-squared is only three percent. The

relationship between initial democracy and changes in years of schooling is shown in Figure 3.

While both in Table 1 and here the evidence suggests that schooling leads to democracy, there is

no evidence that democracy leads to schooling.



                                                 8
        This evidence is subjected to more formal specifications by Glaeser et al. (2004) and

Papaioannou and Siourounis (2005). Both studies confirm that education is a strong predictor of

transition to democracy.          The second study in particular focuses on the third wave of

democratization (Huntington 1991) and shows that education is a powerful predictor of

permanent transitions from dictatorship to democracy.

        One objection to these findings is that some permanent country characteristics, such as

geography or culture, are responsible for producing both education and democracy. In Table 2,

we address this concern by estimating the relationship between education and democracy in

regressions with country fixed effects:


(3) Democracyi ,t = α t + θ i + β • Schooling i ,t + ε i ,t ,


where α t represents a year fixed effect, θ i is a country fixed effect and ε i ,t is a country-year

error term. Table 2 reports several specifications so that we can compare the results for both

different data sets and different time periods. In all specifications, we use the Jaggers and

Marshall (2003) democracy score.

        The first column of Table 2 reports the results for the period 1960-2000, and uses Barro

and Lee’s schooling variable—the same period and the same data as we used in Table 1. With

country and year fixed effects, the coefficient on schooling is no longer significant – indicating

that a common cause explanation might indeed be valid. However, the Barro and Lee measure is

well known for its extreme persistence. As documented in Glaeser et al. (2004), the correlation

between Barro and Lee’s measure of years of schooling in one year and the same measure ten

years later is never less than 97 percent. This suggests that longer panels, new data, or both are

needed to estimate any within-country relationship between education and democracy.



                                                         9
       Accordingly, in the rest of Table 2 we use Banks (2004) data on university and secondary

school enrollments from 1865 to 2000. The enrollments data are not nearly as persistent as the

Barro and Lee measure, because conceptually they reflect investments in rather than stocks of

human capital. The panel is unbalanced and over the entire time period we have 133 countries.

We have data at five year intervals giving us 25 time periods and a total of 1316 observations.

       In the second and third columns, we keep the time period 1960-2000, but include

separately secondary school and university enrollment measures form Banks. Even for the short

forty year interval, the effects of enrollments on democracy are now large and statistically

significant in a country fixed effects specification.       That is, within countries, educational

investment predicts democracy. In the fourth and fifth specifications, we again use secondary

school and university enrollment separately, but now use the whole time period from 1865 to

2000. The coefficients on education variables rise in magnitude and statistical significance. The

coefficient of 0.290 on secondary school enrollment means that a ten percent increase in such

enrollment is associated with a 2.90 point increase in the democracy score – a huge change. The

coefficient of 0.850 on university enrollment implies that a one percent increase in such

enrollment is associated with a 0.85 point increase in the democracy score. The sixth regression

includes both secondary school and university enrollment together. In this specification, both

coefficients fall, although that on university enrollment remains statistically significant.

       The final specification does not include country fixed effects. Both coefficients more

than double, reflecting the fact that the correlation between education and democracy is stronger

across countries than within countries over time. This result is unsurprising, and could reflect an

effect of school enrollment at a point in time on democracy in later time periods, both because

people influence politics over their entire lives, and because educated people can create lasting




                                                 10
political institutions. Still, despite these issues of timing, Table 2 shows a strong relationship

between education and democracy within and not just across countries.

       The bottom line of this section is strong support of Lipset’s (1960) hypothesis. Education

is highly correlated with democracy in both cross-section and panel regressions with fixed

effects. Moreover, the effect seems to be causal, as evidenced by the evidence on transition to

democracy. The question now is what theory best explains these results.



III. Education and Civic Participation

       Education may promote democracy because it raises the benefits (or reduces the costs) of

political activity. In section IV, we take this as an assumption and show how it explains the

evidence. In this section, we describe some theories of why education raises civic participation

and then present some empirical evidence bearing on them.


Why Should Education and Civic Participation Be Correlated?

       Perhaps the simplest hypothesis explaining the link between education and civic

participation is that indoctrination about political participation is a major component of

education. In democracies, schools teach their students that political participation is good. One

“content standard” listed by the State of California’s Department of Education aspires that

students “understand the obligations of civic-mindedness, including voting, being informed on

civic issues, volunteering and performing public service, and serving in the military or

alternative service.” The original public school movement in the United States emphasized

preparing students for participation in democracy. This emphasis is not unique to America.

Holmes (1979) synthesizes the aims of schools systems around the world. Political aims are

often cited as an educational goal: “school work is organized so as to develop democracy in



                                               11
school and consequently in society as a whole” (Sweden), “the Constitution states that a general

aim of education is to produce good citizens, a democratic way of living and human solidarity”

(Costa Rica), and “an education system that creates knowledgeable, democratic and patriotic

citizens is the aim of the Indonesian government.”              Perhaps the key implication of the

indoctrination hypothesis is that the positive impact of schooling should be particularly

pronounced in political rather than all social participation.

       A second hypothesis holds that schooling lowers the costs of social interactions more

generally. According to this view, a primary aim of education is socialization—teaching people

how to interact successfully with others. Such successful interaction includes understanding and

appreciating the others’ point of view, as well as being able to effectively communicate one’s

own, through both writing and speech. When people communicate successfully, they may

control any innate anti-social tendencies, and as a consequence become more productive

participants in group activities (Bowles and Gintis, 1976).          Formally, socialization can be

thought of as raising the benefits of social engagement, or reducing the costs of such

engagement, or increasing the productivity of working together in groups.

       Education textbooks list socialization as a pillar of curriculum design. Driscoll and Nagel

(2005) describe several curricular approaches to primary education. Many of these list social

outcomes among the goals: “the children will develop cooperative relationships, reflecting both

social skills and understanding the perspectives of others” (the Kamii and DeVries approach);

“socialization of children. Self-regulation of behavior is necessary to participation in forms of

society and in relationship with others” (the Bank Street approach); and “conditions that promote

or strengthen relationship between children, and between children and adults” (the Waldorf

approach). Gordon and Browne (2004) write that “a major role for the early childhood teacher is




                                                 12
to see that children have enjoyable social contacts and to help motivate children toward a desire

to be with others,” because “enhancing social intelligence builds a set of skills that may be

among the most essential for life success of many kinds.”

        Why do schools spend so much effort on socializing children? An altruistic view might

suggest that the ability to work well in social settings is among the most important skills needed

to function in society. A more cynical view sees socialized children as easier for their teachers to

manage. Whatever the reason, schools in all political and religious regimes devote considerable

resources to teaching social cooperation3.

        The socialization hypothesis predicts that education should impact all forms of social

involvement. Its ability to predict political engagement should be no stronger than that for other

forms of social participation. This theory also predicts no difference in the impact of education

on social activities in democracies or non-democracies.

        A third hypothesis holds that schooling raises political participation because it increases

its personal material benefits. After all, the usual economist’s interpretation of education is that

it increases cognitive capabilities and effectiveness. The impact of education on competence

should not be limited purely to the economic domain; more educated people are more likely to

become political or civic leaders just as they are more likely to earn more money. Higher returns

from civic activity for the more educated might explain a positive link between education and

civic engagement.

        The benefits hypothesis predicts that education should be most strongly associated with

forms of civic engagement which yield private returns. Participation in lobbying groups or trade



3
  By social cooperation we do not mean obedience to authority. Obedience to authority is of course something
different that schools also teach, although evidently not as successfully, as the evidence of student – and more
generally educated people’s – activism against authority illustrates.


                                                      13
unions may be attractive because these groups serve the individual’s interests.          However,

education is unlikely to raise the private returns to voting (or suicide bombing).

       These three hypotheses all assume that education causes civic participation. It is at least

possible that the link between schooling and education represents selection, not treatment, and

that exogenous characteristics that make people tolerant of education also enable them to sit

through meetings or wait in line to vote. If this were true, then exogenous increases in schooling

would have no impact on overall levels of civic participation.             Furthermore, if innate

characteristics vary more within than across areas, this view predicts a low (or non-existent)

relationship between education and civic participation at the aggregate level.


Empirical Evidence on the Education and Civic Participation

       Using the World Values Survey (WVS), we begin with cross-country evidence on

education and membership in social groups. We exclude countries with the Polity IV autocracy

score above 5 from the analysis because these countries force party and other participation. (For

example, 25% of the Chinese respondents report membership in the Communist party). Figure

4 presents the results for the available 28 countries. It shows a sharply positive and statistically

significant (t=2.49) relationship between education and participation in social groups. This

evidence is broadly consistent with our theoretical perspective, but unfortunately does not allow

us to distinguish the various hypotheses.

       We can do that better with individual-level evidence from the United States. There are

two primary individual-level sources for information on social activities: the General Social

Survey (GSS) and the DDB Needham Lifestyles Survey. Using the GSS, DiPasquale and

Glaeser (1999) document a strong positive relationship between education and a variety of social

outcomes. College graduates are 27 percent more likely than high school dropouts to say that



                                                 14
they vote in local elections and 29 percent more likely to say that they help solve local problems.

       College graduates are also more likely to join organizations. Glaeser and Sacerdote

(2001) show this to be true for fifteen out of sixteen forms of group membership: the exception is

trade union membership. Using the WVS, they also find a significant positive relationship

between years of education and group membership in almost every country. Education also

positively predicts church attendance in the GSS. Fifty percent of American college graduates

say that they attend church more than several times per year; thirty-six percent of high school

graduates say they attend that often.

       Using evidence from the DDB Needham Lifestyles Survey, we revisit some of those

results in Table 3. The DDB Needham Survey is administered over the years 1975-1999 and

covers (for many questions) a larger sample than the GSS. We control for basic demographics

such as age, race and gender. All of our variables are categorical and take discrete values

capturing the frequency of the activity. We normalize each of these variables to have a mean of

zero and a standard deviation of one.    We also control for income. Because (as in the GSS)

income is missing for many observations, we include these observations but code them as having

the mean value of income in the sample, and add a dummy which takes on a value of one when

income is missing. We also include a dummy for each survey year to capture time trends in

social activities. We measure education with two separate dummy variables. The first takes on a

value of one if the person is a high school graduate and zero otherwise. The second variable

takes on a value of one if the person is a college graduate and zero otherwise. Our results do not

change if we use continuous measures of education.

       In each regression, both education variables positively affect participation and both are

almost always statistically significant. The first regression shows the impact of education on




                                                15
attending church. The effect of being a college graduate relative to a high school dropout is

more than 30 percentage points. The second regression shows the large and positive impact of

education on attending a class or a seminar.

       Regression (3) shows a strong association between schooling and self-reported working

on a community project. In the fourth regression, we look at writing a letter to a newspaper, a

particularly clear form of civic engagement. Again, the correlation with education is positive,

and the effect of college education is particularly strong. Since the mean of this variable is much

lower than that of many others, we should not be surprised that the coefficients on schooling are

smaller. Regression (5) shows results on contacting a public official. Again, the impact of

education is strong.

       Regression (6) looks at registering to vote. Obviously, this variable is an important

measure of political participation in a democracy. Registering to vote (and voting) is particularly

strongly associated with years of education. Finally, regression (7) shows that giving someone

the finger—an anti-social form of behavior -- is negatively associated with years of schooling.

These regressions show a pervasive pattern, in which years of schooling are associated not only

with political participation in a democracy, but also with many other forms of social engagement.

       Because our model addresses political battles that are often violent outside the U.S., we

now turn to the evidence on more violent forms of group activity. Education and training are

closely linked to military discipline and group coherence under fire (Hanson, 2002). Following

Keegan (1976) and many others, Hanson argues both that historically military success is

primarily the result of troops not fleeing under fire and that military discipline is itself the result

of culture and education. Costa and Kahn (2003) show that illiteracy strongly predicts desertion

among Union soldiers in the American Civil War.




                                                  16
       Ferguson (1999) looks at the ratio of prisoners of war to total casualties across countries

during the First World War. This variable is described by some military historians as a measure

of soldiers’ willingness to surrender, as opposed to fight, under fire. Across major combatant

countries, the ratio of prisoners to total casualties was the lowest for the United Kingdom, the

United States, and Germany (1.4%, 6.7% and 9% respectively). These arguably were the best

educated combatants. The ratio of prisoners to total casualties was the highest among Russians,

Austro-Hungarians and Italians (51.8%, 31.8% and 25.8%) – the least educated of the major

combatants. More standard forms of military history corroborate that these prisoner rates capture

general failures of morale.

       Perhaps more controversially, Krueger and Maleckova (2003) and Berrebi (2003) link

education to terrorism in the Middle East. They argue that terrorists see their effort as pro-social

and supportive of their community. Consistent with this argument, Krueger and Maleckova

(2003) find that education predicts participation in Hezbollah activities in Lebanon. Berrebi

(2003) shows that more educated Palestinians are more likely to be suicide bombers.

       Finally, two recent studies address the view that the correlation between education and

participation is selection. Millian, Moretti, and Oleopolos (2004) find that exogenous increases

in education due to compulsory schooling laws raise voter turnout.           Dee (2004) finds that

increases in education accounted for by availability of junior and community colleges have a

large effect on subsequent participation in voting. These results suggest that the effect of

education on political participation is causal, rather than just the consequence of selection.

       Can the evidence help us distinguish between the other hypotheses?              The fact that

education predicts such social behavior as voting and fighting rather than surrendering, which do

not earn private rewards, is inconsistent with the private benefits hypothesis. The fact that




                                                 17
education increases all forms of participation, many of which are deeply apolitical, goes against

the political indoctrination hypothesis. That hypothesis is also undermined by the peaceful anti-

communist revolutions throughout Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, dominated by

educated people with years of pro-communist indoctrination under their belts.           Given the

separation between church and state in the U.S. and U.K., and given the often anti-religious

sentiment of the French educational establishment, the positive correlation between years of

education and church attendance is hard to understand as reflecting political indoctrination.

       The theory that best explains all of the facts is the second hypothesis: education is

socialization. This theory predicts the universal relationship between education and participation

across activities and across countries. Of course, this does not mean that other mechanisms do

not also operate, but we are inclined to accept the view that acquiring social capital is a crucial

part of acquiring human capital.



IV. A Model of Education and Democracy

       In this section, we model a channel through which education encourages democracy, both

by increasing its stability and by increasing the probability of transition to democracy. The

critical assumption, following the evidence of the previous section, is that education raises the

benefits of political participation. The core insight of the model is that democracy requires

support from a broad base of citizens who face only weak incentives to fight for it, while

dictatorships offer strong incentives to a narrow base of supporters. Education raises the benefits

of political participation and draws relatively more people to support democracy even when they

face only weak incentives.




                                                18
Model Setup

         We assume that the country is populated by measure 1 of homogeneous citizens, each

with a human capital level of h ≥ 0 .4 A regime is defined as a set G of insiders, with g ∈ [0,1]

being the measure of the set, or the size of the regime. We interpret a larger g as a more

democratic regime. We call a regime with g = 1 a perfect democracy.

         In period zero, there is an exogenous status quo regime G0 of size g 0 . In period one, an

alternative regime, G1 of size g1 , is proposed5. Membership in each regime is exogenous. In

period two, individuals choose whether to defend the existing regime, to fight for the new

regime, or to stay politically uninvolved. Individuals may not support both regimes. Thus, in

this model, while each individual takes as given his membership in a particular regime (or in

neither), he still chooses whether to participate in politics.

         We let s 0 denote the endogenously determined measure of people who support G0 and

s1 denote the measure of people who support G1 . The challenger unseats the incumbent if and

only if ε 0 s0 ≤ ε1s1 , where ε i are random shocks to the effectiveness of each faction’s supporters.

                            ε0
The ratio ρ ≡                  has a continuous probability distribution Z(ρ ) on ℝ⁺.6
                            ε1




4
  In Bourguignon and Verdier (2000), as in our model, political participation depends on education, but education is
determined by the initial income distribution.
5
   In our model, what matters is the relative and not the absolute size of the two regimes. As a consequence, unlike in
some other models of policy choice (e.g., Mullainathan and Shleifer 2005), raw population does not affect the
likelihood of democracy. Campante and Do (2005) present a model in which the raw population influences the
availability of recruits for the anti-dictatorial coup, and hence the likelihood of democracy.
6
  In particular, if ζ is the density of ε i it is straightforward to compute the distribution
             ∞       ρε 1                                                         ∞
Z (ρ ) = ∫       ∫          ζ (ε1 )ζ (ε 0 )dε 0 dε1   and its density z (ρ ) =   ∫ ζ (ρε )ζ (ε )dε   .
          0      0                                                               0




                                                                         19
       Each decision-maker is of measure zero and so does not impact the probability that either

regime succeeds. Individuals therefore do not base their political participation decisions on their

impact on the outcome. Instead, participation is based on three different forces. First, regimes

provide incentives to their members to participate. We assume that these incentives take the

form of punishing a regime’s insiders who do not fight for it. Second, regime insiders who

participate themselves motivate their fellow insiders to join them. We model this as a benefit

from participation. We also assume that there are individual-specific costs of participation.

       We formally model a regime’s power to motivate insiders by assuming that insiders who

fail to support their regime suffer an expected utility loss equal to p(g). We assume that p is a

monotone decreasing function of g, ranging from p (0 ) = p to p (1) = p ≥ 0 . Smaller groups

impose larger punishments on free-riders. This assumption follows Mancur Olson’s hypothesis

that smaller groups are better at solving free-rider problems: “the greater effectiveness of

relatively small groups […] is evident from observation and experience as well as from theory”

(Olson 1965, p. 53).     Smaller groups benefit from mutual monitoring and punishment of

transgressors. As Olson (p. 61) writes, “In general, social pressure and social incentives operate

only in groups of smaller size.” This assumption sets up the basic tradeoff between smaller and

larger regimes. Small regimes provide strong incentives to a small base. Larger regimes provide

much weaker incentives but to a larger potential base of supporters.

       We allow for the possibility that the incumbent regime can have an advantage in eliciting

support, which is modeled by assuming that insiders in an incumbent regime who fail to support

it pay an additional expected utility cost of a ≥ 0 . This incumbent advantage may simply reflect

access to the machinery of the state.




                                                20
       The threat of punishment captures the global incentives provided by the leaders to all

insiders. We also allow regime insiders who participate to motivate their peers to do likewise.

While the regime level motivation should be thought of as leaders threatening members, we

think of this local motivation as friends convincing friends to come out and fight. Precisely

because of their local nature, these benefits are independent of the aggregate size of the regime.

In line with Section III, we assume that they are a function of the human capital of regime

members. These local incentives are represented by a function b(h) that is monotonically

increasing in h, ranging from b(0 ) = b to lim h→∞ b(h ) = b . Higher levels of human capital make

people better at inducing their peers to politically participate.

       The function b(h) captures the role of education in creating social skills, in two different

ways. First, more educated people are better at cajoling, encouraging, motivating, or otherwise

persuading others they interact with to join them. Second, more educated people are better able

to reap the benefits of social interaction themselves, perhaps because they understand better why

they are participating. Socialization covers the twin powers to persuade and to understand, both

captured by b(h). It is more appealing to participate in a collective activity the more educated a

person is, and the more educated the other participants are.

       Offsetting the global and local incentives is an effort cost of political participation, which

equals c + η , where c > 0 is the average cost and η a mean-zero idiosyncratic shock which is

identically and independently distributed across all individuals. This shock is realized at the start

of period two, after membership in the two regimes has been defined. We make two technical

assumptions on the distribution of cost shocks: (1) the distribution function F(η) is log-concave,

and (2) η has support η ,η [ ] such that η ≤ p + b − c < p + b − c ≤ η .      The first assumption




                                                  21
               f (η )
implies that          is monotonically decreasing in η . Economically, this assumption means that
               F (η )

the more supporters a regime already has, the more expensive it becomes for it to attract

additional supporters. The cost of providing incentives for turnout is convex. This assumption is

“commonly made in the incentives literature and is satisfied by many distributions” (Laffont and

Tirole 1988, p. 1157).      Bagnoli and Bergstrom (1989) show that this assumption is satisfied by

the uniform, normal, lognormal, exponential, Pareto, logistic, gamma, chi-square, extreme-value,

power-function, Weibull and Laplace distributions, and by any truncation thereof.

        The second assumption is simplifying, and implies that among individuals belonging to

one and only one regime there are always some supporting the regime and some choosing not to

participate, regardless of regime size and human capital. This assumption enables us to avoid the

uninteresting case where there is no margin of participation in a regime.




Human capital and political competition

        Consider a contest between two exogenously formed regimes G0 and G1 . Individuals

excluded from both regimes abstain from political participation as they reap no benefits and only

incur costs. Members of G0 and not G1 , whose mass is denoted by ĝ 0 , have two options:

abstaining, which has a cost p( g 0 ) + a , or participating in support of G0 , which has a cost c+η –

b(h). Likewise, members of G1 and not G0 , whose mass is denoted by ĝ1 , can abstain at a cost

p( g1 ) or support G1 at a cost c+η – b(h). Finally, some individuals could belong to both

regimes: they can then choose to abstain at a cost p( g 0 ) + p( g1 ) + a , to support G0 at a cost

p ( g1 ) + c + η − b(h ) , or to support G1 at a cost p( g 0 ) + a + c + η − b(h ) .


                                                       22
          It is immediate that if g1 > g 0 , no incumbent can be induced to switch allegiance:

conditional on participation, he always prefers to fight for the current regime both because it is

smaller and because of the incumbency advantage. More generally, politically active members

of both regimes support the incumbent if and only if a > p( g1 ) − p( g 0 ) .


          We can now compute support levels for the two regimes. If a > p( g1 ) − p( g 0 ) , then total

support for the incumbent is                   g 0 F ( p( g 0 ) + a + b(h ) − c ) , and that for the challenger

gˆ 1 F ( p ( g1 ) + b(h ) − c ) .   If g1 < g 0 and 0 ≤ a ≤ p( g1 ) − p( g 0 ) , then total support for the

incumbent is gˆ 0 F ( p( g 0 ) + a + b(h ) − c ) and that for the challenger g1 F ( p ( g1 ) + b(h ) − c ) . Putting

these two pieces together, the probability that the challenger G1 replaces the incumbent G0

equals

                         ⎧ ⎛ g1 F ( p( g1 ) + b(h ) − c ) ⎞
                         ⎪Z ⎜⎜                                     ⎟ 0 ≤ a ≤ p ( g1 ) − p ( g 0 )
                         ⎪ ⎝ gˆ 0 F ( p( g 0 ) + a + b(h ) − c ) ⎟⎠
(1)                   π =⎨
                         ⎪Z ⎛⎜ gˆ 1 F ( p ( g1 ) + b(h ) − c ) ⎞⎟ a > max{0, p ( g ) − p( g )}
                         ⎪⎩ ⎜⎝ g 0 F ( p( g 0 ) + a + b(h ) − c ) ⎟⎠                1           0




Differentiation then yields:

Proposition 1: Consider a contest between two given regimes G0 and G1 :


          (a) If g1 > g 0 , or g 1 < g 0 and 0 ≤ a ≤ p(g1 ) − p(g 0 ) , the probability that the more inclusive

regime succeeds is increasing in the level of human capital.

          (b) If g1 < g 0 , or a > p(g1 ) − p( g 0 ) ≥ 0 , the probability that the less inclusive challenger

succeeds is increasing in the level of human capital.




                                                           23
        The mechanism underpinning part (a) of Proposition 1 can be easily grasped graphically.

The area of each bar in Figure 5 represents the total support for one regime at two levels of h,

with higher support resulting from higher human capital. The bar with the broader base captures

the support for the democracy and the bar with the narrower base that for dictatorship. As

education rises, both regimes receive more support, but because the democratic regime has by

definition a broader base, the increase in raw numbers is higher for that regime.

        Dictatorial regimes provide strong incentives for a favored few; democratic regimes with

many insiders provide weak incentives for their potential supporters. The larger group has a

wider base of supporters, but a lower participation rate. Higher levels of human capital favor

democratic regimes because they increase the benefits of participation for everyone, and

encourage a larger fraction of the many beneficiaries of a democracy to support it against a more

dictatorial alternative. In the case presented in Figure 5, η is uniformly distributed, so that the

increase in the participation rate is identical for both groups regardless of their size. It is then

immediate that the larger group derives a higher increase in its total support. More generally, the

assumption that F(η) is log-concave ensures that, for a given rise in h, the proportional increase

in the participation rate is always at least as great for the smaller as for the larger group.

        Figure 6 presents the relationship between human capital and the probability that a

regime G0 is replaced by a larger, non-overlapping regime G1 for the case where ε is log-

normally distributed, η is uniformly distributed, and specifications of p and b are consistent with

our assumptions.     In particular, the graph considers two challengers to a regime of size

g 0 = 15% : the flatter curve represents a challenge by the marginally larger oligarchy g1 = 20% ,

while the more concave curve one by the almost democratic complement regime, g1 = 85% .




                                                  24
When education is low, a challenge by a rival oligarchy is much more likely to be successful. As

education increases, the threat coming from a democratic uprising eventually becomes dominant.

       Part (b) of Proposition 1 shows that with a sufficiently large incumbency advantage,

education need no longer help the more inclusive regime, because education makes incumbency

                                          f (η )
less valuable.   The assumption that             is monotonically decreasing in η means that
                                          F (η )

increasing education always helps the group with weaker initial incentives to participate. With

an incumbency advantage a > p( g1 ) − p( g 0 ) ≥ 0 , the larger incumbent offers stronger incentives

even if g1 < g 0 . In this case, therefore, an increase in education helps the challenging regime.

When the challenger regime is larger than the incumbent, it offers weaker incentives both

because of its size and because it lacks the incumbency advantage, and as a consequence

education always helps it.

       This part of the proposition suggests that education can create instability among

competing dictatorships of roughly the same size. When people are uneducated, even a small

incumbency advantage ensures that the ancien regime continues to win out. As education rises

and there are more potential participants, the probability of success for another dictatorial

challenger increases.

       If we focus on perfect democracy, with g1 = 1 , it is immediate that a democratic

challenge to a dictatorial regime always falls under part (a) of the proposition. The probability

that democracy succeeds in replacing oligarchy is then increasing in the level of human capital.

       In the opposite case, an oligarchic coup by a group G1 such that g1 < 1 , attempts to

overturn a perfect democracy G0 , for which g 0 = 1 .      This case is central to the stability of

democratic regimes and is meant to shed light on subversions of initially democratic regimes by


                                                25
coups perpetrated by either outsiders or government insiders. It is important to note, first, that

the coup is abortive if a > p( g1 ) − p , for then none of the prospective oligarchs switch allegiance

from democracy to the challenging regime. As a consequence, democracy is perfectly stable if

the incumbency advantage is sufficiently high, namely if a > p − p . If the coup has any

probability of success, then we must once again be in the region described by part (a) of the

proposition, and the probability that the coup succeeds in upending democracy is decreasing in

the level of human capital. As before, as education rises, more people are willing to support

democracy despite the weaker incentives it offers.



Endogenous Regime Size and the Stability of Regimes

       We have shown that, among two rival regimes of exogenous sizes, an increase in human

capital makes it more likely that the more inclusive one prevails. In particular, democracy is

more likely to be instituted and preserved. We next address the possible endogeneity of regime

sizes by asking which regime size maximizes the probability of a successful revolution. We do

not formally model the decision-making process of regime-builders, but rather assume that the

success-maximizing size is favored.

       We     now     assume     that    η   is    uniformly    distributed    on    [− η ,η ]   with

η ≥ max{c − p − b, p + b − c}. We also assume that p is three times continuously differentiable,

and that p′′′ > 0, which makes it possible for the cost of abstention to be first a concave and then

a convex function of group size. Figure 7 shows an example of p used in our simulations.

       We start by analyzing a contest between competing oligarchies. To simplify the analysis,

we assume that the challenger cannot recruit members of the incumbent oligarchy, or



                                                  26
analogously that it is counterproductive to do so due to a sufficiently large incumbency

advantage a > p − p( g 0 ) .


           For a fixed incumbent regime, G0 , the support of the non-overlapping challenger G1 is

                          p( g1 ) + b(h ) − c + η
equal to s ( g1 ) = g1                            . Increasing the size of a group has two opposing effects
                                    2η

on its support: broadening the base and decreasing the incentives for that base to participate. The

assumptions on p imply that the function is initially increasing in g 1 and if p ′( g 1 ) is sufficiently

negative, the function eventually decreases. Assuming that, for sufficiently low levels of human

capital h≃0, the size g1* of the challenging regime that maximizes its support is interior, it

follows that:7



Proposition 2: The size g1* of the non-overlapping challenging regime that is most likely to

overthrow a dictatorship G0 is increasing in the level of human capital h, and may jump

discretely to (1 − g 0 ) when h crosses a threshold ĥ .



           As human capital increases, the greatest threat to a dictatorship becomes an ever more

democratic regime. For a sufficiently high level of human capital, the most successful revolution

includes all but the members of the previous regime. A surprising element in this proposition is

the jump. Figure 8 shows a possible graph of the support for a challenger to a dictatorship with



7
    This requirement is equivalent to the formal condition that
∃gˆ 1 ∈ (0,1 − g 0 ) : gˆ 1 [ p( gˆ 1 ) + b − c + η ] > (1 − g 0 )[ p(1 − g 0 ) + b − c + η ], failing which the support-
maximizing size of the challenger would be       g 1* = 1 − g 0 ∀h ≥ 0 ; the latter case remains in fact mathematically
consistent with Proposition 2, but becomes economically uninteresting.


                                                              27
g 0 = 15% ; higher curves are associated with higher levels of h. In this case, there is indeed a

discrete jump to the corner solution as human capital increases above ĥ , as shown in Figure 9.

           The intuition for the jump in the size of the support-maximizing regime comes from the

basic economics of regime size. For low levels of g1 , support increases with regime size. As

size continues to grow, incentives rapidly decrease, which echoes the transition from a “small” to

a “large” regime in Olson’s analysis. In this intermediate range, support decreases with regime

size. As g1 rises even further, p ( g1 ) asymptotes towards its lower bound, and incentives are so

low already that the marginal dilution is more than offset by the addition of new members. In

this region, support is again increasing in regime size.

           We now turn to the conspiracy G1 that is most likely to overthrow a perfect democracy.

                                                           s( g1 )
This conspiracy sets g 1 to maximize t ( g1 ) =                    . The value of g1 for which p(g1 ) = p + a
                                                           1 − g1

describes the maximum size of a conspiracy that provides sufficient incentives to attract traitors

from a perfect democracy. Assuming that for sufficiently low levels of human capital h≃0 the

size g1* of G1 that maximizes its probability of success is interior, it follows that:8



Proposition 3: The size g1* of the challenging regime that is most likely to overthrow a perfect

democracy is increasing in the level of human capital h, and may jump discretely to g 1 when h

crosses a threshold ĥ .

8
    This requirement is equivalent to the formal condition that
                       gˆ 1
∃gˆ 1 ∈ (0, g1 ) :            [ p(gˆ 1 ) + b − c + η ] > g1 [ p(g1 ) + b − c + η ] , failing which the support-
                     1 − gˆ 1                           1 − g1
maximizing size of the challenger would be g 1 = g 1∀h ≥ 0 ; the latter case remains in fact mathematically
                                                   *

consistent with Proposition 3, but becomes economically uninteresting.


                                                             28
       Figure 10 graphs t ( g1 ) with g1 = 25% ; higher curves are associated with higher levels of

h. Again, there is a discrete jump from an interior optimum to g1* = g1 . Figures 11 and 12

respectively plot the maximum probability of a successful coup against democracy, and the size

of the associated conspiracy, as a function of h.

       This discussion suggests that the size of the success-maximizing challenger regimes

increases with the level of education. At low levels of education, status quo dictatorships are

most effectively challenged by small coups, often including bands of disgruntled opponents

(Huntington 1957, Finer 1988, Campante and Do, 2005). At higher levels of education, the sizes

of optimal uprisings against both dictatorship and democracy rise. In Europe during the age of

Revolutions, increasingly large groups fought to overthrow the existing regime. Similarly,

revolts against democracy, such as the Fascist takeover in Italy in the 1920s or the Nazi

movement in Germany became increasingly broad-based in societies with more education.




Implications

       The model provides one explanation for the empirical link between education and

democracy, but also a further set of testable implications. Proposition 1 yields two predictions.

First, the ability of a minority to withstand or displace a large popular movement declines with

the education of the population. Second, the value of incumbency declines as education rises.

Some anecdotal evidence seems consistent with these propositions.

       Before 1600, European monarchies were relatively secure against broad-based uprising.

Sporadic peasant revolts were generally crushed, and the real threat to a monarch usually came

from a close relative offering an alternative monarchy. Starting with the Dutch revolution

against Spain and the English revolution, monarchs were increasingly threatened by more


                                                    29
broadly-based opposition groups. Notably, these two nations had unusually high levels of

education. In the late 18th and 19th centuries, France, Germany and Italy all experienced

popular uprisings as well, with large roles played by the more educated citizens. By 1920,

monarchies had almost vanished in Europe, as the incumbency advantages of monarchs were

wiped out in the aftermath of World War I. But it took another 25 years in Western Europe and

another 70 years in Eastern Europe for democracy to become entrenched.

       The implication of Proposition 1 for political instability also receives some support.

England was unstable until 1689, with often violent royal successions (DeLong and Shleifer

1993). Four French regimes were toppled by popular revolts between 1789 and 1871, as the

levels of education were growing. Similar instability was seen in Germany and elsewhere in the

educated Europe. Once the transitions to democracy occurred, well educated democracies were

themselves initially unstable. At least at first glance, one sees similar patterns of instability of

democracy in Latin America, former Soviet Union, and other parts of the world.

       Education also seems linked to the ability of democracies to defend themselves from

dictatorial coups. Popular uprisings during the less educated periods (England 1640, France

1689, Russia 1917 and Germany in 1920) were almost invariably followed by dictatorial

takeovers. The educated supporters of democracy tried but failed to resist the dictators. As

nations became more educated, they also became more successful at defending democracy. In

France in the 1870s and 1880s, the Third Republic faced risks from both the monarchists and the

popular generals, like Boulanger. However, unlike the coups of 1797 and 1851, when the two

Napoleons crushed their less organized opponents, in this later period a coalition of educated

democrats protected the republic. Such a defense of democracy was even more striking in 1990,

when educated Russians engaged in a remarkable campaign to stop an attempted putch.




                                                30
       Propositions 2 and 3 suggests that education increases the optimal size of effective

uprisings.   This again seems supported by European and Latin American history.               In less

educated times and places, coups are generally small affairs including only small cadres of

nobles or army officers (Campante and Do 2005). As education grows, effective uprisings (like

the American Revolution) became larger. Eventually, large swaths of society were included in

attempts to overthrow a regime. Even the Nazi takeover in Germany, which eventually led to a

dictatorship, succeeded only after the Nazis had built a broad coalition, including students and

other educated Germans. Their earlier attempt at a narrow coup proved an embarrassing failure.



V. Conclusion

       The correlation between education and democracy is clear.                  The reason for this

correlation is not. In this paper, we offer an explanation for the correlation.

       Our explanation hinges on the connection between education and the costs and benefits

of political engagement. Schools socialize young people and political involvement is one form

of socialization; a variety of evidence shows a positive connection between education and civic

engagement. We model education as raising the benefits of political action when individuals

choose to support a more or less democratic regime. In this model, democratic regimes offer

weak incentives to a wide base of potential supporters, while dictatorships offer strong incentives

to a narrower base.     Education increases the society-wide support for democracy because

democracy relies on people with high participation benefits for its support. We show that better

educated nations are more likely both to preserve democracy and to protect it from coups.

       The analysis raises two broader questions that are worth mentioning in conclusion. First,

while our model has focused on the effects of education on participation, the analysis applies to




                                                 31
all social glue that encourages collective action.     For example, the analysis might suggest that

ethnic homogeneity is good for democracy (although in cross-country or panel regressions with

education controls, ethnic heterogeneity does not matter for democracy).            This surely seems

plausible, and remains to be explored. Perhaps as interestingly, the analysis suggests a solution

of Olson’s free-rider problem in all organizations, and not just in political regimes, namely

human capital or other social glue as a motivation to participate.

       Second, our analysis runs into the old puzzle, namely why do some dictators invest in

education if they know that doing so eventually dooms them? The examples of fallen dictators

in East Asia, Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet Union are telling reminders of this risk.

There are several possible answers. One is that many dictators face an external threat, and

therefore must grow their economies and their armies (including investing in human capital) to

counter these threats even if this raises the risk of democratization. A second is that even selfish

dictators unconcerned with external threats might derive income from economic growth, and

therefore promote education to get richer. A third (and most original) idea is that all dictators

face significant ouster risks, and that it is much better for the dictator’s life for him to be replaced

by a democracy in an educated country than by another dictator in an uneducated one.

       Our initial empirical results offer scant hope for the success of democracies transplanted

in highly uneducated countries. Among the countries for which we have data, only four with

education levels like those of Afghanistan and Haiti have had democracies for twenty years of

more (Botswana, India, Papua New Guinea and Venezuela). We estimate that the probability

that democracies imposed on these countries will turn into dictatorships within 20 years is over

50 percent. As Iraq is better educated, the chance of democracy surviving is higher. Still, the

odds are far from one.




                                                  32
References

Almond, Gabriel, and Sidney Verba (1989, 1st ed. 1963), The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes

   and Democracy in Five Nations, London: Sage Publications.

Alvarez, Michael et al. (2000), Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Material

   Well-being in the World, 1950-1990. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bagnoli, Mark, and Theodore Bergstrom (1989), “Log-Concave Probability and its

   Applications,” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Barro, Robert (1999), “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy 107: 158-

   183.

Barro, Robert, and J.-W. Lee (2001), “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates

   and Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers 53: 541-563.

Berrebi, Claude (2003), “Evidence About the Link between Education, Poverty, and Terrorism

   among Palestinians,” Mimeo Princeton University.

Boix, Carles, and Susan Stokes (2003), “Endogenous Democratization,” World Politics 55: 517-

   549.

Bourguignon, Francois, and Thierry Verdier (2000), “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality, and

   Growth,” Journal of Development Economics 62: 285-313.

Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis (1975), Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational

   Reform and the Contradictions of Capitalist Life. New York: Basic Books.

Brady, Henry, Sidney Verba, and Kay Lehman Schlozman (1995), “Beyond SES: A Resource

   Model of Political Participation,” American Political Science Review 89: 271-294.

Campante, Filipe, and Quoc-Anh Do (2005), “Inequality, Redistribution, and Population,”

   Mimeo, Harvard University.




                                              33
Costa, Dora, and Matthew Kahn (2003), “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the American

   Civil War,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 519-548.

De Long, Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer (1993), “Princes and Merchants: European City Growth

   Before the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics 36, 671-702.

Dee, Thomas (2004), “Are there Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public Economics 88,

   1697-1720.

DiPasquale, Denise and Edward Glaeser (1999), “Incentive and Social Capital: Are Homeowners

   Better Citizens?” Journal of Urban Economics 45: 354-384.

Driscoll, Amy and Nancy G. Nagel (2005), Early Childhood Education Birth -8: The World of

   Children, Families and Educators. Third Edition. Boston: Pearson Education.

Ferguson, Niall (1999), The Pity of War. New York: Basic Books.

Finer, Samuel (1988), The Man on Horseback: The Role of the Military in Politics. Boulder,

   Colorado: Westview Press.

Glaeser, Edward, and Bruce Sacerdote (2001), “Education and Religion,” NBER Working Paper.

Glaeser, Edward, LaPorta, Rafael, Lopes-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Andrei Shleifer (2004), “Do

   Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9: 271-303.

Gordon, Ann, and Kathryn Browne (2004), Beginnings and Beyond: Foundations in Early

   Childhood Education. Sixth Edition. Thomson Delmar Learning: Clifton Park, NY.

Hanson, Victor (2001), Culture and Carnage: Landmark Battles in the Rise of Western Power.

   New York: Doubleday.

Holmes, Brian (1979), International Guide to Education Systems. Paris: UNESCO.

Huntington, Samuel (1957), The Soldier and the State: The Theory of Politics of Civil-Military

   Relations. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.




                                             34
Huntington, Samuel (1991), The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.

   Norman and London: University of Oklahoma Press.

Jaggers, Keith, and Monty Marshall (2003), Polity IV Project, Center for International

   Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland.

Kamens, David (1988), “Education and Democracy: A Comparative Institutional Analysis,”

   Sociology of Education 61: 114-127.

Keegan, John (1976), The Face of Battle. New York: Viking Press.

Krueger, Alan, and Jitka Maleckova (2003), “Education, Poverty, and Terrorism: Is there a

   Causal Connection?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17: 119-144.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole (1988), “The Dynamics of Incentive Contracts,”

   Econometrica 56: 1153-1175.

Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959), “Some Social Requisites for Democracy: Economic

   Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review 53: 69-105.

Lipset, Seymour Martin (1960), Political Man: the Social Basis of Modern Politics, New York:

   Doubleday.

Milligan, Kevin, Moretti, Enrico, and Philip Oreopoulous (2004), “Does Education Improve

   Citizenship? Evidence from the U.S. and the U.K.,” Journal of Public Economics 88: 1667-

   1695.

Mulligan, Casey, Ricard Gil, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004), “Do Democracies Have Different

   Public Policies than Non-democracies,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18, 51-74.

Mulligan, Casey, and Andrei Shleifer (2005), “The Extent of the Market and the Supply of

   Regulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:1445-1473.




                                              35
Olson, Mancur (1965), The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups,

   Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Papaioannou, Elias, and Gregorios Siourounis (2005), “Economic and Social Factors Driving the

   Third Wave of Democratization,” Mimeo, London Business School.

Posner, Richard (2003), Law, Pragmatism, and Democracy, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard

   University Press.

Przeworski, Adam, and Fernando Limongi (1993), “Political Regimes and Economic Growth,”

   Journal of Economic Perspectives 7: 51-70.

Rander-Pehrson, Justine Davis (1999), Germany and the Revolution of 1848-1849, New York:

   Peter Lang.

Schumpeter, Joseph (1942), Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, New York: Harper and

   Row.

Tilly, Charles, Louise Tilly, and Richard Tilly (1975), The Rebellious Century 1830-1930.

   Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.




                                             36
                           Democracy Index                                                 .

11.6662

                         Papua Ne                         Costa Ri Italy Netherla
                                                                          Finland
                                                                             Iceland
                                                                                   Norway
                                                                                      Ireland
                                                                                         Austria
                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                               Switzerl
                                                                                                 Belgium
                                                                                                   United
                                                                                                   SwedenGermany
                                                                                                          KCanada
                                                                                                             United
                                                                                                                Denmark
                                                                                                                    S Australi
                                                                                                                      New Zeal
                                          Jamaica
                                          Mauritiu
                                                                 Cyprus                            Israel
                               Botswana                         Trinidad
                                 India
                                          Venezuel
                                                                                  France
                                     Turkey    Colombia
                                                             South Af
                                                                    GreeceFiji
                                                      Sri Lank
                                    Portugal                           Urug uay
                                                          Spain
                                        Malaysia
                                              Ecuador

                                         Dominica        Philippi
                                  El Salva     Brazil
                                                  Peru                  Chile
                                                               Bolivia Argentin
                    Pakistan
                                                     Thailand
                                 Honduras         Korea, R     Panama
                                                      Guyana
                     Bang lade Zimbabwe
                              Guatemal                                                         Hungary
                                                                                                Poland
                                      Nicaragu Singapor
                                                  Lesotho
              Nepal              Zambia            Parag uay
              Mozambiq          Senegal Mexico
               Mali
               Sudan
                 Sierra UgL andaMalawi
                Central
               NigerGhana
                      Haiti
                             Kenya
                    Iran, Indonesi
                  Liberia  Is Jordan
                                  Swazilan
                Tog     Algeria
                             Cameroon
                      o Syrian
                  Tunisia       A
                 Congo,     D Bahrain Kuwait
     0
               0                                                     5                                                      10
                                                          Years of Schooling 1960
                               Figure 1: Education and Democracy




                                   cdemoc                                                                   Fitted values

     15




                                                     Portugal                       Spain                                        Hungary
     10
                                                                             Taiwan
                                                                              Thailand                                            Poland

                                    Indonesi
                                        Guatemal Nicaragu
                                                      Mexico                                      Bolivia

                   Nepal                                                    Paraguay

                     Mali
                      Central                  El Salva
                                              Honduras

          5
                     Niger

                               Ghana

                                          Jordan

                        Togo
                          Tunisia
                             Haiti Cameroon

                       Sudan
                       IraqPakistan
          0
                   0                                      2                           4                                   6                8
                                                                           Schooling level in 1960
  Figure 2: Schooling and the Growth of Democracy 1960-2000



                                                                                  37
                   cschool                                       Fitted values

  8
                                                                                 Korea, S




  6    Jordan                                                                                       Norway
                                                                                                    Malaysia
       Taiwan
                                                                                                     Finland
       Mexico                                      Peru
        Iraq
  4                                                        Philippi   South
                                                                      GreeceAf                      Netherla
                                                                                                    Sweden
        Tunisia
         Spain                          Ecuador   Panama                                            United S
       Indonesi              Argentin
        Ghana                                                                               India
        Poland                                                        Venezuel                      Switzerl
                                                                                                     Iceland
                                                                                                    Canada
       Portugal                                    Chile                                              Japan
                El Salva
       Thailand
         Togo                                              France     Sri Lank                       Ireland
      Paraguay
      Nicaragu Honduras                                                          Uruguay
                                                                                                       Italy
                                                                                                      IsraelRi
       Hungary                                                                                      Costa
                                                                                                     Austria
         Haiti                                                        Colombia
  2    Pakistan
         Nepal
      Cameroon
       Central
                                                                                                    New   Zeal
      Guatemal
        Sudan                                              Brazil                                   United K
                                                                                 Myanmar            Germany
                 Bolivia                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                                     Australi
                                                                                                    Denmark
        Niger
        Mali                 Senegal

  0
         0                                        5                                                    10
                                             1960 democ
Figure 3: Democracy and the Growth of Schooling 1960-2000




        Figure 4: Membership and Education by Country in 1990


                                                  38
       y       1




            0.75




             0.5




            0.25




               0
                   0   0.25        0.5      0.75          1

                                                      x



     Figure 5: Support for two regimes as a function of h




      Pi

           0.625




             0.5




           0.375




            0.25




           0.125



                                                      h



Figure 6: Probability of success for a more democratic regime




                              39
       p




                   0    0.25          0.5         0.75             1

                                                               g



 Figure 7: An example of cost function with p′ < 0 and p′′′ > 0




       s

            0.05




       0.0375




           0.025




       0.0125




              0
                   0   0.2          0.4     0.6          0.8

                                                               g



Figure 8: Support for a challenger to an oligarchy G : g = 0.15




                               40
    s
         0.04


        0.035


         0.03


        0.025


         0.02


        0.015


         0.01
                    0.2          0.4          0.6         0.8

                                                                g



Figure 9: Discrete jump in g* as h crosses the threshold




    t
         0.08




         0.06




         0.04




         0.02




            0
                0         0.05     0.1      0.15    0.2             0.25

                                                                g



Figure 10: Support for a coup against perfect democracy




                                       41
      p*
     1

   0.8

   0.6

   0.4

   0.2

                                                       h


Figure 11: Maximum probability of overthrowing democracy




            g*

     0.24
     0.22
         0.2
     0.18
     0.16
     0.14
     0.12
                                                   h


   Figure 12: Size of the most effective oligarchic coup



                            42
Table 1a – The Stability of Democracy and Dictatorship in High Education Countries (>5.0115)
Initial Year and      Number of           Number of Countries          Number of Countries        Number of Countries         Number of Countries still
Total countries       Countries that are: still after 10 years:        still after 20 years:      still after 30 years:       after 40 years:
1960: Democracy       20                  20                           19                         19                          19
22      Dictatorship  2                   2                            2                          0                           0
1970 Democracy        22                  20                           20                         20
26      Dictatorship  4                   2                            0                          0
1980 Democracy        25                  25                           25
34      Dictatorship  9                   1                            0
1990 Democracy        38                  37
46      Dictatorship  8                   3



Table 1b – The Stability of Democracy and Dictatorship in Intermediate Education Countries (2.6785-5.0115)
Initial Year and      Number of           Number of Countries still   Number of Countries still  Number of Countries still    Number of Countries still
Total countries       Countries that are: after 10 years:             after 20 years:            after 30 years:              after 40 years:
1960: Democracy       11                  6                           5                          5                            5
17      Dictatorship  6                   6                           4                          3                            0
1970 Democracy        7                   7                           7                          7
19      Dictatorship  12                  10                          5                          1
1980 Democracy        9                   9                           8
24      Dictatorship  15                  12                          6
1990 Democracy        13                  13
27      Dictatorship  14                  11



Table 1c – The Stability of Democracy and Dictatorship in Low Education Countries (< 2.6785)
Initial Year and       Number of           Number of Countries still  Number of Countries still   Number of Countries still   Number of Countries still
Total countries        Countries that are: after 10 years:            after 20 years:             after 30 years:             after 40 years:
1960: Democracy        4                   2                          2                           2                           2
18      Dictatorship   14                  13                         13                          11                          5
1970 Democracy         3                   1                          1                           1
21      Dictatorship   18                  18                         16                          9
1980 Democracy         4                   3                          2
24      Dictatorship   20                  17                         9
1990 Democracy         5                   2
16      Dictatorship   11                  4




                                                                         43
Table 2 - The Effect of Education on Democracy, 1865-2000
                                                                                                 1865-2000 with   1865-2000 with
                              1960-2000     1960-2000    1960-2000
   Independent Variable                                               1865-2000     1865-2000      no country        country
                                Only          Only         Only
                                                                                                   clustering       clustering
  Secondary Coefficient            -           0.181                     0.290          -             0.238            0.499
                                              (0.053)                   (0.046)                      (0.496)          (0.136)
  University Coefficient           -             -          0.633          -          0.850           0.532            1.825
                                                           (0.196)                   (0.172)         (0.183)          (0.430)
    Years of Schooling            -0.237           -          -                -        -               -                -
                                 (0.150)
   Country Fixed Effects           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes               No
     Year Fixed Effects            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes
          Countries                101           132           132           133           133             133               133
           Years                     9             9            9             25           25              25                25
        Observations               777           691           691          1316          1316            1316              1316
         R-Squared                0.799         0.879         0.879         0.788         0.786           0.790             0.210
Dependent variable is the democracy score from: Jaggers, Keither and Monty G. Marshall (2003). “Polity IV Project.” Center for
International Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland. Online at
http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/index.htm.
Average Years of Schooling data (column 1) from: Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, International Data on Educational Attainment:
Updates and Implications. Source: Barro and Lee (2000) Data posted on http://www.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata/ciddata.html.
Enrollment data (columns 2-7) from: Banks, Arthur S (2004). Cross National Time-Series Data Archive. CD-ROM. Binghamton, New
York: Arthur S. Banks.
Data are every 5 years from 1865 to 2000 with the exception of 1915, 1940, and 1945, for which data are unavailable.




                                                               44
Table 3: Social Engagement and Education
                                Attended church or        Attended a          Worked on a      Wrote a letter    Contacted a           Are you a         Gave someone the
                              other place of worship   class or seminar    community project    to the editor   public official    registered voter?    finger while driving
Dependent variable mean      22.7                      4.8                2.4                  0.5              2.1               88%                  2.1
High School grad             0.1794                    0.181              0.1209               0.0353           0.1044            0.4673               -0.1413
                             [12.22]**                 [7.01]**           [8.69]**             [1.88]           [2.15]*           [7.89]**             [3.01]**
College grad                 0.1593                    0.4011             0.1997               0.0865           0.1828            0.1632               -0.159
                             [14.45]**                 [23.18]**          [19.10]**            [6.50]**         [4.65]**          [4.63]**             [5.84]**
Survey year                  -0.018                    -0.0169            -0.0069              0.0002                                                  0.04
                             [14.38]**                 [3.27]**           [5.85]**             [0.10]                                                  [1.69]
Female                       0.2515                    0.0282             0.0733               0.005            -0.1546           0.1167               -0.2101
                             [27.66]**                 [1.92]             [8.51]**             [0.45]           [4.77]**          [3.77]**             [8.74]**
Age                          0.0103                    -0.0111            0.0056               0.0016           0.0027            0.0119               -0.0122
                             [36.12]**                 [24.02]**          [20.55]**            [4.66]**         [2.50]*           [12.18]**            [16.34]**
Black                        0.0983                    -0.0549            0.0095               0.0138           -0.1619           0.1167
                             [4.61]**                  [1.84]             [0.47]               [0.57]           [1.64]            [2.10]*
Asian                        -0.303                    0.1815             -0.0641              0.0607           0.0778            -0.533
                             [5.61]**                  [2.74]**           [1.25]               [1.06]           [0.15]            [4.61]**
Other                        -0.1549                   0.0918             0.0688               0.3124           -0.1327           -0.0172
                             [2.76]**                  [1.27]             [1.29]               [5.01]**         [0.46]            [0.12]
Log income in 2000 dollars   0.02                      -0.0659            0.052                -0.0181          0.0063            0.1299               -0.0038
                             [3.08]**                  [6.17]**           [8.45]**             [2.29]*          [0.20]            [5.84]**             [0.22]
Missing income data          -0.0243                   -0.0149            0.0085               0.0295           -0.1134           0.0164               0.0143
                             [1.04]                    [0.48]             [0.39]               [1.14]           [0.83]            [0.19]               [0.27]
Constant                     34.7132                   34.6147            12.7943              -0.4271          -0.2611           -2.4316              -79.0522
                             [14.01]**                 [3.37]**           [5.44]**             [0.09]           [0.85]            [10.15]**            [1.67]
Observations                 47459                     18888              47808                30710            3229              3617                 6747
R-squared                    0.05                      0.07               0.02                 0                0.02              0.08                 0.05
Notes: Absolute value of t statistics in brackets. * Indicated significance at 5%; ** Indicates significance at 1%. Data from DDB Needham




                                                                                    45
