NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ZOMBIE LENDING AND DEPRESSED RESTRUCTURING IN JAPAN
Ricardo J. Caballero
Takeo Hoshi
Anil K. Kashyap
Working Paper 12129
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12129

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

We thank numerous seminar participants and colleagues, especially Olivier Blanchard, Roger Bohn,
Toni Braun, Mark Gertler, Keiichiro Kobayashi, Hugh Patrick, Masaya Sakuragawa, and three anonymous
referees for helpful comments. We thank Yoichi Arai, Munechika Katayama and Tatsuyoshi Okimoto
for expert research assistance. Caballero thanks the National Science Foundation for research support.
Hoshi thanks the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI) for research support.
Kashyap thanks the Center for Research in Securities Prices, the Stigler Center, and the Initiative onGlobal
Markets all at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business for research support. This research
was also funded in part by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and not necessarily of any of the organizations with which we are affiliated
or which sponsored this research. Future drafts of this paper will be posted to http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/anil.kashyap/research.
First draft: September 2003.
© 2006 by Ricardo J. Caballero, Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan
Ricardo J. Caballero, Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 12129
April 2006, Revised September 2007
JEL No. E44,G34,L16,O53
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a bank-based explanation for the decade-long Japanese slowdown following
the asset price collapse in the early 1990s. We start with the well-known observation that most large
Japanese banks were only able to comply with capitalstandards because regulators were lax in their
inspections. To facilitate this forbearance the banks often engaged in sham loan restructurings that
kept credit flowing to otherwise insolvent borrowers (that we call zombies). Thus, the normal competitive
outcome whereby the zombies would shed workers and lose market share was thwarted. Our model
highlights the restructuring implications of the zombie problem. The counterpart of the congestion
created by the zombies is a reduction of the profits for healthy firms, which discourages their entry
and investment. In this context, even solvent banks do not find good lending opportunities. We confirm
our story's key predictions that zombie-dominated industries exhibit more depressed job creation and
destruction, and lower productivity. We present firm-level regressions showing that the increase in
zombies depressed the investment and employment growth of non-zombies and widened the productivity
gap between zombies and non-zombies.
Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-252a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu
Takeo Hoshi
Graduate School of International Relations
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
thoshi@ucsd.edu

Anil K. Kashyap
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
This paper explores the role that misdirected bank lending played in prolonging
the Japanese macroeconomic stagnation that began in the early 1990s. The investigation
focuses on the widespread practice of Japanese banks of continuing to lend to otherwise
insolvent firms. We document the prevalence of this forbearance lending and show its
distorting effects on healthy firms that were competing with the impaired firms.
Hoshi (2000) was the first paper to call attention to this phenomenon and its
ramifications have been partially explored by a number of observers of the Japanese
economy. There is agreement that the trigger was the large stock and land price declines
that began in early 1990s: stock prices lost roughly 60% of their value from the 1989
peak within three years, while commercial land prices fell by roughly 50% after their
1992 peak over the next ten years. These shocks impaired collateral values sufficiently
that any banking system would have had tremendous problems adjusting. But in Japan
the political and regulatory response was to deny the existence of any problems and delay
any serious reforms or restructuring of the banks.1 Aside from a couple of crisis periods
when regulators were forced to recognize a few insolvencies and temporarily nationalize
the offending banks, the banks were surprisingly unconstrained by the regulators.
The one exception to this rule is that banks had to comply (or appear to comply)
with the international standards governing their minimum level of capital (the so-called
Basle capital standards). This meant that when banks wanted to call in a non-performing
loan, they were likely to have to write off existing capital, which in turn pushed them up
against the minimum capital levels. The fear of falling below the capital standards led
many banks to continue to extend credit to insolvent borrowers, gambling that somehow
these firms would recover or that the government would bail them out. 2 Failing to
1

For instance, in 1997, at least 5 years after the problem of non-performing loans was recognized, the
Ministry of Finance was insisting that no public money would be needed to assist the banks. In February
1999 then Vice Minister of International Finance, Eisuke Sakakibara, was quoted as saying that the
Japanese banking problems “would be over within a matter of weeks.” As late as 2002, the Financial
Services Agency claimed that Japanese banks were well capitalized and no more public money would be
necessary.
2
The banks also tried to raise capital by issuing more shares and subordinated debt, as Ito and Sasaki
(2002) document. When the banks raised new capital, however, almost all came from either related firms
(most notably life insurance companies) that are dependent on the banks for their financing, or the

2

rollover the loans also would have sparked public criticism that banks were worsening
the recession by denying credit to needy corporations. Indeed, the government also
encouraged the banks to increase their lending to small and medium sized firms to ease
the apparent “credit crunch” especially after 1998.3 The continued financing, or “evergreening,” can therefore be seen as a rational response by the banks to these various
pressures.
A simple measure of the ever-greening is shown in Figure 1, which reports the
percentage of bank customers that received subsidized bank credit. We defer the details
of how the firms are identified until the next section, but for now all that matters is that
the universe of firms considered here is all publicly traded manufacturing, construction,
real estate, retail, wholesale (excluding nine general trading companies) and service
sector firms. The top panel of the figure shows roughly 30% of these firms were on life
support from the banks in the early 2000s. The lower panel, which shows comparable
asset weighted figures, suggests that about 15% of assets reside in these firms. As these
figures show, these percentages were much lower in the 1980s and early 1990s.
By keeping these unprofitable borrowers (that we call “zombies”) alive, the banks
allowed them to distort competition throughout the rest of the economy. The zombies’
distortions came in many ways, including depressing market prices for their products,
raising market wages by hanging on to the workers whose productivity at the current
firms declined and, more generally, congesting the markets where they participated.
Effectively the growing government liability that came from guaranteeing the deposits of
banks that supported the zombies served as a very inefficient program to sustain
employment. Thus, the normal competitive outcome whereby the zombies would shed
workers and lose market share was thwarted.4 More importantly, the low prices and high

government when banks received capital injections. See Hoshi and Kashyap (2004, 2005) for more on this
“double-gearing” between banking and life insurance sectors.
3
Subsequently when the Long-Term Credit Bank was returned to private ownership, a condition for the
sale was the new owners would maintain lending to small and medium borrowers. The new owners
tightened credit standards and the government pressured them to continue supplying funds, see Tett (2003)
for details.
4
See Ahearne and Shinada (2004) for some direct evidence suggesting that inefficient firms in the nonmanufacturing sector gained market share in Japan in the 1990s. Fukao and Kwon (2006) and Nishimura,
Nakajima, and Kiyota (2005) find that the productivities of the exiting firms were higher than those of the
surviving firms in many industries. See also Kim (2004) and Restuccia and Rogerson (2003) for attempts
to quantify the size of these types of distortions.

3

wages reduce the profits and collateral that new and more productive firms could
generate, thereby discouraging their entry and investment.5

Therefore, even solvent

banks saw no particularly good lending opportunities in Japan.
In the remainder of the paper we document and formalize this story. In the next
section, we describe the construction of our zombie measure. There are a number of
potential proxies that could be used to identify zombies. As we explain, however,
measurement problems confound most of these alternatives.
Having measured the extent of zombies, we then model their effects. The model
is a standard variant of the type that is studied in the literature on creative destruction. It
is designed to contrast the adjustment of an industry to a negative shock with and without
the presence of zombies. We model the presence of zombies as a constraint on the natural
surge in destruction that would arise in the wake of an unfavorable technological, demand,
or credit shock. The main effect of that constraint is that job creation must slow
sufficiently to re-equilibrate the economy. This means that during the adjustment the
economy is characterized by what Caballero and Hammour (1998, 2000) have called
“sclerosis” — the preservation of production units that would not be saved without the
banks’ subsidies— and the associated “scrambling” — the retention of firms and projects
that are less productive than some of those that do not enter or are not implemented due
to the congestion caused by the zombies.
In the fourth section of the paper, we assess the main aggregate implications of
the model. In particular, we study the interaction between the percentage of zombies in
the economy and the amount of restructuring, both over time and across different sectors.
We find that the rise of the zombies has been associated with falling levels of aggregate
restructuring, with job creation being especially depressed in the parts of the economy
with the most zombie firms.

We then explore the impact of zombies on sectoral

performance measures. We find that the prevalence of zombies lowers productivity.
In section 5 we analyze firm-level data to directly look for congestion effects of
the zombies on non-zombie firms’ behavior. We find that investment and employment
growth for healthy firms falls as the percentage of zombies in their industry rises.
5

It is important to clarify at the outset that the zombie mechanism complements (rather than substitutes for)
standard financial constraint mechanisms. As stated in the main text, an increase in the number of zombies
reduces the collateral value of good firms in the industry, and hence tightens any financial constraints.

4

Moreover, the gap in productivity between zombie and non-zombie firms rises as the
percentage of zombies rises. All of these findings are consistent with the predictions that
zombies crowd the market and that the congestion has real effects on the healthy firms in
the economy.

Simple extrapolations using our regression coefficients suggest that

cumulative size of the distortions (in terms of investment, or employment) is substantial.
For instance, compared with the hypothetical case where the prevalence of zombies in the
1990s remained at the historical average instead of rising, we find the investment was
depressed between four and 36 percent per year (depending on the industry considered).
In the final section of the paper we conclude by summarizing our results and
describing their implications.

2. Identifying zombies
Our story can be divided into two parts. First, the banks misallocated credit by
supporting zombie firms. Second, the existence of zombie firms interfered with the
process of creative destruction and stifled growth. Our measure of zombie should not
only capture the misallocation of credit but also be useful in testing the effect of zombies
on corporate profitability and growth.

2.1 Defining Zombies
There is a growing literature examining the potential misallocation of bank credit
in Japan (see Sekine, Kobayashi, and Saita (2003) for a survey). Much of the evidence is
indirect. For instance, several papers (including Hoshi (2000), Fukao (2000), Hosono
and Sakuragawa (2003), Sasaki (2004)) study the distribution of loans across industries
and note that underperforming industries like real estate or construction received more
bank credit than other sectors that were performing better (such as manufacturing).6

6

Other indirect evidence comes from studies such as Smith (2003), Schaede (2005) and Jerram (2004) that
document that loan rates in Japan do not appear to be high enough to reflect the riskiness of the loans.
Sakai, Uesugi and Watanabe (2005), however, show that poorly performing firms (measured by operating
profits or net worth) still pay higher bank loan rates and are more likely to exit compared with better
performing firms, at least for small firms. Finally, see also Hamao, Mei and Xu (forthcoming) who show
that firm-level equity returns became less volatile during the 1990s and argue that this is likely due to a lack
of restructuring in the economy.

5

Peek and Rosengren (2005) offer the most direct and systematic study to date on
the potential misallocation of bank credit. They find that bank credit to poor performing
firms often increased between 1993 and 1999. During poor performance periods, these
firms’ main banks are more likely to lend to them than other banks. This pattern of
perverse credit allocation is more likely when the bank’s own balance sheet is weak or
when the borrower is a keiretsu affiliate. Importantly, non-affiliated banks do not show
this pattern.
We depart from past studies by classifying firms as zombies only based on our
assessment of whether they are receiving subsidized credit, and not by looking at their
productivity or profitability. This strategy permits us to evaluate the effect of zombies on
the economy.

If instead we were to define zombies based on their operating

characteristics, then almost by definition industries dominated by zombie firms would
have low profitability, and likely also have low growth. Rather than hard-wiring this
correlation, we want to test for it.
The challenge for our approach is to use publicly available information to
determine which firms are receiving subsidized credit: banks and their borrowers have
little incentive to reveal that a loan is miss-priced. Because of the myriad of ways in
which banks could transfer resources to their clients, there are many ways that we could
attempt to measure subsidies. To get some guidance we used the Nikkei Telecom 21 to
search the four newspapers published by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha (Nihon Keizai
Shimbun, Nikkei Kin’yū Shimbun, Nikkei Sangyō Shimbun, Nikkei Ryūtsū Shimbun)
between January 1990 and May 2004 for all news articles containing the words “financial
assistance” and either “management reconstruction plan” or (“corporation” and
“reconstruction”).7 The summary of our findings are given in Table 1.
Our search uncovers 120 separate cases. In most of them there were multiple
types of assistance that were included.

As the table shows, between interest rate

concessions, debt-equity swaps, debt forgiveness, and moratoriums on loan principal or

7

The Japanese phrases were Kin’yu Shien AND (Keiei Saiken Keikaku OR (Kigyo AND Saiken)).

6

interest, most of these packages involve reductions in interest payments or outright debt
forgiveness by the troubled firms.8
The decision by a bank to restructure the loans to distressed companies in these
ways, rather than just rolling over the loans, helps reduce the required capital needed by
the bank. Without such restructuring, banks would be forced to classify the loans to
those borrowers as “at risk”, which usually would require the banks to set aside 70% of
the loan value as loan loss reserves. With restructuring, the banks need only move the
loans to the “special attention” category, which requires reserves of at most 15%.
In light of the evidence in Table 1, we concentrate on credit assistance that
involves a direct interest rate subsidy. We proceed in three steps. First, we calculate a
hypothetical lower bound for interest payments (R*) that we expect only for the highest
quality borrowers. We then compare this lower bound to the observed interest payments.
Finally, we make several econometric assumptions to use the observed difference
between actual interest rate (r) and notional lower bound rate (r*) to infer cases where we
believe subsidies are present.

2.2 Detecting Zombies
The minimum required interest payment for each firm each year, R*i,t, is defined
as:

⎛ 5
⎞
R *i ,t = rst −1 BSi ,t −1 + ⎜ 15 ∑ rlt − j ⎟ ⋅ BLi ,t −1 + rcbmin over last 5 years,t * Bondsi ,t −1
⎝ j =1
⎠

where BSi ,t , BLi ,t and Bondsi ,t are short-term bank loans (less than one year), long-term
bank loans (more than one year), and total bonds outstanding (including convertible
bonds (CBs) and warrant-attached bonds) respectively of firm i at the end of year t, and

rst , rlt , and rcbmin over the last 5 years, t are the average short-term prime rate in year t, the

8

These patterns are consistent with the claim by Tett and Ibison (2001) that almost one-half of the public
funds injected into the banking system in 1998 and 1999 were allowed to be passed on to troubled
construction companies in the form of debt forgiveness.

7

average long-term prime rate in year t, and the minimum observed coupon rate on any
convertible corporate bond issued in the last five years before t.
This estimate for the lower bound reflects the data constraints we face.

In

particular, all we know about the firms’ debt structure is the type of debt instrument
(short-term bank borrowing, long-term borrowing that are due in one year and remaining
long-term bank borrowing, bonds outstanding that are due in one year and remaining
bonds outstanding, and commercial paper outstanding). In other words, we do not know
the exact interest rates on specific loans, bonds or commercial paper, nor do we know the
exact maturities of any of these obligations. Finally, the interest payments we can
measure include all interest, fee and discount expenses, including those related to trade
credit.
The general principle guiding the choices we make is to select interest rates that
are extremely advantageous for the borrower, so that R* is in fact less than what most
firms would pay in the absence of subsidies. For instance, by assuming that bond
financing takes place at rcbmin

over the last 5 years, t

we are assuming not only that firms

borrow using convertible bonds (which carry lower interest rates due to the conversion
option), but also that these bonds are issued when rates are at their lowest. We provide
additional discussion of the data choices used in constructing R* and the alternative
approaches that we examined for robustness check in Appendix 1.
To categorize firms we compare the actual interest payments made by the firms
(Ri,t) with our hypothetical lower bound. We normalize the difference by the amount of
total borrowing at the beginning of the period (Bi.t-1 = BSi ,t −1 + BLi ,t −1 + Bondsi ,t −1 +CPi,t-1),
where CPi,t-1 is the amount of commercial paper outstanding for the firm i at the
beginning of the period t, so that the units are comparable to interest rates. Accordingly
we refer to the resulting variable, xi,t ≡

R i,t - R *i,t
Bi,t-1

= ri ,t − ri*,t , as the interest rate gap. This

measure is “conservative” because we assume the minimum interest rates that are
extremely advantageous to the firm and because the interest payment, Ri,t, includes
interest expenses on items beyond our concept of total borrowing (such as interest
expenses on trade credit).

8

Given our procedure to construct r* we will not be able to detect all types of
subsidized lending.9 In particular, any type of assistance that lowers the current period’s
interest payments can be detected: including debt forgiveness, interest rate concessions,
debt for equity swaps, or moratoriums on interest rate payments, all of which appeared to
be prevalent in the cases studied in Table 1. On the other hand, if a bank makes new
loans to a firm at normal interest rates that are then used to pay off past loans, then our
gap variable will not capture the subsidy. Likewise, if a bank buys other assets from a
client at overly generous prices our proxy will not detect the assistance.
We explore two strategies for identifying the set of zombie firms from the
calculated interest rate gaps. Our baseline procedure classifies a firm i as a zombie for
year t whenever its interest rate gap is negative (xit < 0).

The justification for this

strategy is the conservative philosophy underlying the construction of r*. If r* is a
perfectly measured lower bound, then only a firm that receives a subsidy can have a
negative gap. However, the problem of labeling a firm with xit just above zero as nonzombie remains even under this perfect scenario.
Thus we resort to a second approach, which is more robust to misclassification of
non-zombies. In this second approach we assume that the set of zombies is a “fuzzy” set.
In the classical set theory, an element either belongs or does not belong to a particular set
so that a 0-1 indicator function can be used to define a subset. In contrast, in fuzzy set
theory an element can belong to a particular subset to a certain degree, so that the
indicator function can take any value in the interval [0, 1].

When the images of the

indicator function are confined to {0, 1}, a set defined by the indicator function is called
a “crisp” set. Using this terminology, our first approach assumes the set of zombies is
“crisp.” Our second approach, on the other hand, assumes the set is “fuzzy,” allowing
some firms to be more-or-less zombie-like.10
The indicator function that defines a fuzzy subset is called “membership
function,” which we assume to be (for the set of zombie firms):
9

In addition to the cases studied below, Hoshi (2006) examines the potential problems that might arise
from rapid changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates fell sharply and actual loan terms moved
as well, then our gap variable could be misleading about the prevalence of subsidized loans. He constructs
an alternative measure (that would be more robust to within year interest rate changes) and concludes that
this sort of problem does not appear to be quantitatively important.
10
See Nguyen and Walker (2006) for an introduction to the fuzzy set theory.

9

⎧ 1
⎪
⎪d −x
z ( x; d1 , d 2 ) = ⎨ 2
⎪ d 2 − d1
⎪⎩ 0

if x < d1
if d1 ≤ x ≤ d 2

where d1 ≤ 0 ≤ d 2

(1)

if x > d 2

The shape of the membership function is determined by the two parameters, d1 and d2.
Figure 2 shows this membership function along with the indicator function implicit in our
first approach. It is easy to see the second approach degenerates to our first approach
when d1 and d2 are both zero.
The second approach is appealing given the fuzzy nature of the concept of
“zombie firms.” These are defined to be those firms that receive sufficient financial help
from their creditors to survive in spite of their poor profitability. It is inherently difficult
to specify how much financial help is considered to be sufficient, even if we had access
to much more information than we do about individual firms. Our fuzzy approach
acknowledges this limitation and assigns numbers between 0 and 1 to those firms whose
zombie status is ambiguous.
Given the asymmetry (toward conservatism) inherent in the construction of r*, we
assume that d1 is closer to zero than d2. In what follows we show results for (d1, d2) = (0,
50bp) and (d1, d2) = (-25bp, 75bp), where bp stands for basis points. Thus, in the first
case, we assume a firm with xit below zero is a definite zombie and a firm with xit above
50 basis points is definitely a non-zombie: any firm with xit between zero and 50 basis
points has “zombiness” between 0 and 1.

2.3 Quantifying the prevalence of zombies
Figure 1 showed the aggregate estimate of the percentage of zombies using our
baseline procedure. As mentioned earlier, treating all firms equally we see that the
percentage of zombies hovered between 5 and 15 percent up until 1993 and then rose
sharply over the mid 1990s so that the zombie percentage was above 25 percent for every
year after 1994. In terms of congestion spillovers, a size weighted measure of zombies is
likely to be more important.

Weighting firms by their assets we see the same general

10

pattern but with the overall percentage being lower, closer to 15 percent in the latter part
of the sample.
We view the cross-sectional prevalence of zombies as another way to assess the
plausibility of our definition. To conduct this assessment, we aggregated the data used in
Figure 1 into five industry groups covering manufacturing, construction, real estate, retail
and wholesale (other than the nine largest general trading companies), and services –
recall that all the firms included here are publicly traded. The zombie index for an
industry is constructed by calculating the share of total assets held by the zombie firms –
and for the remainder of the paper we concentrate on asset weighted zombie indices. In
addition to showing the industry distribution, we also compute the zombie percentages
implied by our second procedure with (d1, d2) = (0, 50bp) and (d1, d2) = (-25bp, 75bp).
Figure 3 shows the zombie index for each industry from 1981 to 2002. We draw
three main conclusions from these graphs. Starting with the upper left hand panel that
shows the data for the entire sample, first notice that the crisp zombie measure (our
baseline case) and the two fuzzy measures share similar time series movements (with the
correlation between the crisp measure and the two fuzzy measures exceeding 0.99).
Second, the other five panels show that the proportion of zombie firms increased in the
late 1990s in every industry. The third key conclusion is that the zombie problem was
more serious for non-manufacturing firms than for manufacturing firms.

In

manufacturing, the crisp measure suggests that zombie index only rose from 3.11%
(1981-1993 average) to 9.58% (1996-2002 average).

In the construction industry,

however, the measure increased from 4.47% (1981-1993 average) to 20.35% (1996-2002
average). Similar large increases occurred for the wholesale and retail, services, and real
estate industries.
There are a variety of potential explanations for these cross-sectional differences.
For instance, Japanese manufacturing firms face global competition and thus could not be
protected easily without prohibitively large subsidies. For example, many of the troubled
Japanese automakers were taken over by foreign firms rather than rescued by their banks
during the 1990s. In contrast, there is very little foreign competition in the other four
industries.

11

A second important factor was the nature of the shocks hitting the different
sectors. For instance, the construction and real estate industries were forced to deal with
the huge run-up and subsequent collapse of land prices mentioned earlier. Thus, the
adjustment for these industries was likely to be more wrenching than for the other sectors.
But the most important point about the differences shown in Figure 3 is that they
confirm the conventional wisdom that bank lending distortions were not equal across
sectors and that the problems were less acute in manufacturing – see Sekine et al (2003)
for further discussion. Thus, regardless of which explanation one favors as to why this
might be the case, we view it as particularly reassuring that our zombie index confirms
this conventional view.
Figure 4, our last plausibility check, shows the asset weighted percentages of
zombies for the firms that are above and below the median profit rate for their industry.
To keep the graphs readable we show only the crisp measures, but the other measures
show similar patterns.

In manufacturing the differences are not very noticeable, with

slightly fewer high profit firms being labeled as zombies. In the remaining industries,
particularly in real estate and construction, it appears that our measure of zombies is
identifying firms that are systematically less profitable than the non-zombies, particularly
from the mid-1990s onward.
2.4. Potential Classification Errors

Our classification scheme of zombies is admittedly imperfect, so we also consider
a number of alternative schemes. The goal in exploring these alternatives is to assess the
effect of misclassifying a zombie firm as a non-zombie (a type I error) or misclassifying a
healthy firm as a zombie (a type II error). Most of the alternatives reduce one type of
error by increasing the other type of error. Thus, we do not expect the results from these
experiments to be identical. Instead, we looked primarily at whether the time series
pattern and cross-sectional patterns were similar to the ones presented in the last section.
We also re–estimate our basic regressions using these alternative zombie measures
instead of our standard measures.

The results for the baseline definitions and the

12

alternatives are generally quite similar, and in the remainder of this section we briefly
describe the properties of the alternatives.
One possible problem is that some good firms are mistakenly dubbed zombies
because they can borrow at interest rates lower than the prime rates. Alternatively, if a
good firm pays off its bank loans during an accounting year, we may find its interest
payment for the accounting year too small given the amount of bank loans at the
beginning of the period and classify the firm as a zombie.11
To gauge the extent of these problems we modified our baseline definitions in two
ways (both of which will reduce our estimates of the zombie prevalence). In one version,
we automatically classified any firms with quality corporate bonds as non-zombies. This
makes sense if we believe buyers of bonds will not subsidize firms and hence access to
the bond market would dry up for failing firms. We considered two thresholds: bonds
rated A or above, or those rated BBB or above, the latter being the cutoff for a bond to be
considered investment grade.12
We also modified the definition to use data from either two or three years to
determine a firm’s zombie status; in these alternatives, we average the value of the
zombie indicators across either two or three years.

By taking only the firms that have

persistently low funding costs we are much more likely to avoid incorrectly labeling a
non-zombie as a zombie. However, given the nature of the lower bound interest rate used
in our calculation, this averaging would be extremely conservative and hence much more
likely to characterize zombies as non-zombies.13
To explore the potential impact of these type I errors, we reverse the preceding
logic and count firms as zombies based on the maximum zombie indicator over either the

11

To see how often clearly healthy firms are mis-classified as zombies by our crisp definition, Hoshi
(2006) examined the firms that had R&I bond rating of AA or above as of November 2004 and are included
in our sample. In only one occasion for one out of these 26 firms for five years (1997 to 2001), our zombie
index misclassified the firm as a zombie. From this, he concludes the type II error is not a serious problem.
12
We use the Ratings by R&I and its predecessors. We thank Yasuhiro Harada and Akio Ihara of R&I for
providing us with the data. When both the firm itself and the bonds that the firm issued are rated, we use
the rating for the firm. When the rating for the firm itself is not available and when multiple bonds are
rated, we use the most recent rating announcement (newly rated, changed, or maintained).
13
If we go all the way to forcing the firms to be obvious zombies in multiple consecutive years the
percentages of zombies drops sharply. For instance, using the crisp definition, the percentage of assets in
zombies firms is 14.96% in 2002. If we consider only firms that are zombies in two (three) consecutive
years, the percentage drops to 10.83% (8.74%).

13

last two or three years.14 For example, with the three year window, we define a new crisp
set of zombies that include all firms for which the crisp indicator identifies a firm as a
zombie in the current year or either of the last two years. Naturally, these corrections
raise the estimated prevalence of zombies.
Collectively these experiments yield 18 alternative indices (the three baseline
definitions, interacted with two different bond rating thresholds, two time averaging
schemes, and two maximum time horizons). Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of
the various definitions. The second column shows the correlations between the different
measures and the crisp index (Z1), while the next column reports the asset weighted
percentage of zombies in the last year of the sample (2002). We report the latter data
because having inspected versions of Figure 3 for the various definitions, this is a
convenient way to summarize the quantitative differences across them.
We read these two columns as suggesting two main conclusions. First, the crisp
measure is highly correlated with all other measures.

Second, the quantitative

significance of the alternatives on the estimated level of zombie prevalence is fairly
modest. For instance, the estimates for the conservative alternatives based on the crisp
zombie definition (ZA01 to ZA04) in 2002 range from 10.65% to 14.14%, while Z01 is
14.96%. The estimates for the alternatives based on fuzzy zombies (ZA05 to ZA12)
range between 17.09% and 22.17%, while Z02 and Z03 are 21.40% and 22.42%,
respectively.
The remaining columns in the table show correlations between the crisp measure
for different industries and the alternative estimates.

Given the predominance of

manufacturing firms in the sample it is not surprising that the results for that industry
mimic the full sample patterns. The alternatives are also quite similar for construction,
trade and services, and there is no reason why this needs to be the case.
The variation across the zombie definitions for the real state sector is somewhat
larger. This partially reflects the fact that there were not many real estate firms in the
sample (fewer than 40 in the early 1980s and no more than 60 during the 1990s). Indeed,
14

Hoshi (2006) examines prevalence of type I error by looking at how our zombie measure classifies well
known troubled firms in Japan. He finds that our measure often fails to identify the firms in the list of
highly indebted and troubled firms published in Kin’yu Business (December 2001) as zombies. Thus, he
concludes the type I error is potentially a problem.

14

looking back at Figure 3 it was already apparent that the fuzzy and crisp definitions gave
somewhat different pictures of the 1980s. This is because the movement of only a few
firms could change the percentages appreciably. Fortunately given the small size of this
sector relative to the other four (less than 5% of total sample assets reside in this sector),
these differences are not responsible for the main findings that follow.

3. A simple model of the effect of zombie firms on restructuring
To analyze the effect of zombies we study a simple environment that involves
entry and exit decisions of single-unit incumbent firms and potential new firms. After
exploring this case we consider a richer version of the model that describes expansion
and contraction decisions of existing multi-unit firms. As a benchmark we first model all
decisions being governed purely by the operating profits from running a firm. We then
contrast that environment to one where some incumbent firms (for an unspecified reason)
receive a subsidy that allows them to remain in business despite negative operating
profits.

3.1 The Environment
The essential points of interest can be seen in a model where time is discrete and
indexed by t . A representative period t starts with a mass mt of existing production
units. The productivity of the incumbents varies over time and the current level of
o

productivity for firm i in year t, Yit , is:

Yito = At + At B + At ε ito = At(1 + B + ε ito ) ,

15

where At represents the state of technology shared by all the incumbent production units
at time t, B is a potential shift parameter that can represent an aggregate productivity
shock, and ε ito is an idiosyncratic shock that is distributed uniformly on the unit interval.
The state of technology is assumed to improve over time so that At+1 > At.

The main

predictions from this model do not depend on the persistence of idiosyncratic
productivity shocks, so we assume they are independently and identically distributed.
In addition to the incumbents, there is also a set of potential entrants, and we
normalize their mass to be ½. Each potential entrant draws a productivity level,Yitn ,
before deciding whether to enter or not.

We assume that potential entrants have

technological advantage over incumbents, so that the productivity for a potential new
firm is consistently higher than incumbents by γAt. Thus,

Yitn = At (1 + γ ) + At B + At ε itn = At (1 + γ + B + ε itn )
with ε itn distributed uniformly on the unit interval. The shock ε itn is again assumed to have
no persistence. The stochastic process for aggregate technology left unspecified, except
for the assumption that it grows by more than the advantage of the new firms, so that

At+1>(1+γ)At. We also assume that there is an entry cost that is proportional to the state
of technology, κ At > 0 , that the new entrants must pay to start up.
Finally, both new and old units must incur a cost At p(N t ) in order to produce,
where N t represents the number of production units in operation at time t , i.e., the sum
of remaining incumbents and new entrants. The function p(N ) is increasing with respect
to N, and captures any reduction in profits due to congestion or competition.15 For our
purposes, all the predictions we emphasize will hold as long as p(N ) is a strictly
increasing continuous function of N. For simplicity, we adopt the linear function:

15

For example, we can motivate p(N) as the reduction in profits due to competition in the output market.
Suppose the price of output is given by D-1(N), a decreasing function of N, and that the cost of production
for each production unit is just proportional to the state of technology, AC. Under our assumption on
productivity, an incumbent decides to stay in the market (and a potential entrant decides to enter the
market) if D-1(N)A(1+B+ε)-AC > 0, or equivalently, 1+B+ε-C/ D-1(N) > 0. In this specific
example, p(N) is C/ D-1(N), which is increasing with respect to N.

16

p(N t ) = N t + μ.
where the intercept μ captures cost changes and other profit shocks.
In analyzing this model, it is useful to normalize productivity by the state of
technology. For the incumbents, this is given by:

yito ≡

Yito
= 1 + B + ε ito
At

(2)

For the potential entrants:

yitn =

Yitn
= 1 + γ + B + ε itn
At

(3)

3.2 Decisions
This basic model will quickly generate complicated dynamics because the
existing firms have paid the entry cost and thus face a different decision problem than the
new firms for which the entry cost is not sunk. These dynamics are not essential for our
main predictions, thus we assume that γ = κ .

In this case, the exit decision by

incumbents and the entry decision by potential entrants become fully myopic. Since
productivity shocks are i.i.d. and there is no advantage from being an insider (the sunk
cost of investment is exactly offset by a lower productivity), both types of units look only
at current profits to decide whether to operate.
Letting y o and y n denote the reservation productivity (normalized by the state of
technology) of incumbents and potential entrants, respectively, we have:

y o − p(N ) = 0,

y n − κ − p(N ) = 0.

In this case it is straightforward to find the mass of exit, Dt , and entry, H t ,
respectively:

17

1
Dt = mt ⎡1 − ∫
di ⎤ = mt (p(N t ) − 1 − B ),
p (N t )−1−B
⎣⎢
⎦⎥

Ht =

(4)

1 1
1
di = (1 − (p(N t ) − 1 − B )).
∫
(
)
1
p
N
B
−
−
t
2
2

(5)

Adding units created to the surviving incumbents yields the total number of units
operating at time t :
1
N t = H t + mt − Dt = ⎛⎜ + mt ⎞⎟ (1 − ( p(N t ) − 1 − B ) ) .
⎝2
⎠

(6)

3.3 Equilibrium and Steady State
We can now solve for the steady state of the normal version of the economy. The first
step is to replace p(N ) with N + μ in (6). The notation is simplified if we define S to be
composite shock that is equal to 1+B-μ . Note that a lower S indicates either higher costs
(higher μ) or lower productivity for both incumbents and potential entrants (smaller B).
We can now find the equilibrium number of units:
⎛ 1/ 2 + mt
Nt = ⎜
⎝ 3 / 2 + mt

⎞
⎟ (1 + S ).
⎠

(7)

Given the total number of operating units, we can solve for equilibrium rates of
destruction and creation by substituting (7) into (4) and (5):
⎛ 1/ 2 + mt − S ⎞
Dt = mt ⎜
⎟
⎝ 3 / 2 + mt ⎠

Ht =

1⎛ 1+S ⎞
⎜
⎟.
2 ⎝ 3 / 2 + mt ⎠

(8)

(9)

18

The dynamics of this system are determined by:

mt +1 = N t .

(10)

In steady state, the mass of incumbents remains constant at m ss = N ss , which
requires that creation and destruction exactly offset each other or, equivalently, that

mt = N t . Using the latter condition and (7), yields a quadratic equation for m ss , which
has a unique positive solution of:
2

1
⎛1
⎞
S − + ⎜ − S ⎟ + 2(1 + S )
2
⎝2
⎠
m ss =
2
For small values of S, we can approximate the above by:

m ss ≈

1 2
+ S.
2 3
In our subsequent analysis we will assume that the economy begins in a steady

state and that the initial (pre-shock) value of S, S0, is 0. Given this normalization, the
corresponding steady state will be m0 = N 0 = 1/ 2 and H 0 = D0 = 1/ 4.

3.4 A (permanent) Recession
We can now analyze the adjustment of the economy to a profit shock. By
construction the model treats aggregate productivity shifts, changes in A, and cost shocks,
changes in μ, as equivalent. Thus, what follows does not depend on which of these
occurs. We separate the discussion to distinguish between the short- and long-run impact
of a decline in S from S0 = 0 to S1 < 0 . By the “short-run” we mean for a fixed m = m0 =
1/2. By the “long-run,” on the other hand, we mean after m has adjusted to its new steady
state value m1 = 1/ 2 + (2 / 3)S1 .
19

It is easy to see from the equations (7), (8) and (9) that in the short-run:

∂D
−2m 0
1
=
=−
∂S
3 + 2m0
4

(11)

∂H
1
1
=
=
∂S
3 + 2m 0 4

(12)

∂N 1 + 2m0 1
=
=
∂S 3 + 2m0 2

(13)

That is, when S drops, creation falls and destruction rises, leading to a decline in N. In
other words, in a normal economy, a negative profit shock is met with both increased exit
by incumbents and reduced entry of new firms.
Over time, the gap between destruction and creation reduces the number of
incumbents (recall from (6) and (10) that

ΔN=H-D), which lowers the cost (p(N)) and

eventually puts an end to the gap between creation and destruction caused by the negative
shock.
Across steady states, we have that:
∂N ∂m 2
=
=
∂S
∂S
3
The number of production units falls beyond the initial impact as time goes by and the
positive gap between destruction and creation closes gradually. Note that because N falls
less than one for one with S, the long run reduction in the cost due to reduced congestion
is not enough to offset the direct effect of a lower S on creation. That is, creation falls in
the long run.

And since creation and destruction are equal in the long run, the initial

surge in destruction is temporary and ultimately destruction also ends up falling below its
pre-shock level.16

16

This long run level effect is undone when creation and destruction are measured as ratios over N, as is
often done in empirical work. However, the qualitative aspects of the short run results are preserved since

20

3.5 Zombies

Suppose now that “banks” choose to protect incumbents from the initial surge in
destruction brought about by the decline in S. There are a variety of ways that this might
be accomplished. We assume that the banks do this by providing just enough resources to
the additional units that would have been scrapped so that they can remain in operation.
With this assumption, a firm that does receive a subsidy is indifferent to exiting and
operating, and thus entry and exit decisions remain myopic.
Under the zombie-subsidy assumption, we have that:

D0z+ = D0 =

1
.
4

The post-shock destruction remains the same as the pre-shock level.

The lack of

adjustment on the destruction margin means that now creation must do all the adjustment.
Thus, the following two equations, derived from (5) and (6), determine the post-shock
creation and the number of production units under the presence of zombies.

H 0z+ =

1
(1 − N 0z+ + S )
2

N 0z+ = H 0z+ + m0 − D0z+ = H 0z+ + 1/ 4
Solving these:

H 0z+ =

1
1
S 1
(1 + S ) − (m 0 − D0z+ ) = +
3
3
3 4

(14)

N 0z+ =

1
2
S 1
(1 + S ) + (m 0 − D0z+ ) = +
3
3
3 2

(15)

empirically the flows are divided by either initial employment or a weighted average of initial and final
employment.

21

Differentiating (14) with respect to S, and compare the result to the short-run change in
creation that occurs in the absence of zombies (given by (12)):

∂H 0z+ 1 1 ∂H 0+
= > =
.
∂S
3 4
∂S
Indeed, it is easy to see the expression (12) is less than 1/3 for any positive m0. That is, a
decline in S always has a much larger negative effect on creation in the presence of
zombies. This result is a robust feature of this type of model. In particular, the same
qualitative prediction would hold even if we had not suppressed the dynamics and had
allowed persistence in the productivity shocks and a gap between entry costs and the
productivity advantage of new firms. Intuitively, this is the case because the adverse
shock requires the labor market to clear with fewer people employed. If destruction is
suppressed, then the labor market clearing can only occur if job creation drops
precipitously.
As Caballero and Hammour (1998, 2000) emphasize, both this “sclerosis” — the
preservation of production units that would not be saved without the banks’ subsidies—
and the associated “scrambling” — the retention of firms that are less productive than
some of those that do not enter due to the congestion caused by the zombies – are robust
implications of models of creative destruction when there are frictions against destruction.
Compared with a normally functioning economy, we have shown the existence of
zombies softens a negative shock’s impact on destruction and exacerbates its impact on
creation. What is the net effect on the number of firms? Differentiating (15) with respect
to S:

∂N 0z+ 1 1 ∂N 0+
= < =
.
∂S
3 2
∂S
That is, in response to a negative shock, N falls by less if there are zombies, which means
that in the presence of zombies the reduced destruction is not fully matched by the
additional drop in creation. It is easy to see that the expression (13) is greater than 1/3 for

22

any positive m0. This is another intuitive and robust result. This occurs because as job
creation falls, the marginal entrant’s productivity rises. This high productivity allows the
marginal entrant to operate despite the higher cost induced by (comparatively) larger N.
A final important prediction of the model is the existence of a gap in profitability
(net of entry costs) between the marginal entrant and the marginal incumbent when there
are zombies. 17 At impact, the destruction does not change, so that all the firms with
idiosyncratic productivity shocks above the old threshold (1/2) remain in the industry.
On the other hand, new entrants have to clear a higher threshold to compensate for the
negative shock in S (which is only partially offset by the lower congestion following the
negative shock). As a result, the profitability of the marginal entrant is inefficiently
higher than that of the marginal incumbent. The difference (normalized by the existing
state of technology) is given by:
2
⎡⎛ S 1 ⎞
⎤ 1
⎢⎜⎝ 3 + 2 ⎟⎠ − S ⎥ − 2 = − 3 S > 0 .
⎣
⎦
In summary, the model makes two robust predictions.

The first is that the

presence of zombies distorts the normal creation and destruction patterns to force larger
creation adjustments following shocks to costs, productivity or profits. Second, this
distortion depresses productivity by preserving inefficient units at the expense of more
productive potential entrants.

Accordingly, productivity will be lower when there are

more zombies and as the zombies become more prevalent they will generate larger and
larger distortions for the non-zombies.
Finally, note that for simplicity we have illustrated the main effects of zombies in
the case of a permanent recession. However these effects carry over to temporary
recessions as well. The main mechanism through which zombies hurt creation and
productivity is through congestion. It is apparent that if the recession were to end, then
the presence of congesting zombies would yield a recovery that is less vigorous in terms

17

Note that a wedge like this one also arises when there is a credit constraint on potential entrants but not
on incumbents. In our model depressed entry results from the congestion due to zombies, and the gap is due
to the subsidy to incumbents. Clearly, however, if the two mechanisms coexist they would reinforce each
other, as congestion would reduce the collateral value of potential entrants.

23

of creation and productivity growth. This weak recovery aspect is also a fairly general
implication of models of creation destruction with frictions in destruction.18

3.6. A Firm as a Collection of Projects

By re-interpreting a “production unit” in the model to be a “project” and defining
a “firm” as an entity that has many such projects (both existing and potential), we can use
the model to discuss expansions and contractions of large firms. This extension brings
the theoretical discussion closer to our empirical analysis in later sections.
Let us assume that the industry has a fixed number of firms, which is normalized
to be one.

Each firm has a mass mkt of incumbent projects, whose productivity

(normalized by the existing state of technology) is given by (2). Each firm has a mass 1/2
of potential new projects, whose productivity (normalized by the state of technology) is
given by (3). Each project is hit by an idiosyncratic shock every period, so each firm
decides which incumbent projects to terminate and which new projects to start.
A zombie firm is defined to be a firm that does not adjust the project selection
rules when a (negative) shock hits the industry, consistent with the discussion above. A
non-zombie firm adjusts the project selection rules following the shock. The operating
cost (normalized by the state of technology) of the firm is assumed is, as before, a
function of the total amount of projects operated by all the firms in the industry at time t,
Nt. Letting λ be the proportion of non-zombie firms in the industry and assuming all
zombies (and non-zombies) are homogeneous within the group in terms of the
distribution of potential projects they can take, the total number of projects actually taken
by all the firms is:

N t = λ N tnz + (1 − λ ) N tz ,

18

(16)

See, e.g., Caballero (2007).

24

where N tz is the total number of projects operated by a (representative) zombie firm and
N tnz is the total number of projects operated by a (representative) non-zombie firm.
Assuming the same linear functional form for p(N) and the same notation for the
shock S as in the previous sections, a non-zombie firm starts all the new projects with
idiosyncratic productivity shock greater than N-S and terminates all the incumbent
projects with idiosyncratic productivity shock less than N-S. Thus, destruction (the
number of incumbent projects terminated) by non-zombies, denoted by Dtnz is:
Dtnz = mtnz ( N t − S ) ,

(17)

where mtnz is the number of incumbent projects for a non-zombie at the beginning of
period t. Similarly, creation (the number of new projects implemented) by non-zombies,
denoted by H tnz is:

H tnz =

1
(1 + S − N t )
2

(18)

The total number of projects taken by non-zombie firms in period t is:
N tnz = mtnz + H tnz − Dtnz

(19)

Solving the equations (16) through (19) for a given N tz , which by assumption is
insensitive to changes in S,

N tnz =

1/ 2 + mtnz
⎡1 + S − (1 − λ ) N tz ⎤⎦
nz ⎣
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mt )

(20)

Dtnz =

⎡ ⎛1
⎤
mtnz
⎧ ⎛1
⎞
⎞ ⎫
λ + mtnz ⎟ − S − ⎨λ ⎜ + mtnz ⎟ − 1⎬ (1 − λ ) N tz ⎥
nz ⎢ ⎜
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mt ) ⎣ ⎝ 2
⎠
⎠ ⎭
⎩ ⎝2
⎦

(21)

25

H tnz =

1
⎡⎣1 + S − (1 − λ ) N tz ⎤⎦
nz
2 1 + λ (1/ 2 + mt )

(

(22)

)

By differentiating (20), (21), and (22), it is straightforward to see:
∂Dtnz
mtnz
=−
<0
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz )
∂S
∂H tnz
1/ 2
=
>0
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz )
∂S
1/ 2 + mtnz
∂N tnz
=
>0
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz )
∂S

Thus, following a negative profitability shock, non-zombie firms increase destruction,
reduce creation, and contract. Moreover, the size of these adjustments is increasing in the
number of zombies in the industry. This can be shown by differentiating the derivatives
above with respect to λ.
∂ 2 Dtnz
mtnz (1/ 2 + mtnz )
=
>0
∂S ∂λ ⎡1 + λ (1/ 2 + m nz ) ⎤ 2
t
⎣
⎦
2
nz
nz
∂ Ht
(1/ 2 + mt )
=−
<0
2
∂S ∂λ
2 ⎡⎣1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz ) ⎤⎦
∂ 2 N tnz
(1/ 2 + mtnz ) 2
=−
<0
2
∂S ∂λ
⎡⎣1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz ) ⎤⎦

(23)

Having more zombies in the industry (smaller λ) increases the amount of adjustment
induced by a negative shock (negative S).
We can also study the productivity implications for non-zombies.

The

productivity (normalized by the state of technology) of the marginal incumbent project
kept by non-zombie firms is N t − S . Similarly, the productivity of the marginal new
project chosen by non-zombies is γ + N t − S . Thus, under the assumption of a uniform

26

distribution of idiosyncratic shock for projects, the average productivity of a non-zombie
firm, Vt, is:

Vt =

1 + N t − S γ H tnz
+
2
2 N tnz

(24)

Substituting (16), (20), and (22) into (24), yields:
1 + (1 − λ ) N tz + λ N tnz − S
γ
+
Vt =
2
2(1 + 2mtnz )
Thus,
∂Vt 1 ⎡ ∂N tnz ⎤
∂mtnz
γ
= ⎢λ
− 1⎥ −
nz 2
∂S 2 ⎣ ∂S
⎦ (1 + 2mt ) ∂S
∂mtnz
1
γ
=−
−
2 + λ (1 + 2mtnz ) (1 + 2mtnz ) 2 ∂S

(25)

Immediately after a negative profitability shock hits the industry, the second term of this
expression is zero, so that the average productivity of a non-zombie unambiguously goes
up.
Over time, a negative shock reduces the number of incumbent projects and
gradually increases the proportion of new (and more productive) projects relative to
incumbent projects. This further increases average productivity.

.

∂mtnz ∂N tnz−1
1/ 2 + mtnz−1
=
=
>0
∂S
∂S
1 + λ (1/ 2 + mtnz−1 )

Moreover, it is clear that both (negative) terms in (25) are increasing in λ. Thus, when
there are more zombies in the industry (smaller λ), the size of the productivity gap
increases.

27

From this analysis we conclude that allowing for multi-project firms does not
change the baseline predictions regarding creation, destruction or productivity.

We

explored further extensions of the model that allowed for heterogeneity in the
productivity levels but found that there were no robust predictions about how
heterogeneity might alter these predictions. In particular, if we model heterogeneity as a
firm specific factor that affects the level of productivity (i.e. adding a firm-specific
constant to equations (2) and (3)), then there are no changes to our main predictions
regarding the effects of increased zombie prevalence.

4. The effect of zombies on job creation, destruction and productivity
We use the two robust predictions of the model to guide our search for evidence
that the zombie problem has affected Japan’s economic performance significantly. We
begin by looking at aggregate cross-industry differences. In the next section, we study
firm-level data to characterize how the behavior of the non-zombie firms has been altered
by the presence of zombie competitors.
Because our zombie indices exist from 1981 onwards, we start by calculating the
average of the crisp zombie index for each industry from then until 1993 and compare
that to the average for the late 1990s (1996-2002). We use the differences in these two
averages to correct for possible biases in the level of zombie index and any industryspecific effects. It makes little difference as to how we define the pre-zombie period. In
particular, the results we show would be very similar if we took the normal (non-zombie)
period to be 1981 to 1990, or 1990 to 1993. Our evidence consists of relating creation,
destruction, and productivity data to this change in the zombie index, in order to see if
these measures are more distorted in the industries where zombie prevalence has
increased the most.
Our most direct evidence on this point is in Figure 5, which plots the rate of job
creation and destruction against the change in the zombie index. We use the job flow
measures constructed by Genda et al. (2003) as proxies for the concepts of entry and exit
in our model.

Their measures are based on The Survey of Employment Trends,

conducted by the Ministry of Welfare and Labor biannually on a large sample of

28

establishments that employ five or more regular workers.

The series used for our

analysis include not only the job creation (destruction) at the establishments that were
included in the survey in both at the beginning and at the end of the year, but also the
estimated job creation (and destruction) by new entrants (and the establishments that
exited). To control for the industry specific effects in job creation/destruction, we look at
the difference between the average job creation (destruction) rate for the 1996-2000
period and the average for the 1991-1993 period. We are restricted to using the 1991—
93 data as a control because figures of Genda et al. start only in 1991 and we stop in 2000
because that is the last year they cover.
The top of Figure 5 shows that the job destruction rate in the late 1990s increased
from that in the early 1990s in every industry, as we would expect to see following an
unfavorable shock to the economy.19 More importantly, the graph shows that the surge in
destruction was smaller in the industries where more zombies appeared. Thus, as we
expected, the presence of zombies slows down job destruction.
The second panel of Figure 5 shows that the presence of zombies depresses job
creation.

Creation declined more in the industries that experienced sharper zombie

growth.

In manufacturing, which suffered the least from the zombie problem, job

creation hardly changed from the early 1990s to the late 1990s. In sharp contrast, job
creation exhibits extensive declines in non-manufacturing sectors, particularly in the
construction sector.
Of course not all sectors were equally affected by the Japanese crash in asset
prices and the slowdown that followed it. For example, construction, having benefited
disproportionately from the boom years, probably also was hit by the largest recessionary
shock during the 1990s. A large shock naturally raises job destruction and depresses job
creation further. Despite this source of (for us, unobserved) heterogeneity, the general
patterns we expected from job flows hold. One way of controlling for the size of the
shock is by checking whether in more zombie-affected sectors, the relative adjustment
through job creation is larger. In this metric, it is quite clear from Figure 5 that job
19

Our simple model assumes that the job destruction rate stays the same even after a negative shock in a
zombie industry. It is straightforward to relax this by assuming, for example, that 90% of zombies are
rescued by banks. None of the major results would change. Job destruction would rise following a
negative shock but not as much as it would under the normal environment.

29

creation has borne a much larger share of the adjustment in construction than in
manufacturing.
Our evidence on productivity distortions caused by the interest rate subsidies is
given in Figure 6. In the model, zombies are the low productivity units that would exit
the market in the absence of help from the banks. Their presence lowers the industry’s
average productivity both directly by continuing to operate and indirectly by deterring
entry of more productive firms. The productivity data here are from Miyagawa, Ito and
Harada (2004) who study productivity growth in 22 industries. Figure 6, which plots the
average growth of the total factor productivity (TFP) from 1990 to 2000 against the
change in the crisp zombie index, shows that the data are consistent with the model’s
implication: the regression line in the figure confirms the visual impression that industries
where zombies became more important were the ones where TFP growth was worst.20
As mentioned in the introduction to the paper, the role of zombie firms in
depressing

productivity is a critical channel through which zombies can have longer-

lived aggregate affects. One potential concern with the causal interpretation of Figure 6
is that the zombie infestation was most pronounced outside of manufacturing and it is
possible that the lagging productivity of these industries is just a normal cyclical
phenomenon.
Figure 7 shows the (level of) TFP for the manufacturing sector and nonmanufacturing sector from 1980 through 2004.21 The data are taken from the EU Klems
project (http://www.euklems.net/) that is organized by the European Union and the
OECD to permit comparisons of productivity and other economic outcomes across
countries. We form the non-manufacturing series by weighting the reported valued
added TFP figures for Construction, Wholesale and Retail Trade, and Real Estate
Activities by their value added shares.22 The shaded areas of the graph show business
cycle downturns, defined as the period between a peak and the next official business
cycle trough (http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/stat/di/041112rdates.html).
20

Of course this correlation could arise because industries that had the worst shocks wound up with the
most zombies. We can disentangle these explanations by using firm-level data (see below).
21
Prior to 1980 manufacturing productivity growth in Japan was exceptionally high (presumably due to the
catching up of the Japanese economy). Hence, comparisons of manufacturing and non-manufacturing
productivity in the 1970s and 1960s are not informative about the issues that interest us.
22
In the KLEMS spreadsheet these series are codes F,G, and 70. The manufacturing series is code D.

30

We draw two general conclusions from Figure 7. First, as a rule productivity
growth in the non-manufacturing sectors is lower than in manufacturing. Second, during
the second half of our sample from (1991 through 2002) productivity growth slowed in
both manufacturing and non-manufacturing. The change is especially clear for recoveries
(periods between a trough and the next peak) when the need for vigorous creation is
depressed by the congestion caused by zombies: Productivity growth during the
recoveries in the 1990s is much weaker than in the 1980s.
More importantly for the zombie hypothesis is that the relative behavior of
manufacturing and non-manufacturing also has shifted during the 1990s. From the end of
the deep 1982 recession until the onset of the recession in 1991, manufacturing and nonmanufacturing productivity growth differed by 1.5 percent per year. The relative gap
widened substantially through the 1990s; for instance, during just the recovery periods of
1993-97 and 1999-2000, the gap was over 3.8 percentage points per year. This gap
pattern is consistent with the prevalence of zombies during the 1990s.

5. Firm-level zombie distortions
We read the evidence in the last section as showing that zombies are distorting
industry patterns of job creation and destruction, as well as productivity in the ways
suggested by the model. To test directly the model’s predictions, we next look at firmlevel data to see if the rising presence of zombies in the late 1990s had discernible effects
on healthy firms (which would suffer from the congestion created by the zombies).
The data we analyze are from the Nikkei Needs Financial dataset and are derived
from income statements and balance sheets for firms listed on the first and second
sections of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The sample runs from 1981 to 2002, and it
contains between 1,844 and 2,506 firms depending on the year. We concentrate on three
variables: employment growth (measured by the number of full-time employees), the
investment rate (defined as the ratio of investment in depreciable assets to beginning of
year depreciable assets measured at book value), and a crude productivity proxy
(computed as the log of sales minus 1/3 the log of capital minus 2/3 the log of

31

employment).23 In all the regressions reported below we dropped observations in the top
and bottom 2.5% of the distribution of the dependent variable.
The simplest regression that we study is:
Activityijt = δ1′D t +δ 2′D j + β nonz ijt + χ Z jt + ϕ nonz ijt *Z jt + ε ijt

(26)

where activity can be either the investment rate, the percentage change in employment, or
our productivity proxy, Dt is a set of annual dummy variables, Dj is a set of industry
dummy variables, nonzijt is the non-zombie dummy (defined to be one minus the zombie
indicator), and Zjt is the percentage of industry assets residing in zombie firms.
Because of the reduced form nature of both the regression equation and the
modeling of the subsidies to the zombies, we do not attempt to interpret most of the
coefficients in these regressions. For instance, we include the year dummies to allow for
unspecified aggregate shocks. Likewise, we can imagine that the zombies’ subsidies are
so large that they wind up investing more (or adding more workers) than the healthy
firms; so we do not propose to test the theory by looking at the estimates for β, the
coefficient on the non-zombie dummy. The one exception to this general principle is that
for the productivity specification the model clearly predicts that non-zombies will have
higher average productivity than zombies.
We instead focus on what we see as the novel prediction of the theory: that the
rising zombie congestion should harm the non-zombies. The prediction is most clearly
shown in (23), which shows the effects when we define each firm as a collection of
projects. The cross-derivatives in (23) show that when there are more zombies in the
industry, a negative shock leads to a larger increase in destruction, reduction in creation,
and reduction in the total number of projects carried out by the non-zombies. This
prediction suggests that φ should be negative in the investment and employment
regressions, and positive in the productivity specification.
23

In the model there is no distinction between capital and labor. As noted by an anonymous referee, if
subsidized interest rates bias zombies toward capital-intensive technologies, then congestion could be more
severe in the capital market than in the labor market. However, it is also possible that subsidized loans are
only meant to finance working capital, in which case the bias goes the other way around. We have no way
to distinguish between these possibilities in our data.

32

The second through fourth columns of Table 3 shows our estimates for equation
(26) for the crisp zombie index. We draw two main conclusions from this simple
specification. First, as predicted by the theory, increases in percentages of zombie firms
operating in an industry significantly reduces both investment and employment growth
for the healthy firms in the industry.24 Second, looking at column 4, the productivity gap
between zombies and non-zombies rises significantly as the percentage of zombies in an
industry rises. These findings are consistent with the main predictions of our model.
Note that for the investment (employment) specification one might normally expect that
as the percentage of sick firms in the industry rises, the healthy firms would have more
(relative to the sick ones) to gain from investing (expanding employment). Thus, under
normal (non-zombie) circumstances there would be good reasons to expect φ to be
positive rather than negative.
The main reason, other than ours, for finding a negative φ is if the zombie
percentage in the industry (for that year) is somehow standing in for the overall
(un)attractiveness of operating in the industry (for that year). To this potential objection
to our results we start by noting two things. First, our definition of zombies, by virtue of
only using interest rate payments, does not guarantee that growth opportunities are
necessarily bad just because the zombie percentage is high. Second, in order to be
consistent with our findings, the reaction to industry conditions must be different for
zombies and non-zombies. In particular, non-zombies must be more affected by an
industry downturn than zombies for φ to come out negative.
Nonetheless, we make several attempts to address this potential problem. Our
first alternative is to add industry-year dummies to equation (26), so that we estimate:25
Activityijt = δ3′D jt + β nonz ijt + ϕ nonz ijt *Z jt + w ijt

(27)

This specification controls for all the factors that affect all the firms in an industry in a
certain year. 26 Note that we cannot identify the coefficient on the industry zombie

24

We ran a similar regression using investment rates for US firms covered in the Compustat database
between 1995 and 2004. In this regression φ was insignificantly different from zero. The limited
information on debt structure in Compustat no doubt introduces noise in zombie assignments and we did
explore many alternatives to deal with this. But this result suggests to us that there is not a mechanical
reason to find that φ is significantly negative in this type of regression.
25
We thank two anonymous referees for suggesting this approach.

33

percentage anymore, but we can still estimate φ, which is the primary coefficient of
interest.27
Second, we seek to find other controls for business opportunities for the healthy
firms. Our main control to address this problem is to add current sales growth of each
firm to the regression specification. Thus, our second alternative specification is:
Activity ijt = δ3′D jt + β nonz ijt + ϕ nonz ijt *Z jt + θ sijt + v ijt

(28)

where sijt is the growth rate of sales and the other variables are defined as in the previous
two equations.28
The next three columns in Table 3 show that controlling for the full set of
interactions between industry and time dummies leads to modest changes in the
estimates; the estimate of φ for the employment growth is now only different from zero at
the six percent level of significance. These estimates suggest to us that unobserved timevarying industry-specific shocks are not driving the results.
The final three columns in the table show the results when sales growth is
included as additional control. For the investment specification, this type of accelerator
specification generally performs quite well in a-theoretic horse-races among competing
specifications (see Bernanke, Bohn and Reiss (1988)). We recognize that the inclusion
of sales growth in the employment and productivity specifications is questionable, but it
shows up as highly significant in those specifications as well (and it is hardly obvious
which other balance sheet or income statement variables would be better pretty proxies

26

For instance, if industry-specific policies by the government were time-varying this specification would
controll for the changes.
27
We could go further and add firm-fixed effects to control for all the factors that are not included in the
regression that are specific to each firm. However, if the zombie status of firms is persistent over time, this
approach loses much of the useful information Nonetheless, we estimated regression (27) controlling for
firm fixed-effects. Surprisingly, the estimate of φ continues to be negative and significant in the investment
and employment regressions. The results for the productivity regression change. The point estimate of φ is
now negative but it is not significantly different from zero.
28
We also allowed the coefficient on sales growth to differ for non-zombies, but the slope was never
different, so to save space we only report the estimates that impose the same coefficient for both types of
firms.

34

for potential growth opportunities).29 Controlling for sales growth raises the adjusted R2
for all three equations, and further reduces the estimate of φ for the employment
specification, so that it is only different from zero at 20 percent level of significance.
In Appendix 2, we report a long list of robustness exercises, including estimating
of (26), (27), and (28) using alternative definition of zombies, omitting marginal zombies,
as well as using different measures of minimum required interest rates in the construction
of zombie indicators. While the level of significance and some of the point estimates vary
across these multiple scenarios, the general flavor of the results does not.

More

specifically, the estimates for φ tend to be negative and consistently significant for the
investment regressions, negative and mostly significant for the employment regressions,
and positive and consistently significant for the productivity regressions.
In the remainder of our discussion we attempt to quantify the impact of zombie
firms on investment and employment growth of non-zombies. We focus on the five nonmanufacturing industries, where our asset weighted measures of zombies were
particularly high in the late 1990s. For a typical non-zombie firm in each of these
industries, we estimate how much more the non-zombie would have invested or increased
employment if there had not been so many zombies in the industry. We consider two
alternative low zombies scenarios. In “Case 1,” we assume that the zombie index stayed
at its average value from 1981 through 1992 for each industry and calculate how much
more a typical non-zombie firm would have invested (or employed) over the next ten
years. In “Case 2,” we assume that the zombie index for the industry was the same as
that for manufacturing for each year from 1993 to 2002. We calculate the cumulative
investment under these two scenarios and compare it to the typical amount of annual
investment (defined as the average of the median rates) during this period.

For

employment, we compare the cumulative decline attributable to the zombies with the
typical annual change over the period (again defined as the average of the median rates).
In all of these calculations we take the regression estimates based on the crisp zombie
29

As an anonymous referee pointed out, it is possible to derive an equation relating employment to past
sales as an optimizing choice in which a firm attempts to keep its labor sales ratio close to a desired level in
the presence of labor adjustment costs. In this case, employment growth depends on the lagged sales and
employment levels. We estimated the regressions of this type with lagged (log of) sales and lagged (log of)
the employment as additional variables (with or without sales growth) and found that the estimate of φ is
still negative and statistically significant.

35

indices in Table 2 using the first specification in the table, and ignore any feedback from
industry equilibrium considerations.
More specifically, the investment (or employment) is estimated to have been
higher than the actual level by ( χˆ + ϕˆ )( actual zombie index − alternative zombie index ) .
Noting the possibility that the industry zombie index may be proxying for unobservable
industry-year specific profitability shock, one can argue that this calculation
overestimates the pure impact of zombies by including the estimate of χ. To address this
concern, we also report ϕˆ ( actual zombie index − alternative zombie index ) , which would be
a lower bound for the pure zombie impact. Of course, all these estimates are subject to
substantial uncertainty and do not take into consideration general equilibrium effects, but
they are still informative and suggestive of the large negative impact of zombies.
Table 4 shows that both investment and employment growth in non-zombie firms
would have been higher in all these industries had there been less zombies. In some
industries, the difference is quite large. For example, for the typical non-zombie firm in
the wholesale industry the cumulative investment loss (compared with the hypothetical
case where the zombie index remained to be at its 1981-1992 average) was about 43.2%
of capital, which was more than 3.5 years worth of investment during this period. Even
the lower bound estimate that includes only the differential effects on non-zombies
(calculated from the coefficient estimate on the interaction term) shows the cumulative
loss of 17% of capital, which is still more than one year worth of investment.
The effects on employment growth are large as well.

For example, the

employment growth of a typical non-zombie real estate developer would have been
higher by 9.5 percentage points at the end of the period if the zombie percentage had not
risen (which can be compared to the average hiring in the industry of 0.62% per year).
Even the lower bound estimate shows that employment growth at a typical non-zombie in
the real estate industry would have been higher by more than 3 percentage points.

6. Final Remarks
Our mechanism has aspects of conventional credit crunch stories, but it is also
distinct. In our model, the essence of a credit crunch acts as a reduced form profit shock.
Thus, if a pure contraction in credit availability was all that was going on, the economy
36

would be expected to behave like the normal benchmark case we analyze, with a rise in
destruction and a fall in creation. Instead, the data show that destruction falls more in the
sectors with more zombies, suggesting there is more than a simple credit crunch story at
work. 30
At the same time, we do not dispute the observation that credit availability was
likely to have fluctuated in the wake of the asset price collapse. Accordingly, it is not
surprising that studies such as Kitasaka and Ogawa (2000) find evidence of a classic
credit crunch.
Rather than positing and trying to test between more complicated versions of the
zombie and credit-crunch hypotheses, we think it is more important to recognize that
these mechanisms are fundamentally complementary. If there were financial frictions
then the zombie congestion would exacerbate them by lowering collateral values (even
for healthy firms). Thus, we see the spillover effects of the zombies as being the most
important to emphasize.
One key characteristic of our mechanism is that zombies create on-going
distortions that lower job creation and industry productivity. A straightforward extension
of the model would make long-run productivity growth endogenous. In this case the
present value of the costs due to the suppression of restructuring generated by continuing
forbearance with the zombies would greatly exceed calculation based only on the direct
costs of subsidies.
While our model is not structural enough to provide an analysis of optimal
government regulation, or to assess whether the costs in terms of productivity loss were
outweighed by the benefits of reduced unemployment, we argue that Japanese regulators
may have failed to recognize the large costs of allowing zombies to continue operating
during the episode. For example, the capital injections given to Japanese banks in the
late 1990s did not recapitalize the banks sufficiently so that they no longer had an
30

For example, one may argue that a credit crunch could depress creation particularly if it hits small and
young firms. However, these firms are not the typical ones in our sample of publicly traded firms.
Moreover, we do not observe the spike in job destruction that would accompany a credit crunch that afflicts
small firms disproportionately. Finally, if we assume that smaller firms’ main credit source is from banks,
then the observation that the distortions are bigger when there are more zombies in the same industry,
would require a very special pattern of lending. The banks would have to be financing more small firms in
precisely the industries where the zombies became most important. We are unaware of any evidence
suggesting that this was the case.

37

incentive to evergreen.

The forgone benefits that would have accrued had Japan

returned at that point to having a normally functioning economy could have been large
enough to justify a very generous transition policy package to the displaced workers that
would have been released if the zombies were shuttered.31
Finally, our description of the Japanese experience is similar to the diagnosis that
has been used to describe the early phases of the transition of many former socialist
economies to become market-oriented. In these economies the depressing effects on the
private sector of the continued operation of state-owned enterprises (typically funded by
state owned banks) is often noted; discussions of the situation in China in the 2000s
would be the latest of these examples. Also, note that the key to our mechanism is lack
of restructuring, which also may be caused by legal bankruptcy procedures that protect
debtors rather than by banks’ behavior. For example, in the U.S. airline industry it is
routinely asserted that the industry has been plagued because unprofitable carriers go
bankrupt, yet they fail to exit the industry (see Wessel and Carey (2005)). These cases
suggest that the mechanism that we have sketched is not unique to Japan.32

31

The same reasoning applies to the question of whether the lack of liquidations in the U.S. airline industry
raised or lowered the taxpayers’ costs of rationalizing the industry.
32
See Caballero (2007) for a discussion of different models and manifestations of sclerosis in
macroeconomics.

38

References
Ahearne, Alan G., and Naoki Shinada, 2004, “Zombie Firms and Economic Stagnation in
Japan,” paper presented at the conference “Macro/Financial Issues and International
Economic Relations: Policy Options for Japan and the United States” at University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, October 22-23, 2004.
Bernanke, Ben S., Bohn, Henning, and Peter C. Reiss, 1988, “Alternative Non-Nested
Specification Tests of Time Series Investment Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 37(2),
March, pp. 293-326.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 2007, Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring, Yrjo
Jahnsson Lecture, forthcoming MIT Press.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, 1998, "The Macroeconomics of
Specificity," Journal of Political Economy, 106(4), pp. 724-767.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, 2000, “Creative Destruction and
Development: Institutions, Crises, and Restructuring,” Annual World Bank Conference
on Development Economics 2000, pp. 213-241
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, 2005, ``The Cost of Recessions
Revisited: A Reverse Liquidationist View,’’ Review of Economic Studies, 72, 313-341.
Fukao, Kyoji and Hyeog Ug Kwon (2006). “Why Did Japan’s TFP Growth Slow Down
in the Lost Decade? An Empirical Analysis Based on Firm-Level Data of Manufacturing
Firms,” Japanese Economic Review, 57(2), 195-228.
Fukao, Mitsuhiro, 2000, Kin’yū Fukyō no Jisshō Bunseki (Empirical Analyses of
Financial Recession), Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha, (in Japanese).

39

Genda, Yuji, Hiroshi Teruyama, Soichi Ohta, Ryo Kanbayashi, Mamiko Ishihara, Yuji
Senuma, Kazuhiro Sasaki, Kentaro Abe, Takayuki Kusajima, and Taku Morifuji, 2003,
“Koyō Sōshutsu to Shitugyō ni kansuru Jisshō Kenkyū” (Job Creation and
Unemployment: Empirical Analysis) Keizai Kenkyu, No.168, ESRI (Economic and
Social Research Institute), Cabinet Office (Japanese Government), (in Japanese).
Guner, Nezih, Ventura, Gustavo, and Xu Yi, 2004, “Macroeconomic Implications of
Restrictions on Size”, working paper, Pennsylvania State University.
Hamao, Yasushi, Mei, Jianping, and Yexiao Xu, forthcoming, “Unique Symptoms of
Japanese Stagnation: An Equity Market Perspective,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking.
Hoshi, Takeo, 2000, “Naze Nihon wa Ryūdōsei no Wana kara Nogarerareainoka? (Why
is the Japanese Economy Unable to Get Out of a Liquidity Trap?)” in Mitsuhiro Fukao
and Hiroshi Yoshikawa eds. Zero Kinri to Nihon Keizai (Zero Interest Rate and the
Japanese Economy), Tokyo Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha, pp. 233-266, (in Japanese).
Hoshi, Takeo, 2006, “Economics of the Living Dead”, Japanese Economic Review, 57(1),
pp. 30-49.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K Kashyap, 2001, Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan,
MIT Press: Cambridge.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K Kashyap, 2004, “Japan’s Financial Crisis and Economic
Stagnation” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), Winter 2004, pp. 3-26.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K Kashyap, 2005, “Solutions to Japan’s Banking Problems: What
Might Work and What Definitely Will Fail,” in Takatoshi Ito, Hugh Patrick, and David E.
Weinstein (Eds.) Reviving Japan’s Economy: Problems and Prescriptions. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp.147-195.

40

Hosono, Kaoru, and Masaya Sakuragawa, 2003, “Soft Budget Problems in the Japanese
Credit Market,” Nagoya City University Discussion Papers in Economics No.345.
Ito, Takatoshi and Yuri N. Sasaki, 2002, “Impacts of the Basle Capital Standard on
Japanese Banks’ Behavior,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 16, pp.
372-397.
Jerram, Richard, 2004, “Banks still not reflating”, ING Financial Markets, June 2, 2004.
Kim, Se-Jik, 2004, “Macro Effects of Corporate Restructuring in Japan”, International
Monetary Fund, working paper.
Kitasaka, Shin-Ichi and Kazuo Ogawa, 2000, "Bank Lending in Japan: Its Determinants
and Macroeconomic Implications," in Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial
System, eds. Hoshi,T. and H.Patrick, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp.159-199.
Miyagawa, Tsutomu, Ito, Yukiko and Nobuyuki Harada, 2004, “The IT revolution and
productivity growth in Japan”, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
18(3), pp. 362-389.
Nakakuki, Masayuki, Akira Otani, and Shigenori Shiratsuka, 2004, “Distortions in Factor
Markets and Structural Adjustments in the Economy”, Bank of Japan Discussion Paper
No. 2004-E-4.
Nguyen, Hung T., and Elbert A. Walker, 2006, A First Course in Fuzzy Logic, 3rd edition.
Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall.
Nishimura, Kiyohiko, Takanobu Nakajima, and Kozo Kiyota, 2005, “Does the Natural
Selection Mechanism Still Work in Severe Recessions? Examination of the Japanese
Economy in the 1990s,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 58, 53-78.

41

Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren, 2005, “Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the
Misallocation of Credit in Japan”, American Economic Review, 95(4), pp. 1144-1166.
Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, 2003, “Policy Distortions and Aggregate
Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants”, working paper, Arizona State University.
Sakai, Koji, Iichiro Uesugi, and Tsutomu Watanabe, 2005, “Firm Age and the Evolution
of Borrowing Costs: Evidence from Japanese Small Firms,” RIETI Discussion Paper 05E-026.
Sakuragawa, Masaya, 2002, Kin’yū Kiki no Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis of
Financial Crisis), Tokyo: Univeristy of Tokyo Press, (in Japanese).
Sasaki, Yuri, 2004, “Japanese Banks’ Behavior under the Basle Capital Standards,
mimeo, Meiji Gakuin University.
Schaede, Ulrike, 2005, “The ‘Middle Risk Gap’ and Financial System Reform: Small
Firm Financing in Japan,” Monetary and Economic Studies, 23 (1), pp.149-176.
Sekine, Toshitaka, Kobayashi, Keiichiro, and Yumi Saita, 2003, “Forbearance Lending:
The Case of Japanese Firms”, Monetary and Economic Studies, 21(2), pp. 69-91.
Smith, David C., 2003, “Loans to Japanese Borrowers”, Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies, 17(3), pp. 283-304.
Tett, Gillian, 2003, Saving the Sun : A Wall Street Gamble to Rescue Japan from Its
Trillion-Dollar Meltdown, Harper-Collins Business.
Tett, Gillian and David Ibison. 2001. “Tokyo ‘May Have to Support Banks’.” Financial
Times, September 14.

42

Wessel, David and Sarah Carey, 2005, “For U.S. Airlines, a Shakeout Runs Into Heavy
Turbulence”, Wall Street Journal, September 19.
White, Halbert, 1980, “A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariace Matrix Estimator and
a Direct Test for Heteroscedasticity,” Econometrica, 48, 817-838.

43

Appendix 1

The variable R* plays a critical role in our analysis. In this appendix we provide
some additional details on the construction of this variable and the other data used in the
analysis.
In constructing R* our goal is to produce a plausible lower bound for what firms
might pay to borrow. For the portion of the interest payments coming from short term
bank loans, which accounts for about 40% to 45% of total lending in our sample, we
believe that this is straightforward because almost no loans are made at rates below the
prime rate (once we take into account all the origination and other fees). Thus, we view
the use of the short term prime rate as relatively uncontroversial.33
Ideally, we would find an equally conservative assumption for handling long-term
loans. It is quite likely that interest payment on a new long-term loan would be above the
prime rate at the time the loan is originated. Unfortunately, the available data on longterm bank debt gives just the stock outstanding without information on the exact maturity
of the loans. Thus, we assume that each firm’s long term loans have an average maturity
of 2.5 years and with one-fifth of them having been originated in each year for five years.
Five years corresponds to the average maturity of bank loans at the time of origination in
the dataset of Smith (2003). This assumption implies that the right interest rate is an
equally weighted average of the last five years of the long-term prime rates. Thus, we
calculate the minimum required interest payment on the long-term loans by multiplying
the outstanding long-term loans of all maturities with the five year average of the longterm prime rates.
Turning to the non-bank financing, we know that during the 1990s, roughly 40%
of interest paying debt was bonds and about 3% was commercial paper. Our measure of
the required payment ignores the interest payments for commercial paper. Given the
limited importance of commercial paper financing and the low interest rates on the
commercial paper for the 1990s, this is not likely to cause any serious problems for our
analysis.
33

As alternative we instead computed a required rate that imposed a mark up over the London Interbank
Borrowing (LIBOR) rate based on the average spreads reported in Smith (2003). This approach produced
similar results regarding the numbers of firms with negative interest rate gaps.

44

For the remaining debt we assume that it was financed as advantageously as
possible. Specifically, we assume that bond financing is done with CBs (which by their
nature have lower yields) and that firms were always able to time the issues so that the
rate is the lowest within the last five years. Implicitly, this presumes that the firms have
perfect foresight and refinance their bonds every time there is a local trough in interest
rates. This assumption is almost surely understating the required payments on corporate
debt. For instance, from 1996 onwards this imputation procedure assumes that all bond
financing is done at a zero interest rate. By assuming very low required interest rates on
bonds, the approach reduces the risk of our misclassifying credit worthy companies that
enjoy extreme low bond rates in the public market as zombies. On the other hand, the
approach increases the risk of failing to identify the zombies that pay interests on the
bonds they issued in the past. Thus, we can be confident that any firms that we label as
zombies must be getting very favorable interest rates from their banks. Put differently, by
assuming access to such low bond financing rates our classification scheme picks out
only the most egregious zombies that receive massive help from their banks.
Besides this baseline procedure we also explored several approaches.

One

alternative centered on estimating the maturity structure of each firm each year. Here we
just describe the calculation for long-term bank borrowing. We estimate the maturity
structure of bonds in the same way.
We observe the total long-term bank borrowing for firm i at the end of accounting
year t ( BLit ) and the long-term bank borrowing that comes due within 1 year ( BL1it ). Let
NBLit be the amount of new long-term bank loans that the firm i takes in during year t.
We use the following equation to estimate NBLit :
NBLit = max { BLit − BLit −1 + BL1it −1 , 0}

Let BP (n)it denote the amount of long-term bank loans to firm i that was given in year tn and still outstanding at the end of t. We assume the maximum maturity of long-term
bank loans to be 10 years. If NBL is available for all years in the past 10 years, we can
estimate BP(n) recursively as follows.

45

BP(0)it −1 = min { NBLit −1 , max { BLit −1 , 0}}
n −1
⎧
⎧
⎫⎫
BP(n)it −1 = min ⎨ NBLit − n −1 , max ⎨ BLit −1 − ∑ BP(k )it −1 , 0 ⎬⎬ (n = 1, 2,L ,8)
k =0
⎩
⎭⎭
⎩
8
⎧
⎫
BP (9)it −1 = max ⎨ BLit −1 − ∑ BP (k )it −1 , 0 ⎬
k =0
⎩
⎭

If NBLit − n −1 is not available for n ≥ n*, we stop the iteration at n = n* and assume that
the remaining borrowings (if any) are uniformly distributed across different maturities.
Formally, this implies:
BP(0)it −1 = min { NBLit −1 , max { BLit −1 , 0}}
n −1
⎧
⎧
⎫⎫
BP(n)it −1 = min ⎨ NBLit − n −1 , max ⎨ BLit −1 − ∑ BP(k )it −1 , 0 ⎬⎬ (n < n*)
k =0
⎩
⎭⎭
⎩
n*−1
⎧
⎫
BL
−
⎪⎪ it −1 ∑ BP(k )it −1 ⎪⎪
k =0
BP(n)it −1 = max ⎨
, 0 ⎬ (n ≥ n*)
10
− n*
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩
⎪⎭

The associated regression results are shown in Table A-4 (that we discuss in Appendix 2).
For bonds, we also adopted an extremely conservative approach that assumes the
minimum required interest rate for bonds was zero for the entire sample period. This
approach guarantees that any firms with a negative interest rate gap must be receiving
unusually low interest rates on their bank borrowing. The regressions associated with
this classification scheme are shown in Table A-5 (and are almost identical to those
shown in Table 2).
The data for prime bank loan rates are taken from the Bank of Japan web site
(http://www.boj.or.jp/en/stat/stat_f.htm). The subscribers’ yields for convertible bonds
are collected from various issues of Kin’yu Nenpo (Annual Report on Finance) published
by the Ministry of Finance.
The remaining data we use for the regression analyses are taken from the Nikkei
Needs Corporate Financial Database. The data are annual, so for instance when we refer
to 1993 data they are from a firm’s balance sheet and income statement for the
accounting year that ended between January and December of 1993. The basic properties
for sample as of 1993 are shown in Table A-6.

46

Roughly 2/3 of the sample assets are in manufacturing firms.

Among

manufacturing industries the coverage of the sample is consistent and fairly high. This is
formalized in columns 4 and 5 that compare assets (and sales) for the different industries
to their economy-wide counterparts (that are computed from the Ministry of Finance’s
Statistical Survey of Incorporated Businesses (Hōjin Kigyō Tōkei Chōsa)).

The

comparison is not exact because the industry classification system used by the MOF
Survey differs from the one used in the Nikkei Database. Among the industries in Table
A-6, the MOF Survey does not separately identify medical products, rubber products,
shipbuilding, and other transportation equipment (i.e. the portion excluding ships and
motor vehicles).
The industry composition for manufacturing firms in our sample is also
relatively stable over time. For instance, in terms of the percentage of sample assets in
the various industries there are virtually no changes between 1993 and 2001; the only
cases where the shares differed by more than one percentage point were electric
machinery (which gained about 1.75 percentage points and steel which lost about 1.3
percentage points). Between 1981 and 1993 many of the heavy industries (e.g. chemicals,
petroleum and coal, non-ferrous metal products, non-electrical machinery, and
shipbuilding) shrank and electrical machinery gained over three percentage points.
The coverage is less complete for non-manufacturing firms (see again columns 4
and 5). In the real estate and services industries, our sample firms covered only 8% and
6% respectively of the whole industry in 1993, reflecting the many (unlisted) firms in
those industries that are excluded from our analysis.
As of 1981, the percentage of the sample assets in these firms stood at roughly
25 percent, and that climbed to about 1/3 by 1993, with all industries except wholesaling
gaining at least one percentage point. From 1993 to 2001, construction firms percentage
of sample assets shrunk by 3.5 percentage points and retail and service firm picked up
most of the share.

47

Appendix 2

We checked the robustness of the significance of the estimated φ’s to several
alternative measures of the required minimum interest rate r* and zombie indices. Table
A-1 repeats the regressions from Table 3, using the fuzzy zombie indices with (d1, d2) =
(0, 50bp) and (d1, d2) = (-25bp, 75bp). We draw three conclusions from this table. First,
the estimates of φ are smaller than those in Table 3. However, part of the difference can
be explained by the fact that the industry zombie percentages are larger when we use the
fuzzy zombie measures than when we use the crisp measures. Second, and probably
related, for the estimates of (26), the statistical significance of the estimates of φ is
similar to those reported in Table 3; in other words, the declines in the size of the
coefficients are accompanied by smaller standard errors, so that the t-statistics are similar.
Adding sales growth to these regressions lowers the statistical significance of the
estimates of φ. The estimated signs remain negative for employment and investment and
positive for productivity but the coefficient for employment growth is no longer
significant.
We also estimated the regressions dropping the observations with xit between d1
and d2 entirely. Table A-2 shows the results. The estimates of φ in the investment and
employment growth equations are again negative and statistically significant in almost all
the cases. Indeed, the coefficients are often larger when we drop the observations with xit
close to zero. For the productivity proxy, however, the estimated gap between the
zombies and non-zombies (β in equation (26)) rises substantially, while the estimated
value of φ falls and becomes insignificant.
We also re-estimated equation (26) and (27) for different zombie definitions
shown in Table 2. The first panel in Table A-3 summarizes these results by reporting the
estimates of φ in equation (26), and the second panel shows the equation (27) estimates.
As a benchmark, the first row of estimates in each panel repeats the results from Tables 3
and A-1 for the baseline crisp and fuzzy definitions. Because the different zombie
definitions change the estimated levels of zombies, we do not expect the point estimates
for these interaction terms to be the same across specifications; the more conservative
definitions would likely yield higher coefficients than the more liberal definitions.

48

Accordingly, we focus more on the statistical significance of the results, rather than the
magnitudes of the estimates.
The most striking pattern in the table is in the last two rows of each panel. These
alternatives use more liberal definitions of which firms should be considered as zombies.
For employment and productivity, especially for the fuzzy definitions, the significance of
the estimates rises substantially. This suggests to us that the baseline definitions are too
restrictive and may miss many zombies.
The other noticeable pattern is that automatically excluding firms with BBB rated
bonds leads to higher estimated standard errors.

With this definition the estimated

significance of φ is lower in almost all cases. For these specifications the estimates for
employment are typically not significant for either the crisp or fuzzy definitions. The
definitions that exclude the firms with A rated bonds are somewhat similar, but the
differences with the baseline specifications are much less pronounced.
A third observation is that the significance levels using the full set of industrytime dummies (equation (27) estimates) are typically lower than for baseline equation
(26) estimates. The difference is most clearly seen for the employment regressions, but
the same pattern seems to hold for the productivity and investment specifications.
Beyond these observations, we see no obvious patterns. For some definitions, the
significance rises, but in others it drops.
Table A-4 shows the results using more detailed estimation of the maturity
structure for long-term borrowings and bonds discussed in Appendix 1. The coefficient
estimates of φ are similar (in size and statistical significance) to those in Table 3 in all the
specifications.
Finally, Table A-5 shows the regressions under alternative assumption that the
minimum required interest rate on bonds is zero. The results are again similar to those in
Table 3, although for the employment specification with full interactions of time and year
dummies, the estimate of φ is insignificant.
All in all, the results of these robustness exercises confirm the same broad
patterns as in Table 3. The precision of some of our estimates suffer as we modify the
measures of zombies to address different measurement and classification errors. However,

49

the statistical significance of the estimates of φ for the investment and the productivity
specifications is especially robust.

50

Table 1
Search Results For News Articles Regarding Restructured Companies
Total Hits for January 1990 through May 2004
Of which, related to private sector companies in Japan
Clear description of the content of “financial assistance”
(excludes duplicate articles on the same case)
• New loans
• Interest concessions （金利減免）
• Purchase of new shares （新株引き受け）
• Debt-Equity swaps
• Debt forgiveness （債権放棄）
• Moratorium on loan principle （元本支払猶予）
• Moratorium on interest payments （利子支払猶予）

1,196
1,085
120
19
36
29
26
44
11
5

Notes: Search words: “Financial assistance” AND (“Management Reconstruction Plan” OR
(“Corporation” and “Reconstruction”)); actual phrases were 金融支援 AND (経営再建計画 OR
(企業 AND 再建)).
Source: Nikkei Telecom 21.

51

Table 2
Correlation between Crisp Asset-weighted Zombie Percentage and the Alternatives
All firms
2002
Manufac- ConstrucReal
Trade
Services
Zombie%
turing
tion
Estate
Z01
1.0000
14.96%
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Z02
0.9900
21.40%
0.9787
0.9580
0.8648
0.9839
0.9784
Z03
0.9910
22.42%
0.9768
0.9529
0.8554
0.9860
0.9816
ZA01
0.9985
13.34%
0.9953
0.9785
0.9997
0.9977
0.9807
ZA02
0.9867
10.65%
0.9807
0.9430
0.9975
0.9892
0.9673
ZA03
0.9810
14.13%
0.9734
0.9675
0.9204
0.9774
0.9508
ZA04
0.9607
14.14%
0.9456
0.9474
0.8067
0.9548
0.8532
ZA05
0.9851
19.79%
0.9645
0.9179
0.8575
0.9756
0.9576
ZA06
0.9748
17.09%
0.9445
0.8674
0.8620
0.9658
0.9566
ZA07
0.9743
20.62%
0.9583
0.9387
0.8639
0.9726
0.9275
ZA08
0.9467
20.50%
0.9225
0.9193
0.7770
0.9575
0.8255
ZA09
0.9875
22.17%
0.9636
0.9548
0.8532
0.9823
0.9683
ZA10
0.9855
20.70%
0.9595
0.9550
0.8529
0.9793
0.9643
ZA11
0.9725
21.08%
0.9516
0.9372
0.8442
0.9746
0.9303
ZA12
0.9434
21.01%
0.9150
0.9161
0.7438
0.9592
0.8300
ZA13
0.9796
17.42%
0.9764
0.9752
0.8740
0.9742
0.9454
ZA14
0.9692
19.72%
0.9602
0.9691
0.7853
0.9613
0.8723
ZA15
0.9707
24.68%
0.9522
0.9358
0.7881
0.9659
0.9058
ZA16
0.9485
27.62%
0.9142
0.9210
0.7481
0.9584
0.8041
ZA17
0.9676
25.16%
0.9463
0.9416
0.7508
0.9706
0.9163
ZA18
0.9429
28.21%
0.9097
0.9291
0.6640
0.9625
0.8321
Note: The first column shows the (alternative) zombie definition. The column “2002 Zombie%” reports the 2002
(asset weighted) zombie percentage for all firms calculated using the various definitions. The other columns show
the correlation coefficient between the zombie indicator calculated using the various definitions and the baseline
crisp zombie indicator (Z01) for the sample of firms indicated in the header row.
(Alternative) Definitions:
Z01
Baseline crisp zombie definition (d1, d2) = (0,0)
Z02
Baseline fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005)
Z03
Baseline fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075)
ZA01 Crisp zombie excluding firms with bonds rated A or above
ZA02 Crisp zombie excluding firms with bonds rated BBB or above
ZA03 Crisp zombie 2-year average of years t and t-1
ZA04 Crisp zombie 3-year average of years t, t-1 and t-2
ZA05 Fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005) excluding firms with bonds rated A or above
ZA06 Fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005) excluding firms with bonds rated BBB or above
ZA07 Fuzzy zombie 2-year average of years t and t-1 with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005)
ZA08 Fuzzy zombie 3-year average of years t, t-1 and t-2 with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005)
ZA09 Fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075) excluding firms with bonds rated A or above
ZA10 Fuzzy zombie with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075) excluding firms with bonds rated BBB or above
ZA11 Fuzzy zombie 2-year average of years t and t-1 with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075)
ZA12 Fuzzy zombie 3-year average of years t, t-1 and t-2 with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075)
ZA13 Crisp zombie 2-year maximum of years t and t-1
ZA14 Crisp zombie 3-year maximum of years t, t-1 and t-2
ZA15 Fuzzy zombie 2-year maximum of years t and t-1 with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005)
ZA16 Fuzzy zombie 3-year maximum of years t, t-1 and t-2 with (d1, d2) = (0, 0.005)
ZA17 Fuzzy zombie 2-year maximum of years t and t-1 with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075)
ZA18 Fuzzy zombie 3-year maximum of years t, t-1 and t-2 with (d1, d2) = (-0.0025, 0.0075)

52

Table 3
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
Using Baseline Zombie Estimates
Dependent Variable
Non-Zombie Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie *
Industry Zombie%
Sales growth

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales
– ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales
– ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales
– ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

0.0256
(0.0056)
-0.1370
(0.0376)
-0.0885
(0.0330)

0.00109
(0.001751)
-0.0454
(0.0116)
-0.0232
(0.0102)

0.0139
(0.0135)
-0.3418
(0.0922)
0.2183
(0.0756)

0.0248
(0.0057)

0.0002
(0.0018)

0.0119
(0.0137)

0.0238
(0.0056)

0.0001
(0.0017)

0.0150
(0.0136)

-0.0852
(0.0333)

-0.0188
(0.0102)

0.2315
(0.0767)

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

-0.0716
(0.0321)
0.3490
(0.0176)
No

-0.0131
(0.0098)
0.1404
(0.0073)
No

0.1943
(0.0077)
0.3123
(0.0256)
No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

Industry dummies
included?
Year dummies
included?
Industry*year
dummies included?
Number of obs.

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

22,396

22,429

23,090

22,396

22,429

23,090

22,394

22,428

22,847

R2

0.0537

0.0895

0.3599

0.0617

0.1007

0.3590

0.1125

0.1794

0.3705

The sample consists of between 1,844 and 2,506 publicly traded firms (depending on the year). Each regression is estimated after trimming the top
and bottom 2.5% of observations (based on the dependent variable). White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses under each coefficient
estimate. Point estimates for the various dummies variables are omitted from the table. Any firm with actual interest payments below the hypothetical
minimum is considered a zombie and any firm where this is not true is a non-zombie (d1=d2=0 in equation (1)). Two digit industry classifications are
used throughout. The industry percentages for zombies are based on the share of total industry assets residing in zombie firms. I/K is the ratio of
investment in depreciable assets to beginning of period stock of depreciable assets (measured at book value). E is the total number of full time
employees. K is the book value of depreciable assets and sales growth is the log difference of each firm’s sales.

53

Table 4
Cumulative Impact of Zombie Firms on Non-Zombies
A. Cumulative investment losses (1993-2002) of the median non-zombie firm in the high zombies industries
Industry
Wholesale
Retail
Construction
Real Estate
Actual Average I/K: 1993-2002
0.1184
0.1871
0.1373
0.0920
0.2842
0.2988
0.1883
0.4323
Cumulative Lost I/K Case 1

Services
0.2215
0.3020

(lower bound)
Cumulative Lost I/K Case 2

(0.1697)
0.3454

(0.0739)
0.1432

(0.1173)
0.1804

(0.1115)
0.4006

(0.1185)
0.5048

(lower bound)

(0.1355)

(0.0562)

(0.0708)

(0.1572)

(0.1981)

“Actual Average I/K: 1993-2002” shows the actual average investment rate (I/K) of the median non-zombie firm in the industry for 19932002. “Cumulative Lost I/K Case 1” shows the total amount of investment (I/K) of the typical non-zombie that was depressed during the
period compared with the hypothetical case where the asset weighted zombie index had stayed at its average level for 1981-1992.
“Cumulative Lost I/K Case 2” shows the total amount of investment (I/K) of the typical non-zombie that was depressed during the period
compared with the hypothetical case where the asset weighted zombie index of the industry was the same as that of manufacturing in each
year from 1993 to 2002. The coefficient estimates from the regression in the column 2 of Table 2 were used for the calculation. The
numbers in the parentheses show the “lower bounds” of the cumulative losses that include only the differential impacts on the non-zombie
(calculated from the coefficient estimate on the interaction term).
B. Cumulative employment change (1993-2002) of the median non-zombie firm in the high zombies industries
Industry
Average Actual Employment growth:
1993-2002
Cumulative lost employment -- Case 1

Wholesale
-0.0136

Retail
0.0015

Construction
-0.0043

Real Estate
0.0062

Services
0.0140

0.1238

0.0598

0.0918

0.0951

0.1086

(lower bound)
Cumulative lost employment -- Case 2

(0.0402)
0.0977

(0.0199)
0.0452

(0.0302)
0.0548

(0.0314)
0.1363

(0.0358)
0.1864

(lower bound)

(0.0320)

(0.0151)

(0.0183)

(0.0445)

(0.0602)

54

“Average Actual Employment Growth: 1993-2002” shows the actual average annual rate of change in the employment at the median nonzombie in the industry for 1993-2002. “Cumulative lost employment Case 1” shows the total rate of new hiring at the typical non-zombie
that was depressed during this period compared with the hypothetical case where the asset weighted zombie index had stayed at its
average level for 1981-1992. “Cumulative lost employment Case 2” shows the total rate of new hiring at the typical non-zombie that was
depressed during the period compared with the hypothetical case where the asset weighted zombie index of the industry was the same as
that of manufacturing in each year from 1993 to 2002. The coefficient estimates from the regression in the column 3 of Table 2 were used
for the calculation. The numbers in the parentheses show the “lower bounds” of the cumulative losses that include only the differential
impacts on the non-zombie (calculated from the coefficient estimate on the interaction term).

55

Table A-1
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
Using Fuzzy Zombie Indices
Dependent Variable
{0, 50}

{0, 50}

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K ⅔ Log E
{0, 50}

0.0304
(0.0061)
-0.2016
(0.0335)
-0.0572
(0.0264)

0.0026
(0.0019)
-0.0555
(0.0100)
-0.0161
(0.0080)

0.0343
(0.0144)
-0.2504
(0.0797)
0.1114
(0.0615)

Yes

Yes

Yes

I/K
{d1, d2} (in basis
points) in eq. (1)
Non-Zombie
Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie *
Industry Zombie%
Sales growth
Industry dummies
included?
Year dummies
included?
Industry*year
dummies included?
Number of obs.

R

2

∆Log E

{0, 50}

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K –
⅔ Log E
{0, 50}

0.0276
(0.0056)

0.0009
(0.0018)

0.0334
(0.0145)

No

-0.0456
(0.0257)
0.3488
(0.0176)
No

-.0066
(0.0077)
0.1406
(0.0073)
No

0.1011
(0.0620)
0.3114
(0.0256)
No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

22,396
0.0624

22,429
0.1003

22,847
0.3620

22,394
0.1133

22,428
0.1791

22,847
0.3709

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K – I/K
⅔ Log E
{0, 50}
{0, 50}

{0, 50}

{0, 50}

0.0295
(0.0061)

0.0015
(0.0019)

0.0322
(0.0146)

-0.0553
(0.0266)

-0.0122
(0.0081)

0.1168
(0.0626)

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

22,396
0.0556

22,429
0.0897

22,847
0.3631

∆Log E

56

Table A-1 continued
Dependent Variable
{d1, d2} (in basis
points) in eq. (1)
Non-Zombie
Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie *
Industry Zombie%
Sales growth
Industry dummies
included?
Year dummies
included?
Industry*year
dummies included?
Number of obs.

R

2

I/K

∆Log E

{-25,-75}

{-25,-75}

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K ⅔ Log E
{-25,-75}

0.0323
(0.0068)
-0.2295
(0.0368)
-0.0583
(0.0294)

0.0029
(0.0021)
-0.0616
(0.0111)
-0.0177
(0.0090)

0.0284
(0.0162)
-0.3044
(0.0875)
0.1584
(0.0684)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K – I/K
⅔ Log E
{-25,-75}
{-25,-75}

{-25,-75}

Log Sales –
⅓ Log K –
⅔ Log E
{-25,-75}

0.0298
(0.0067)

0.0011
(0.0020)

0.0280
(0.0163)

No

-0.0470
(0.0286)
0.3489
(0.0176)
No

-0.0078
(0.0087)
0.1406
(0.0119)
No

0.1456
(0.0694)
0.3112
(0.0256)
No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

22,396
0.0624

22,429
0.1003

22,847
0.3622

22,394
0.1132

22,428
0.1791

22,847
0.3710

I/K

∆Log E

{-25,-75}

{-25,-75}

0.0319
(0.0069)

0.0017
(0.0021)

0.0264
(0.0164)

-0.0582
(0.0296)

-0.0137
(0.0090)

0.1637
(0.0698)

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

22,396
0.0559

22,429
0.0898

22,847
0.3630

∆Log E

The sample consists of between 1,844 and 2,506 publicly traded firms (depending on the year). Each regression is estimated after trimming the top
and bottom 2.5% of observations (based on the dependent variable). White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses under each coefficient
estimate. Point estimates for dummies are omitted. The zombie probabilities are calculated as described in the text using equation (1). Two digit
industry classifications are used throughout. The industry percentages for zombies are based on the share of total industry assets residing in zombie
firms. Sales growth is the log difference of each firm’s sales. I/K is the ratio of investment in depreciable assets to beginning of period stock of
depreciable assets (measured at book value). E is the total number of full time employees. K is the book value of depreciable assets. Sample period is
1993 to 2002.

57

Dependent
Variable
Range of excluded
obs (in basis points)
Non-Zombie
Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie *
Industry Zombie%
Industry dummies
included?
Year dummies
included?
Industry*year
dummies included?
Number of obs.

R

2

Table A-2
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
Excluding observations with the interest rate gap close to zero
Log Sales
I/K
∆Log E
I/K
∆Log E

Log Sales
– ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

– ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

{0, 50}

{-25,
-75}

{0, 50}

{-25,
-75}

{0, 50}

{-25,
-75}

{0, 50}

{-25,
75}

{0, 50}

{-25,
-75}

{0, 50}

{-25,
-75}

0.0293
(0.0059)
-0.0972
(0.0390)
-0.1274
(0.0356)
Yes

0.0251
(0.0070)
-0.1111
(0.0469)
-0.1087
(0.0415)
Yes

0.0019
(0.0018)
-0.0318
(0.0124)
-0.0374
(0.0110)
Yes

0.0018
(0.0021)
-0.0262
(0.0145)
-0.0383
(0.0127)
Yes

0.0613
(0.0143)
-0.2056
(0.0989)
-0.0615
(0.0828)
Yes

0.0468
(0.0164)
-0.3388
(0.1121)
0.0432
(0.0934)
Yes

0.0271
(0.0060)

0.0225
(0.0070)

0.0006
(0.0018)

0.0007
(0.0022)

0.0601
(00145)

0.0451
(0.0168)

-0.1187
(0.0361)
No

-0.0950
(0.0420)
No

-0.0303
(0.0111)
No

-0.0318
(0.0128)
No

-0.0546
(0.0848)
No

0.0550
(0.0964)
No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

17,407
0.0556

14,161
0.0457

17,389
0.0897

14,138
0.0792

17,697
0.3652

14,384
0.3595

17,407
0.0595

14,161
0.0568

17,389
0.0981

14,138
0.0898

17,697
0.3643

14,384
0.3580

The sample consists of between 1,844 and 2,506 publicly traded firms (depending on the year). Each regression is estimated after trimming the top
and bottom 2.5% of observations (based on the dependent variable). White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses under each coefficient
estimate. Industry and year dummies are also included in each regression. Any firm with actual interest payments below the hypothetical minimum is
considered a zombie and any firm where this is not true is a non-zombie (d1=d2=0 in equation (1)). Two digit industry classifications are used
throughout. The industry percentages for zombies are based on the share of total industry assets residing in zombie firms. Sales growth is the log
difference of each firm’s sales. I/K is the ratio of investment in depreciable assets to beginning of period stock of depreciable assets (measured at book
value). E is the total number of full time employees. K is the book value of depreciable assets. Sample period is 1993 to 2002.

58

Table A-3
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
for Alternative Zombie Definitions from Table 2

I/K
{d1, d2} (in basis
points) in eq. (1)
Baseline from
Tables 3 and A1
Exclude firms
with A or above
bonds (ZA01,
ZA05, ZA09)
Exclude firms
with BBB or
above bonds
(ZA02, ZA06,
ZA10)
Two Year
Average (ZA03,
ZA07, ZA11)
Three Year
Average (ZA04,
ZA08, ZA12)
Two Year Max
(ZA13, ZA15,
ZA17)
Three Year Max
(ZA14, ZA16,
ZA18)

{0, 0}

Reported Estimates and standard errors on Non-Zombie*Industry Zombie %
as estimated from equation (26)
Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
∆Log E
– ⅓ Log K
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}
{0, 0}
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}
{0, 0}
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}

-0.0885
(0.0330)
-0.0993
(0.0382)

-0.0572
(0.0264)
-0.0601
(0.0293)

-0.0583
(0.0294)
-0.0532
(0.0310)

-0.0232
(0.0102)
-0.0219
(0.0117)

-0.0161
(0.0080)
-0.0196
(0.0090)

-0.0177
(0.0090)
-0.0151
(0.0095)

0.2183
(0.0756)
0.1979
(0.0871)

0.1114
(0.0615)
0.0214
(0.0697)

0.1584
(0.0684)
0.1251
(0.0726)

-0.0964
(0.0397)

-0.0613
(0.0310)

-0.0517
(0.0319)

-0.0161
(0.0122)

-0.0200
(0.0095)

-0.0136
(0.0098)

0.1676
(0.0902)

0.0211
(0.0734)

0.1279
(0.0747)

-0.0827
(0.0379)

-0.0553
(0.0290)

-0.0546
(0.0320)

-0.0322
(0.0118)

-0.0210
(0.0090)

-0.0236
(0.0099)

0.3331
(0.0881)

0.1887
(0.0692)

0.2383
(0.0763)

-0.0878
(0.0421)

-0.0720
(0.0320)

-0.0695
(0.0349)

-0.0443
(0.0131)

-0.0296
(0.0098)

-0.0331
(0.0107)

0.4003
(0.0974)

0.2236
(0.0757)

0.2677
(0.0827)

-0.0720
(0.0277)

-0.0525
(0.0231)

-0.0603
(0.0258)

-0.0264
(0.0084)

-0.0231
(0.0070)

-0.0225
(0.0078)

0.1968
(0.0627)

0.0552
(0.0550)

0.1776
(0.0597)

-0.0574
(0.0251)

-0.0440
(0.0218)

-0.0525
(0.0243)

-0.0307
(0.0075)

-0.0200
(0.0064)

-0.0248
(0.0071)

0.1873
(0.0562)

0.1509
(0.0501)

0.1876
(0.0556)

59

Table A-3 continued

I/K
{d1, d2} (in basis
points) in eq. (1)
Baseline from
Tables 3 and A1
Exclude firms
with A or above
bonds (ZA01,
ZA05, ZA09)
Exclude firms
with BBB or
above bonds
(ZA02, ZA06,
ZA10)
Two Year
Average (ZA03,
ZA07, ZA11)
Three Year
Average (ZA04,
ZA08, ZA12)
Two Year Max
(ZA13, ZA15,
ZA17)
Three Year Max
(ZA14, ZA16,
ZA18)

{0, 0}

Reported Estimates and standard errors on Non-Zombie*Industry Zombie %
as estimated from equation (27)
Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
∆Log E
– ⅓ Log K
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}
{0, 0}
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}
{0, 0}
{0, 50}
{-25, 75}

-0.0852
(0.0333)
-0.0927
(0.0385)

-0.0553
(0.0266)
-0.0562
(0.0296)

-0.0582
(0.0296)
-0.0541
(0.0312)

-0.0188
(0.0102)
-0.0179
(0.0117)

-0.0122
(0.0081)
-0.0166
(0.0090)

-0.0137
(0.0090)
-0.0122
(0.0095)

0.2315
(0.0767)
0.2072
(0.0884)

0.1168
(0.0626)
0.0239
(0.0712)

0.1637
(0.0698)
0.1271
(0.0741)

-0.0854
(0.0400)

-0.0527
(0.0312)

-0.0498
(0.0321)

-0.0110
(0.0123)

-0.0157
(0.0096)

-0.0105
(0.0098)

0.1836
(0.0913)

0.0322
(0.0748)

0.1338
(0.0761)

-0.0707
(0.0382)

-0.0469
(0.0293)

-0.0462
(0.0323)

-0.0240
(0.0118)

-0.0143
(0.0090)

-0.0163
(0.0100)

0.3437
(0.0896)

0.1935
(0.0706)

0.2442
(0.0780)

-0.0674
(0.0425)

-0.0554
(0.0324)

-0.0508
(0.0354)

-0.0334
(0.0131)

-0.0205
(0.0098)

-0.0226
(0.0107)

0.4126
(0.0993)

0.2299
(0.0774)

0.2771
(0.0848)

-0.0689
(0.0280)

-0.0503
(0.0234)

-0.0582
(0.0261)

-0.0222
(0.0084)

-0.0197
(0.0070)

-0.0181
(0.0078)

0.2050
(0.0636)

0.0517
(0.0561)

0.1819
(0.0609)

-0.0510
(0.0253)

-0.0397
(0.0221)

-0.0480
(0.0247)

-0.0267
(0.0075)

-0.0161
(0.0064)

-0.0199
(0.0072)

0.1986
(0.0569)

0.1556
(0.0510)

0.1949
(0.0568)

60

Table A-4
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
Using Estimated Maturity Structure for Long-term Borrowings and Bonds
Dependent Variable
Sample

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

19932002
0.0125
(0.0062)
-0.0668
(0.0520)
-0.0867
(0.0505)
Yes

19932002
-0.0007
(0.0021)
-0.0388
(0.0163)
-0.0321
(0.0155)
Yes

19932002
0.0133
(0.0147)
-0.3601
(0.1190)
0.2285
(0.1122)
Yes

19932002
0.0142
(0.0063)

19932002
-0.0008
(0.0148)

19932002
0.0142
(0.0148)

-0.1028
(0.0512)
No

-0.0350
(0.0155)
No

0.2172
(0.1131)
No

Year dummies included?

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Industry*year dummies
included?
Number of obs.
R2

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

22,396
0.0521

22,429
0.0897

22,847
0.3614

22,396
0.0611

22,429
0.1013

22,847
0.3608

Non-Zombie
Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie * Industry
Zombie%
Industry dummies included?

The sample consists of between 1,844 and 2,506 publicly traded firms (depending on the year). Each regression is estimated after trimming the top
and bottom 2.5% of observations (based on the dependent variable). White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses under each coefficient
estimate. Estimates of the various dummies variables are omitted from the table. Any firm with actual interest payments below the hypothetical
minimum is considered a zombie and any firm where this is not true is a non-zombie (d1=d2=0 in equation (1)); the imputed interest rates for bank
borrowing and bonds are modified as described in Appendix A-2. Two digit industry classifications are used throughout. The industry percentages
for zombies are based on the share of total industry assets residing in zombie firms. Sales is the reported sales for each firm. I/K is the ratio of
investment in depreciable assets to beginning of period stock of depreciable assets (measured at book value). E is the total number of full time
employees. K is the book value of depreciable assets.

61

Table A-5
Impact of Zombie Firms on the Investment, Employment and Productivity of Non-Zombies
Assuming Zero for the Minimum Required Interest Rate on Bonds
Dependent Variable
Sample

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

I/K

∆Log E

Log Sales – ⅔ Log E
– ⅓ Log K

19932002
0.0237
(0.0056)
-0.1879
(0.0394)
-0.0793
(0.0336)
Yes

19932002
0.0007
(0.0017)
-0.0533
(0.0123)
-0.0213
(0.0104)
Yes

19932002
0.0129
(0.0133)
-0.3915
(0.0941)
0.2283
(0.0764)
Yes

19932002
0.0220
(0.0056)

19932002
-0.0004
(0.0017)

19932002
0.0108
(0.0134)

-0.0703
(0.0339)
No

-0.0155
(0.0104)
No

0.2424
(0.0773)
No

Year dummies included?

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Industry*year dummies
included?
Number of obs.
R2

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

22,396
0.0521

22,429
0.0897

23,090
0.3614

22,396
0.0616

22,429
0.1150

23,090
0.3590

Non-Zombie
Dummy
Industry Zombie %
Non-Zombie * Industry
Zombie%
Industry dummies included?

The sample consists of between 1,844 and 2,506 publicly traded firms (depending on the year). Each regression is estimated after trimming the top
and bottom 2.5% of observations (based on the dependent variable). White (1980) standard errors are reported in parentheses under each coefficient
estimate. Estimates of the various dummies variables are omitted from the table. Any firm with actual interest payments below the hypothetical
minimum is considered a zombie and any firm where this is not true is a non-zombie (d1=d2=0 in equation (1)); the imputed interest rates for bonds is
assumed to be zero, see the discussion in Appendix A-2. Two digit industry classifications are used throughout. The industry percentages for
zombies are based on the share of total industry assets residing in zombie firms. Sales is the reported sales for each firm. I/K is the ratio of investment
in depreciable assets to beginning of period stock of depreciable assets (measured at book value). E is the total number of full time employees. K is
the book value of depreciable assets.

62

Table A-6
Sample Summary Statistics for 1993
Industry

# of
firms

Share of
assets
(%)

All
Food products
Textile mill products
Paper & allied products
Chemicals
Medical products
Petroleum & coal products
Rubber products
Ceramics
Steel
Non-ferrous metal products
Machinery, non-electric
Electric machinery
Shipbuilding
Motor vehicles
Other transportation
equipment
Precision machinery
Misc. manufacturing
Construction
Wholesale
Retail
Real Estate
Services

2360
125
76
38
181
47
13
23
63
62
129
223
244
7
71

100.00
4.41
2.18
1.72
7.15
2.18
2.39
0.90
1.89
5.63
3.80
6.31
15.47
1.02
7.34

22
41
86
202
271
170
53
213

0.44
1.19
2.13
14.16
7.17
5.07
4.46
3.00

Share in the overall
economy (%)
Assets
23.60%
40.22%
64.55%
51.17%
52.67%
-74.21%
-40.11%
78.85%
37.88%
64.68%
73.88%
-63.94%

Sales
20.12%
37.11%
50.37%
37.91%
50.35%

Depreciable Assets
(thousand yen)

Productivity
(thousand yen)

67.96%

Mean
127310
105890
86085
136270
118730
139340
553230
117990
90001
273040
88419
85047
190440
439600
310520

Std. Dev.
344850
219310
154430
185260
202980
163500
626230
228440
159570
649320
145930
263680
561120
517490
869640

Mean
21024
24463
16998
49558
27962
19183
81829
24910
23248
90894
18383
13120
28122
55032
69836

Std. Dev.
63792
55329
33124
70452
50293
21802
77178
35775
42273
228310
35383
33458
81031
61206
156410

Mean
3.2969
3.3852
3.0227
2.9394
3.0914
2.8858
4.2080
2.8311
2.9405
3.0335
3.0635
2.9104
3.0086
3.0861
3.0407

Std. Dev.
0.7249
0.4564
0.5949
0.3010
0.3106
0.3438
0.9285
0.3481
0.4556
0.3742
0.4797
0.5123
0.4842
0.1967
0.3642

40.10%
19.05%
21.34%
7.59%
13.79%
11.11%
5.98%

60231
86949
74252
210620
79455
89601
252780
42302

56628
129530
148620
438630
157200
151780
516730
72247

12769
13817
14858
9181
5388
15395
28285
7630

16065
20134
36881
20289
9858
26231
62389
13154

2.9909
2.8800
3.0892
3.9441
4.2574
3.5671
3.5030
2.9103

0.3580
0.5373
0.4783
0.5201
0.9086
0.4293
0.6612
0.6619

73.58%
32.86%
70.32%
33.45%
53.61%
62.00%

-43.36%
22.78%
31.87%
10.52%
14.66%
8.14%
5.69%

Total assets
(thousand yen)

63

Table A-6 (continued)
Industry
All
Food products
Textile mill products
Paper & allied products
Chemicals
Medical products
Petroleum & coal products
Rubber products
Ceramics
Steel
Non-ferrous metal products
Machinery, non-electric
Electric machinery
Shipbuilding
Motor vehicles
Other transportation
equipment
Precision machinery
Misc. manufacturing
Construction
Wholesale
Retail
Real Estate
Services

Investment Rate (I/K)
Mean
Std. Dev.
0.3284
0.7473
0.2664
0.2995
0.2482
0.4107
0.1933
0.2383
0.2690
0.2476
0.4017
0.5125
1.1045
2.4836
0.2766
0.2062
0.2471
0.2116
0.1864
0.1941
0.3334
0.6129
0.3097
1.1883
0.2322
0.2128
0.3595
0.2646
0.2384
0.1328
0.2294
0.3206
0.2945
0.3702
0.4219
0.3936
0.5142
0.4001

0.1707
0.4658
0.4929
0.4170
1.2048
0.6091
1.4205
0.8900

Sales Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
-0.0275
0.1548
0.0069
0.0682
-0.1006
0.1138
-0.0515
0.0581
-0.0348
0.0925
0.0570
0.0751
-0.0314
0.1241
-0.0506
0.0851
-0.0318
0.0843
-0.1131
0.0756
-0.0420
0.1092
-0.1172
0.2077
-0.0720
0.1260
0.0075
0.0686
-0.0200
0.0631
-0.0718
-0.1135
0.0044
0.0378
-0.0341
0.0656
0.0094
0.0283

0.1044
0.1499
0.1742
0.0984
0.1163
0.2566
0.2619
0.1671

Employment Growth
Mean
Std. Dev.
0.0344
0.4731
0.0307
0.1030
-0.0154
0.0823
-0.0061
0.0418
0.0177
0.0942
0.0222
0.0541
0.0129
0.0704
0.0038
0.0585
0.0063
0.0459
-0.0065
0.0835
0.0399
0.2082
0.0029
0.0644
0.0076
0.1712
0.0237
0.0114
0.0145
0.0345
-0.0119
-0.0141
0.0259
0.0429
0.0219
0.2276
0.0087
0.0563

0.0577
0.0875
0.0866
0.0568
0.1344
1.7322
0.1182
0.1847

Number of Employees
Mean
Std. Dev.
1867.8
4655.4
1678.70
2911.20
1537.90
2308.70
1529.30
1663.70
1493.50
2248.30
2264.10
2155.70
1662.80
1363.40
2369.30
3464.40
1358.90
2073.50
3100.00
6720.70
1498.40
2171.30
1462.90
3533.10
3724.30
10093.00
6402.60
7590.00
6105.90
11750.00
1207.70
1809.10
1470.40
1909.10
888.78
1736.00
400.23
1013.90

962.16
2121.40
2408.00
2503.20
1145.20
2750.20
501.00
1315.30

64

Figure 1: Prevalence of Firms Receiving Subsidized Loans in Japan
Raw Percentage
40
35
30
25
(%) 20
15
10
5
0
1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Asset-weighted Percentage
18
16
14
12
10
(%)
8
6
4
2
0
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001

Note: Percentages calculated as described in the text, with d1=d2=0 in equation 1.

65

Figure 2: Membership Function for a Fuzzy Zombie Set

z
1

d1

0

d2

x

66

Fuzzy with (d1, d2) = (-25bp, 75bp)
20

19

19

19

19

01

99

97

95

93

91

%

%
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Manufacturing
60

50
50
50

40
40
40

30
30
30

20
20
20

10
10
10

0
0
0

Trade
60

50
50
50

40
40
40

30
30
30

20
20
20

10
10
10

0
0
0
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Real Estate

19

10

89

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

All Firms

19

30

87

50

19

60

85

%

19

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

60

83

%

19

81

60

19

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

60

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Figure 3: Cross-Industry Incidence of Asset Weighted Zombie Percentage for Crisp and Fuzzy Zombie Definitions

Construction

%

Services

%

Crisp
All Firms

%

-10

Fuzzy with (d1, d2) = (0, 50bp)

Note: Fuzzie zombie definitions computed according to equation 1, see text for details.
67

Figure 4: Asset Weighted Zombie Percentages by Profitability
All Firm s

Manufacturing

Construction

30%

30%

30%

20%

20%

20%

10%

10%

10%

0%

0%

0%

Services

40%

40%

40%

30%

30%

30%

20%

20%

20%

10%

10%

10%

0%

0%

0%
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

Trade

19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

Real Estate

19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

40%

19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

40%

19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02

40%

Note: Solid lines show zombie percentage for firms whose profits are above the median for the industry, dashed show below median.

68

Figure 5

Chage in job destruction rate: 9193 average to 96-00 average (%)

Zombies and Job Destruction
3.0
Manufacturing
2.5
Construction

2.0
1.5

Services
1.0
Wholesate & Retail

0.5
0.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Change in the zombie index: 81-93 average to 96-02 average (%)

Chage in job creation rate: 91-93
average to 96-00 average (%)

Zombies and Job Creation
1.0
Manufacturing

0.0
-1.0
Services

-2.0
-3.0
Wholesate & Retail

-4.0
Construction

-5.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Change in the zombie index: 81-93 average to 96-02 average (%)

69

Figure 6
Zombies and TFP Growth
10%

TFP growth 1990-2000

8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%

y = -0.3993x + 0.0336

-4%
-6%
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

Change in the zombie index: 81-92 average to 93-02 average

70

Figure 7
Total Factor Productivity by Industry: 1980-2002 (1995=100)
120

110

100

90

80

70
80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04
MANUFACTURING

NONMANUFACTURING

Source: Project on Productivity in the European Union: A Comparative Industry Approach (EU
KLEMS2003) (http://www.euklems.net/)

71

