NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL ALLOCATION IN
MULTI—DIVISION FIRMS:
HURDLE RATES VS. BUDGETS

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.

Working Paper No. 1213

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESPARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1983

Boston University, School of Management and Harvard University,
Graduate School of Business Administration. I am grateful to Hoger
Bohn, Philip Jones, George Kanatas, Carl Kester, William Krasker
and David Mullins for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 1/1213
October 1983

CAPITAL ALLOCATION IN MULTI-DIVISION FIRNS:

HURDLE RATES vs. BUDGETS

Abstract

It is common practice for firms to ration capital funds to their divisions,

rather than set a price and let the divisions use as much as they want. This
appears to be true even when the overall firm faces no rationing in the capital

market. This paper offers an interpretation of this phenomenon based on Martin
Weitzman's T?Prices vs. Quantities" model. It is found that a rationing system
is advantageous when division managers do not perceive the full consequences

of their investment decisions for the firm as a whole. By contrast, a pricing
system for allocating capital among divisions would be favored when the division
managers possess valuable information that cannot be costlessly communicated to

headquarters. It is then argued that actual capital budgeting oractice in many
firms reflects a mixture of these two systems and can thus be interpreted as an
attempt to reap both kinds of benefits at once.

Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road

Boston, MA 02163
(617) 495—6423

Capital Allocation in Multi—Division Firms:

Hurdle Rates vs. Budgets

Finance theory offers a clear prescription for capital budgeting policy:

accept all projects with positive net present values. In a multi—division
firm, this prescription might be implemented as follows: First, central head-

quarters determines hurdle rates for each division. These rates correspond to
the riskiness of each division's business and are based on the risk—return

tradeoff implicit in market security prices.' Next, the division heads analyze
potential projects, using their hurdle rates, and adopt all projects with

positive net present values. Finally, central headquarters raises any external
funds needed to undertake all such projects.
It is equally clear, however, that few, if any, corporations behave

exactly in the prescribed manner. Instead of relying solely on an internal price
mechanism to determine total capital expenditures, most corporations resort to
some form of rationing, in which headquarters assigns budgets to the divisions

without full knowledge of their opportunities.2 In some companies, these
budgets are inflexible.3 In others, their use is part of a sequential process
that still retains elements of a hurdle rate system. In such cases, preliminary
budgets are set, divisions use hurdle rates to analyze projects within these
budgets, and the analysis then serves as a basis for a certain amount of renegotiation of the final budgets.4
The prevalance of some form of capital rationing has been noted in the

academic literature, and considerable discussion has been devoted to how capital

budgeting decisions should be made in the presence of rationing.° However, most
of these discussions offer no clear explanation for rationing. One possibility
is that the external capital market constrains the quantity of funds that firms
may raise, but this explanation is viewed with skepticism by most financial

—2--

economists. A second possibility is that rationing is an internal constraint
imposed by top management for reasons of organizational control. Brealey and
Myers [2, p. 104], for example, offer some suggestions along these lines:

Some ambitious divisional managers habitually overstate
their investment opportunities. Rather than trying to
distinguish which projects really are worthwhile, headquarters may find it simpler to impose an upper limit on
divisional expenditure and thereby force the divisions
to set their own priorities. In such instances budget
limits are a rough but effective way of dealing with
biased cash—flow forecasts. In other cases management
may believe that very rapid corporate growth could impose
intolerable strains on management and the organization.
Since it is difficult to quantify such constraints explicitly, the budget limit may be used as a proxy.
The purpose of this paper is to study this second, or internal, form of

capital rationing in the context of a more formal model. Weitzrnan [14, 15] has
introduced a framework for assessing the relative merits of pricing and direct

control as resource allocation mechanisms, and his analysis is applicable to

the problem at hand. The ensuing sections of this paper proceed in two steps
to analyze intracorporation rationing with a modified version of Weitzman's
model.

In order to contrast their properties most sharply, Section I treats
the internal pricing-, or hurdle rate, system and the fixed divisional budget

system as mutually exclusive. The hurdle rate system makes more efficient
use of division managers' information and is thus favored when such information

is both valuable and not easily communicated to headquarters. The rationing,
or budget, system is advantageous when division managers' information is un-

reliable. That may occur either when divisional information contains an error
component of high variance or when division managers fail to perceive the full

impact of their actions on the firm as a whole. In general, though, firms need
not rely exclusively on either system. Section II analyzes the merits of using

—3—

mixed hurdle rate and budget systems and argues that many firms may be doing
just that.

I. Hurdle Rates vs. Budgets
The model in this section is particularly intended to embody the problems
of biased divisional forecasts and overall company growth constraints as des-

cribed by Brealey and Myers [2] in the quotation above. As will be noted
along the way, though, many of the model's specific details could be altered
without changing its essential message.

In broad outline, the following situation is envisioned: A firm has a
central headquarters, HQ, and J divisions. Investment levels, I.,, must be
set for each of the divisions, and headquarters may either choose the

directly or assign each division a hurdle rate, k., and let the division

managers choose I.. In either case, headquarters' objective is that the I.
be chosen so as to maximize net benefits for the whole firm.
Total net benefits depend on the values of the I. and on two types of

state—of—the—world variables. The first of these, n, reflects factors such as
overall economic conditions that are common to all divisions. The second, 0.,
J

reflects factors impinging on division j but not necessarily on other divisions.

These might include the state of demand and technology in the market served
by division j.

Neither headquarters nor the division managers know the true value of n

ex ante, and headquarters is likewise unaware of the true value of 0.. Division
j's manager, on the other hand, can use his specialized knowledge about divisional
operations to make a forecast of 0,.

This

forecast, 0. = 0. +

J

the true value of 0. plus some error term, ..

J

J

E., consists

of

J

The error term might arise

either because division j's manager intentionally distorts his forecast in an

—4--.

effort to pursue personal objectives (e.g. maximize division j's size) that
deviate from those of headquarters or simply because division j's manager
has "noisy" information,

To simplify the analysis, it is assumed that all agents are risk neutral.

Thus inter—division differences in project risk, which would complicate the

model without adding any new insights, are ignored. Managers at both the
headquarters and division levels simply maximize their own perceived measures

of expected net benefits. A shortcoming of the risk—neutrality assumption is
that differences in managers' attitudes toward risk are also ignored.

In the absence of risk aversion, three remaining problems condition the

choice between a hurdle rate or a budget system for setting I.. First, the
division managers cannot communicate their information to headquarters. This
may stem from the technical nature of the information or from credibility

problems. Second, the division managers act as if B., were the true value

of B. Again, this may arise either through intentional distortion or through
division managers' inability to separate out the error component in their

information. In the latter case, it is still rational under risk neutrality
for division j's manager to act as if 0. were the truth as long as his

expected value of c. is equal to zero. Finally, the division managers do
not perceive that their own investment may affect the marginal benefits gener—

ated by other divisions' investment. Headquarters is aware of these interactions, but this knowledge cannot be communicated in any useful way to the
division managers.

Before solving the optimal investment problem, it remains to specify the

net benefits function. Following Weitzman [14], it is assumed that the net
--

benefit

from investment can be locally approximated by a quadratic form. As

—5—

perceived by headquarters, the net benefit from all divisions' investment
is given by6

BHQ(Il ...,
=

E

j

In

ii;

0,

...,

0)

a.(, 0.) + E (h + b.() + 0.)(I. J

J

f.

—

I;

E

(I.j

-

J

j

I.)2
j

—

£
2

J

(El. —

.j

.j

El.)2

J

-

I.)
J

(1)

kEl..

this formulation, a. and b. are functions, while h, f.,, c, I, and k are
J

3

3

3

nonnegative constants. We can interpret k as the cost of capital, and since
k is invariant to total investment, the firm faces no external rationing.
The functions a. represent gross benefits from divisional investment when
I. =

I.

for all j.

The I. are in turn a set of investrrent levels around

which total benefits exhibit some curvature.7 The I. might reflect both
production technology and the technology of managing large—scale organizations.
Further insight into the I. can be gained if we consider the marginal net

benefit, BHQ/I. for division j's investment. The set of terms (h + b.(n)
+ 0. — k) reflects the extent to which marginal net benefit is independent of
I.• However, the terms containing f. and c indicate that marginal net ben2f it

decreases as I. departs from I.. The term containing f. reflects that part
of the decrease stemming from division—specific factors such as production

technology. The term containing c indicates that marginal net benefit from
I. also declines as total investment, El., departs from El.. This latter

jJ

ii

effect might stem from the firm's capacity to absorb growth: if the firm as
a whole invests too much (grows too fast) strains are imposed on the organization and the marginal benefit from investment is weakened for all the

—6--

divisions; by the same token, if the firm

as

a whole invests too little,

there is slack capacity for absorbing growth and some positive interactions
among the different divisions' investment may be missed.

Perceptions of the benefit from investment differ between headquarters

and the division managers. As perceived by the manager of division j, the
net benefit, B., from division j's investment is given by

B.(I.;

-

f
2

n;

0.)

= a.

(n,

0.)

+ (h + b. (n)

+

B.)(I.

I.)
(2)

jj

- k.I..
(I.j - I.)2
j

Expression (2) differs from (1) in three respects. First, the division
manager acts as if his forecast, 0., were the true value of 0.. Second, the
division manager does not perceive the effect of his own investment on the
company's capacity to absorb growth; hence, c = 0 in (2). Finally, to the
extent that the division manager perceives a cost of capital, its value, k.,
is dictated to him by headquarters.

A. Optimal Budgets
Headquarters must now decide whether to determine the I. directly (the
budget system) or to assign divisional hurdle rates, k., and let the division

managers choose the I. themselves. If headquarters sets budgets it will choose
the I. to maximize expected net benefits as perceived by itself. From (1), the
optimization condition for I. is

h + EHQ(bi(ri)) +

—

EHQ(B.)

f.(I.

—

I.)
(3)

—

jJ J

c(EI.

—

El.)

=

k.

—7—

Simpler expressions, but no loss of generality are entailed if we assume in
all that follows that EHQ(O.) =

0 for all j, and h =

EHQ(bi(n))

k.

that case a solution to the problem is for headquarters to set I. =

In

I

for

all j.

B. Optimal Hurdle Rates
Alternatively, if headquarters sets hurdle rates, k., the division

managers will choose the I. to maximize their expected value of (2).8 This
results in

h + E.(b.()) + 0. -

f.(I. - I.)

Or, assuming E.(b.()) = 0 and h =

k,

=

k..

(4)

the investment level, I., that division

j's manager perceives as optimal is

*
I. =
3

I.3

+

k+0.-k.
(5)
3

Expression (5) can be thought of as division j's response function to k.,

and headquarters would want to set k. so that, given this response function,

the levels of investment chosen will maximize EHQ(BHQ). That is, the optimal
k. must satisfy

B
EH[

*
dl.
(6)

I. dk.
3

3

Using (1) and (5), this implies setting k. so that

EHQ(I. —

I.)

—

El.)

=

0,

(7)

—8—

I.

or so that EHQ(I.) =

Let

for all j.

EHQ(O.) =

+ c.)

EHQ(.)
= e..9 It is then optimal for headquarters to set k. = k + e., in which
EHQ(Oi

J

J

J

case

____.

*
J

J

(8)

f

Given (8) headquarters expects division j's investment to be equal to I. and

thus (7) is satisfied. However division j's actual investment will differ
from I. to the extent that its actual forecast, O, differs from headquarters'
expectation of that forecast (that is, to the extent that e. + c differs from

e).
C. The Relative Merits of Hurdle Rates and Budgets
Headquarters will want to use the capital allocation mechanism that has

the largest expected net benefits. Headquarters' expectation of the differ-

ence, , between the net benefits from a hurdle rate system and those from a
budget system is given by

=

EHQ[BHQ(Il

...,

I.;

i;

e1,

...,

0.)
(9)

—

.

BHQ(Il

.. , I.;

n;

e, . . . , 0.)].

Substituting (8) and (1) into (9), i may in turn be expressed as

cov(b.(), 0)
f.

2f.

J

J

J

G

j

2

a2(O)

f.

J

(10)

(0.)
2

2f.
J

+

cov(B.,
2E

E

1j

j i

0.)

1

—9—

Neither the hurdle rate nor budget system is unambiguously optimal, since

may be either positive or negative. Factors that push

in the positive

direction would weigh in favor of the hurdle rate system, while those with
a negative impact on

would favor the budget system. Interpretation of the

different terms in (10) gives some indication of what these factors might
be.

When headquarters dictates investment budgets, it does so on the basis of
expected values of r and 0.,, and in some cases the divisions may be able to

improve on headquarters' selection. From the first term in (10), the division's forecast, 0., may be related to r. If the covariance between 0. and
b.() is positive, then when division j makes decisions based on its analysis
of its own business, these decisions are also right for the firm in terms

of general business conditions. Headquarters stands to gain in this case
by setting hurdle rates and letting the divisions make use of their own

information. Conversely, a negative covariance favors the budget system.
Suppose, for example, that

represents the inflation rate and that division

j's true cash flows from investment are positively related to inflation

(i.e. b() > 0).

Suppose further that division j's manager systematically

underestimates these cash flows by an amount that is directly proportional

to the true inflation rate. There is then a negative covariance between
b.(ri) and the error component of 0., and, other things equal, the budget
system will be preferred.

The second term in (10) indicates that variability in 0. favors the

hurdle rate system. The higher is the variance of 6 the more valuable is
the division' s information about the true 0., and the greater is the advantage to head-

quarters of decentralizing the investment decision. On the other hand, when

—10—

6. varies little around its mean, then headquarters, acting on the basis of

EHQ(6.) cannot go too far wrong by making the choice itself.
The third term in (10) implies that the more variable is the error
component in the division's forecasts, the more dangerous it is for head-

quarters to rely on hurdle rates. Note that headquarters' expectation of
the size of the error appears nowhere in (10). It is uncertainty about
divisional biases, rather than their size, that weighs against the hurdle

rate system. The same insight explains the inflation example above: since
headquarters is uncertain about the true inflation rate it is also uncertain
about the size of division j's inflationary bias, and thus reliance on the
division's forecasts is dangerous in periods of highly variable inflation.
By contrast, if division j's error is proportional to the inflation rate,

but headquarters knows the inflation rate with certainty, it can simply

assign division j a commensurately lower hurdle rate. Likewise, if division
j consistently exaggerates its investment opportunities by a known amount,

it could be given a higher hurdle rate.1° In either case, the expedient of
adjusting the hurdle rate corrects a known bias more efficiently than would
budgeting, since it still allows the division to exploit its useful inform—
ation.

11

The choice between hurdle rates and budgets is also influenced by relative

perceptions of the curvature in benefits. All of the terms in (10) become
small, for example, as the f. increase. The f. reflect that part of the
curvature that is perceived identically by both headquarters and the division
managers, and
to set I. =
J

I.J

the

larger are the f.,

of their own

accord.

the

more likely are the division managers

Hence, the choice between hurdle rate

and budget systems becomes immaterial.

—11—

That part of the curvature, c, that is recognized by headquarters but

not by the division managers has the opposite effect. Since the term in
square brackets in (10) is the variance of a sum and therefore positive,

increases in c tend to favor the budget system. This might correspond to
the situation described by Brealey and Myers [2] in which the budget system
is preferred as the firm's capacity to absorb growth diminishes.

The terms in square brackets further indicate that the effect of c is

conditioned by the extent of variations in the divisions' forecasts. As
the variances of 0. grow larger, the pricing mechanism becomes more dangerous,
because there is a greater chance that each division's information will lead

its investment further away from I, with deleterious consequences for the firm

as a whole. Since 0. = 0. + E.,
J

J

J

part

of the variation in 0. consists of

variation in the true value of 0.. Contrasting the second and fourth terms
in equation (10), then, we see that uncertainty about 8. confronts the firm

with a tradeoff. On the one hand, the more uncertain is headquarters about
the true value of 0., the greater are the potential benefits from fully

exploiting the divisions' information. On the other, wider variations in
0. make it more likely that I will diverge from I,, particularly since the
divisions do not perceive the total effect of their investment on the firm's
net benefits. The detrimental effect is magnified if each division's fore-cast is positively related (as indicated by cov(0., 8.)) to that of other
divisions.

There is at least a rough analogy between this last set of implications
and the conclusions reached in recent discussions of the strategic aspects of

capital budgeting. Kester [10] and Myers [11], for example, have pointed
out that naive applications of discounted cash flow analysis may fail to

—12--

capture the value of future growth opportunities inherent in today's invest-

ment. In effect, they argue that a useful capital budgeting system must
deal with any externalities between projects undertaken at different times.
In a similar vein, the term --(EI. —

E1j2

in expression (1) represents

a variety of these externalities that might be missed at the divisional

level of analysis. Thus far, these have been interpreted as externalities
between the investment of different divisions at a given time. The summations
could, however, be thought of as extending over projects within a given

division or over projects through time. The term I. could represent a

3]
"critical mass" of investment that is needed to sustain a competitive strategy

in a given line of business. Total firm benefits may be sharply kinked around
this critical mass, and if this fact is not appreciated at the division level,

investment budgets may have to be imposed by a centralized strategic planning

group. The variables e. could be interpreted as those aspects of the
divisions' information that tend to lead them away from the critical mass of

investment. The more variable is this information or the more positive is
its covariance across divisions or across time periods, the greater will be
the need for centralized budgeting.12
The model could be subjected to numerous other variations or

reinterpretations, but the essential message would remain the same: Budgeting
is favored when there are divisional blind spots that cannot be overcome

through price signals from headquarters. These situations include divisional
biases of uncertain and highly variable magnitude and divisions' failure to
correctly perceive the second derivative of the net benefits function.

Budgeting should be most prevalent, therefore, for firms with a high degree
of strategic interaction between divisions or with a large number of potential

—13—

projects having implicit growth options. Research and development expenditures, for example, might come under these headings. In addition, it is
sometimes argued that expenditures like R&D are "difficult to quantify" and

therefore not susceptible to hurdle rate analysis. While this argument may
be true for other reasons (see Myers [11]), it may also reflect a judgment
that the error component in divisional analyses of R&D expenditures is
highly uncertain.

By contrast, a hurdle rate system would be favored when there are few
interactions among divisions and when the division managers possess valuable
information that gives them a comparative advantage in setting investment.
A conglomerate firm made up of unrelated businesses, for example, might find
that a hurdle rate system makes best use of its division managers' inf or—
mation, while at the same time interactions between divisions are sufficiently
small that a budget system would yield no special advantages. Indeed, in
the absence of other considerations, there may be no compelling economic
rationale for keeping such divisions together as part of a single firm.
II. Mixed Systems
Since both hurdle rate and budget systems have their advantages and

disadvantages, it is natural to ask whether some combination of the two

might be preferable to using either system alone. There are at least two
ways of effecting such a combination, both of which rely on increasing the
flow of information between headquarters and the divisions. The first of
these is for headquarters to transmit a more complex signal to the divisions,

consisting of both a hurdle rate and a penalty function for investment levels

that deviate from I,. This mechanism has been considered by Weitzman [151,

—14—

and it is discussed in Section II.A. The second method is for headquarters
to try to learn the division managers' information. This method is considered
briefly, but without formal analysis, in Section II.B.

A. Hurdle Rates Plus Penalties
In the face of linear marginal net benefit schedules, such as those
assumed in Section I, Weitzman [15] has shown that a mixed system is optimal.
Specifically, headquarters presents each division with a cost function,

C.(I.) =

k.I.

(I. -

I.)2

(11)

where q. is a penalty for deviations from jl3 This cost function can be
thought of as a mixed pricing and budget mechanism, with k. representing the

pricing component. The heavier is the penalty q., the closer this mechanism
comes to simply fixing I. =

I..

Division j is then instructed to set I. so as to equate its own perception
of gross marginal benefit with the marginal cost measure derived from (11).

Division j's optimality condition is thus

k + 6.. f.(I. 3

33

I.)
3

=

k.
3

33 JI.),

+ q.(I. -

and its investment level is

*

k+B.-k.
q.+f.
3
3

Headquarters will want to set the cost function (11) in an optimal manner,
and as we saw in the preceding section, one requirement for this is
EHQ(I.)

—15—

I.. Thus headquarters will set k. = k + e as in Section I.E., and the
3

3

3

division's optimal investment will be

e.—e.

I.=I.÷q.+f.
*

3

(12)

.

3

When k. is set in this way, headquarters' unconditional expectation of

total net benefits is maximized. The role of the second part of the cost
function, the penalty term, Is to ensure that expected net benefit is also

maximized conditional on the divisions' information. Suppose, for example,
that headquarters knew when division j's forecast, 0., diverged from Its

expected value, e.. Headquarters knows from (12) that every unit increase
in 0. will increase division i's investment by l/(q. + f.). From (1), there—
fore, headquarters' expectation of marginal net benefit from I. would change
by

::;

)/de.)

_______ —

c

EHQ(d(

EHQ(b.(n)f

0.) + EHQ(0.f 0.)
(14)

f.

—

=

(E

q.+f.
iq I +f.1
3
3

(0. —

HQ i

e.1

0.).

There are four separate effects in (13). First, if headquarters knew
that 0. were higher than expected, it might revise its expectation about the
effect, b.(ri), of the overall state—of—nature variable. Second, based on
its knowledge of the usual accuracy of division j's information, headquarters

might revise its estimate of the true 0.. Third,

that

a change in division j

's

headquarters would know

forecast changes division j's investment and

hence changes marginal benefits through f.. Finally, overall firm investment

—16—

will change marginal benefits through c. Not only will division j's invest—
ment affect total firm investment, but to the extent that headquarters knows
other divisions' information to be correlated with j's information it will
expect investment in the other divisions to change as well.

Since headquarters wants expected net benefits to be maximized at all
times, it will set q. so that (13) is equal to zero, or

EHQ(b.(n)e.) + EHQ(Q.JO.)
(14)
f.

=

+

(E(O. - e.jO.).

The optimal q. must therefore satisfy a set of simultaneous equations and

their interpretation in the most general case is complicated. Some additional
insights may be gained, however, by examining special cases. Suppose, for
example, that EHQ(O. —

eJO.)

is zero for all i

j. In that event, (14) can

be rearranged to read

(c+f.)
q. =—f. +

,.

(15)

.

EHQ(b.(n)Je.) + EHQ(e.IO.)

If the denominator of the fraction in (15) approaches unity, indicating that

headquarters believes division j's information to give a completely accurate

picture of the effects of bjn) and 0. on the marginal benefits of investment,
then (15) becomes q. =

c.

That is, the only factor that division j doesn't

properly consider of its own accord is the "growth capacity" effect, c, so
departures from the pure hurdle rate system are based solely on c.

On the

other hand, if the denominator approaches zero, indicating that division

—17—

j's information is useless, q. becomes infinite. This means that division
j is effectively proscribed from choosing an investment level other than
and it amounts to an abandonment of the hurdle rate system in favor of a

pure budget system. The reverse occurs when f. = c = 0 or when c = 0 and
the denominator of the fraction approaches unity. In this case q. = 0 and
the firm relies on a pure hurdle rate system, as there is something to lose

but nothing to be gained from budgeting. In the general case, we would
expect the q. to be neither zero nor infinite and the firm would thus use
a combination of the two systems.

B. Revelation of the Divisions' Information
A second way that headquarters might try to reap the advantages of both
systems at once would be to have the divisions reveal their information.

If this could be done costlessly, of course, the whole allocation problem

would become trivial. Headquarters would simply gather the information,
analyze potential projects using market—based hurdle rates, and tell the
divisions how much to invest.

In a more realistic setting, as discussed by Flaherty [5], this communication process is costly and will be undertaken only to the extent that it

is believed worthwhile. As has been noted earlier, headquarters may not
fully understand the information, and, more seriously perhaps, it may have
no way to ensure that the divisions' information is truthfully revealed.
In addition, headquarters may become overloaded if the divisions must commun-

icate all their information about every investment project. Presumably this
costly communication process is justified only for those cases in which the
divisions' information is potentially very valuable but at the same time
divisional perceptions of net benefits are subject to serious errors.

—18--

C.

Capital Budgeting Practice in Large Firms

Descriptions of the capital allocation process in large firms provide
evidence that some sort of mixed system is in fact frequently used.14 First,
top management in such firms commonly specifies preliminary budgets for its

divisions as well as approval levels for projects. Smaller projects can
typically be approved by division heads, and thus, within the budget limits,

decision—making for these projects is completely decentralized as in a pure

hurdle rate system. Larger projects, by contrast, must be approved by a
central investment committee or even the board of directors. Division
managers must submit formal proposals which include cash flow projections,

estimated rates of return and other information. When more is at stake,
in other words, top management finds it worthwhile to try to learn the

divisions' information through a costly communication mechanism. The
divisions analyze projects using hurdle rates assigned by headquarters,

but for large projects the details of the analysis must be shared with head—
quarters.

Moreover, the investment levels that are ultimately chosen for each
division will, according to Bower and Lessard [1], "sum approximately but

not exactly to the planned capital budget." If a division's worthwhile
projects exceed its budget, top management may be willing to renegotiate.
The strength of the resistance that division heads encounter in this re-

negotiation process can be thought of as performing much the
same function as the penalty coefficients, q., in Section II.A.

While corporate capital budgeting procedures have often appeared

—19—

strange to finance theorists, many of

their

features may be similar

to the mixed price and penalty system analyzed by Weitzman [15J or the costly

communication mechanism described by Flaherty [51. Many firms apparently
try to make efficient use of decentralized information but at the same time
to provide checks on division managers' decisions that correct for divisional
blind spots and overall firm objectives.
III.

Conclusion

The primary purpose of this paper has been to show that budgeting, or
capital rationing, can make sense in a multi—division firm, even in the
context of a value—maximization model in which the firm faces no external

rationing. Among the factors favoring this intra—firm rationing are sources
of curvature in the net benefit function (growth capacity constraints, for
example) that are not perceived at the division level and a high variance

in the error components of the divisions' information. The primary factor
favoring the hurdle rate system is the divisions' possession of valuable
information about investment projects that cannot be communicated at lOW

cost to headquarters. Since, in general, companies would face some tradeoff between these different types of factors, the optimal capital allocation
system for most companies probably entails some mixture of budgets and
hurdle rates.

Although the preceding analysis suggests that a direct application of

Weitzman's models is capable of yielding insights into corporate capital

allocation procedures, several questions are in need of further work. First,
the analysis is primarily concerned with finding optimal operating rules for

headquarters to convey to the divisions. The problem of enforcing these
rules has not been addressed, nor has the question of incentive compensation

schemes. If the divisions receive credit for the benefits from their invest—

—20—

inent and are "charged" for the capital they employ, a full analysis of

division decisions can only be made if the mapping from tnis accounting

scheme to division managers' compensation is specified.15 In addition, the
possibility of gaming behavior on the part of the division managers poses
a number of problems for headquarters as it tries to gather the information
necessary to implement optimal capital allocation procedures.

Footnotes

1.

To the extent that a division chooses among projects of differing risk,
it would be assigned a schedule of hurdle rates corresponding to
these risks.

2.

Surveys of capital budgeting practice have found rationing to be quite
common. See, for example, Fremgen [6] and Gitman and Forrester [7].

3.

Gitman and Forrester [7.1 report that 52 percent of the respondents to

their questionnaire allocated a fixed annual budget among competing
proj ects.

4.

See Bower and Lessard [1] and Hastie [9] for descriptions of this process.

5.

Weingartner [13] provides a detailed critical survey.

6.

In a perpetuity context, this benefit could be interpreted as annual

net operating cash flow minus annual capital cost. For simplicity,
we will not deal with cases where cash flows differ from year to year.

7.

Because of the quadratic form, this curvature is symmetric arourd
The algebra would be somewhat messier but similar results would hold
if asymmetries were introduced.

8.

Division managers are assumed to obediently follow the instruction to

maximize expected net benefits given k... Gaming behavior can be thought
of as entering the problem if the division managers make strategic mis—
estimates of 0..
J

9.

The possibility that e• might take on nonzero values is included for

generality. In the Brealey and Myers case, for example, in which
"divisional managers habitually overstate their investment opportunities,"
we would expect e. > 0.

When divisional forecast errors arise from

noisy information, on the other hand, we have seen above that division

j will rationally behave as if 8. is the true value of 0 only when
J

E (c.) = 0.
j

j

In that event, symmetric rationality would suggest that

J

ER (c.) = e. = 0 as well. None of the conclusions that follow would

QJ

change if e. = 0.

The only difference would be that headquarters would

J

set k. =

k.

10. In cases where division managers are deliberately trying to deceive
headquarters, this analysis captures only the first round of the game.

If division j anticipates headquarters' hurdle rate adjustment, it may

simply increase the size of its bias. Thus an initially known bias
may eventually become an uncertain one.

11. In an explicitly multiperiod context, this point would have to be
qualified considerably. Changes in the hurdle rate would not affect
short—term and long—term projects equally and may therefore introduce

a new kind of bias. I am grateful to Roger Bohn for bringing this
point to my attention.

12. As above, the variability of the divisions' tendency to go astray is
the primary factor that favors budgets. Kester [10] discusses the
attempts of some firms to adjust hurdle rates so as to account for

strategic interaction between projects. A division whose business the
firm wished to emphasize for strategic reasons, for example, might be

assigned a lower hurdle rate. This procedure will work when the size of

the division's investment bias is perfectly predictable, but uncertainty
about the bias will favor budgets.

13. Conceivably the "penalty",

q,

could be negative, in which case deviations

from I are encouraged.

14. In addition to Bower and Lessard [11 and Hastie [9], cited earlier,
useful descriptive material can be found in Kester [10], Prendergast
[12] and in the "Super Project" and "MRC

(A)"

cases in Butters et. al [3].

15. See Harris, Kriebel and Raviv [8] for a model incorporating these
features.

References

1.

Richard S. Bower and Donald R. Lessard. "An Operational Approach to

Risk—Screening." Journal of Finance 28 (May 1973),

2.

Richard Brealey and Stewart Myers. Principles of Corporate Finance.

New York: McGraw—Hill, 1981.

3.

J. Keith Butters, William E. Fruhan, Jr., David W. Mulling, Jr. and

Thomas R. Piper. Case Problems in Finance. Eigth edition. Homewood
Illinois: Irwin, 1981.

4.

Willard T. Carleton. "Linear Programming and Capital Budgeting Models:

A New Interpretation." Journal of Finance 24 (December 1969), 825—33.

5.

M. Therese Flaherty. "Prices Versus Quantities and Vertical Financial

Integration." Bell Journal of Economics 12 (Autumn 1981), 507—525.

6.

James N. Fremgen. "Capital Budgeting Practices: A Survey." Management

Accounting 54 (May 1973), 19—25.

7.

Lawrence J. Gitman and John R. Forrester, Jr. "A Survey of Capital

Budgeting Techniques Used by Major U.S. Firms." Financial Management 6 (Fall
1977), 66—71.

8.

Milton Harris, C.H. Kriebel and Artur Raviv. "Asymmetric Information,

Incentives and Intrafirm Resource Allocation." Management Science 28
(June 1982), 604—620.

9.

K. Larry Hastie. "One

Businessman's

View of Capital Budgeting."

Financial Management 3 (Winter 1974), 36—44.

10.

W. Carl Kester. "Evaluating Growth Options: A New Approach to

Strategic Capital Budgeting." Working Paper 83—38, Harvard University,
Graduate School of Business Administration.

11.

Stewart C. Myers. "Finance Theory and Financial Strategy." Interfaces,

forthcoming.

12.

George J. Prendergast, Jr., "Strategic Planning in DuPont." Paper

presented at TIMS/ORSA Special Interest Conference on Corporate Strategic
Planning, New Orleans, Louisiana, March 1977.

13.

H. Martin Weingartner. "Capital Rationing:

n Authors in Search of a

Plot." Journal of Finance 32 (December 1977), 1403—31.

14.

Martin L. Weitzman. "Prices vs. Quantities." Review of Economic Studies

41 (October 1974), 477—91.

15.

____________.

"Optimal Rewards for Economic Regulation." American

Economic Review 68 (September 1978), 683—91.

