                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       HOUSEHOLD FINANCE

                                           John Y. Campbell

                                         Working Paper 12149
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12149


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2006




Department of Economics, Littauer Center 213, Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA, and
NBER. Tel 617-496-6448, email john_campbell@harvard.edu. This paper was delivered as the Presidential
Address to the American Finance Association on January 7, 2006. It reflects the intellectual contributions
of colleagues, coauthors, and students too numerous to thank individually. I would however like to
acknowledge the special influence of my dissertation advisers at Yale, Robert Shiller and the late James
Tobin, and comments received from Robert Barro, Dan Bergstresser, Steve Cecchetti, Karine de Medeiros,
Xavier Gabaix, Michael Haliassos, David Laibson, Anna Lusardi, Greg Mankiw, James Poterba, Tarun
Ramadorai, Robert Shiller, Andrei Shleifer, Nick Souleles, Jeremy Stein, Sam Thompson, Luis Viceira,
Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Moto Yogo, Luigi Zingales, and seminar participants at Harvard. I am grateful to
Laurent Calvet and Paolo Sodini for allowing me to draw on our joint research in section III, and to Allie
Schwartz for able research assistance with sections II and IV. This material is based upon work supported
by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0214061. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by John Y. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Finance
John Y. Campbell
NBER Working Paper No. 12149
March 2006
JEL No. G12

                                           ABSTRACT

The welfare benefits of financial markets depend in large part on how effectively households use
these markets. The study of household finance is challenging because household behavior is difficult
to measure accurately, and because households face constraints that are not captured by textbook
models, including fixed costs, uninsurable income risk, borrowing constraints, and contracts that are
non-neutral with respect to inflation. Evidence on participation, diversification, and the exercise of
mortgage refinancing options suggests that many households are reasonably effective investors, but
a minority make significant mistakes. This minority appears to be poorer and less well educated than
the majority of more successful investors. There is some evidence that households understand their
own limitations, and try to avoid financial strategies that require them to make decisions they do not
feel qualified to make. Some financial products involve a cross-subsidy from naive households to
sophisticated households, and this can inhibit the emergence of products that would promote
effective financial decision making by households.

John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
    A presidential address is a privileged opportunity to ask questions without answer-
ing them, and to suggest answers without proving them. I will use this opportunity
to explore a field, household finance, that has attracted much recent interest but still
lacks definition and status within our profession. Teaching and research are still or-
ganized primarily around the traditional fields of asset pricing and corporate finance.
Economists in the former field ask how asset prices are determined in capital markets
and how average asset returns reflect risk. Economists in the latter field ask how
business enterprises use financial instruments to further the interests of their owners,
and in particular to resolve agency problems.

    Household finance, by analogy with corporate finance, asks how households use
financial instruments to attain their objectives. Household financial problems have
many special features that give the field its character. Households must plan over
long but finite horizons; they have important nontraded assets, notably their human
capital; they hold illiquid assets, notably housing; they face constraints on their ability
to borrow; and they are subject to complex taxation. Household asset demands are of
course important in asset pricing too, but wealthy and risk-tolerant households have
a disproportionate impact on equilibrium asset returns whereas household finance is
more concerned with the behavior of typical households.

    Research in finance, as in other parts of economics, can be positive or norma-
tive. Positive research describes what economic agents actually do, while normative
research prescribes what they should do. Economists have often hoped that ac-
tual and ideal behavior coincide, or can be made to coincide by the selection of an
appropriately rich model of agents’ beliefs and preferences. Revealed preference
theory (Samuelson 1938), for example, shows how one can work backwards from a
household’s choices over multiple consumption goods to the implied preferences of the
household. The revealed preference agenda leaves no room for normative economics
as distinct from positive economics.2

    Household finance poses a particular challenge to this agenda, because many
households seek advice from financial planners and other experts, and some house-
holds make decisions that are hard to reconcile with this advice or with any standard
model. One response to this is to maintain the hope that actual and ideal behavior
coincide, but to consider non-standard behavioral models of preferences incorporating
phenomena such as loss aversion and mental accounting. An alternative response
  2
   My colleague Robert Barro summarized this view with characteristic sharpness when he told
me that normative economics is “what you do when your model fails to fit the data”.


                                             1
is to abandon the agenda of revealed preference, and to consider the possibility that
households may not express their preferences optimally. On this view behavioral
finance theory describes the choices households currently make, but standard finance
theory describes the choices that maximize household welfare, and that households
can be educated to make.

    In this address I will follow the second approach. I will compare what we know
about what households actually do–positive household finance–with our body of
knowledge about what households should do–normative household finance. The
comparison is not trivial to make, because positive household finance requires high-
quality data that are hard to obtain, while normative household finance requires
significant extensions of textbook financial theory. I will emphasize that for many
households, the discrepancies between observed and ideal behavior have relatively
minor consequences and can easily be rationalized by small frictions that are ignored
in standard finance theory. For a minority of households, however, particularly poorer
and less educated households, there are larger discrepancies with potentially serious
consequences. I call these investment mistakes, and argue that they are central to
the field of household finance.

    It should not be surprising that some households make investment mistakes, given
the complexity of their financial planning problem and the often confusing financial
products that are oﬀered to them. An important question is what determines the set
of financial products available to households. This part of the field might be called
equilibrium household finance. I suggest that retail financial innovation is slowed
by the cost of advertising and educating households, together with the weakness of
patent protection for financial products. In addition, I use my presidential privilege
to speculate that the existence of naive households permits an equilibrium of the
sort described by Gabaix and Laibson (2006), in which confusing financial products
generate a cross-subsidy from naive to sophisticated households, and in which no
market participant has an incentive to eliminate this cross-subsidy.

    If households make investment mistakes, it may be possible for financial econo-
mists to oﬀer remedies that reduce the incidence and welfare costs of these mistakes.
As a financial educator, I am tempted to call for an expansion of financial education.
But academic finance may have more to oﬀer by influencing consumer regulation,
disclosure rules, and the provision of investment default options. Work on these top-
ics might be called household financial engineering, and it oﬀers a powerful practical
rationale for the study of household finance.


                                          2
    The organization of the paper is as follows. Section I summarizes the empirical
and theoretical challenges faced by researchers studying household finance. Section
II discusses household participation and asset allocation decisions, and section III
studies diversification of risky asset holdings. One of the most important decisions
a household must make concerns the form of its mortgage. Academic research on
mortgages has often been conducted by specialists in real estate or asset pricing
economists interested in the valuation and hedging of mortgage-backed securities.
Instead, in section IV I treat mortgage decisions as an aspect of household finance
and use mortgages to illustrate the broad themes of the field. Section V considers
barriers to innovation in retail financial markets, and section VI concludes.


   I. Two Challenges of Household Finance


   A. Measurement


    Positive household finance asks how households actually invest. This is a con-
ceptually straightforward question, but it is hard to answer because the necessary
data are hard to obtain. In the United States, households guard their financial pri-
vacy jealously: in fact, it may be more unusual today for people to reveal intimate
details of their financial aﬀairs than to reveal details of their intimate aﬀairs. In
addition, many households have complicated finances, with multiple accounts at dif-
ferent financial institutions, having diﬀerent tax status, and including both mutual
funds and individual stocks and bonds. Even households that wish to cooperate with
researchers may have some diﬃculty answering detailed questions accurately.

    The ideal dataset for positive household finance would have at least five charac-
teristics. First, it would cover a representative sample of the entire population. It
is particularly important to have good coverage by both age and wealth, since many
aspects of financial behavior vary with these characteristics. Second, for each house-
hold the dataset would measure both total wealth and an exhaustive breakdown of
wealth into relevant categories. Third, these categories would be suﬃciently disag-
gregated to distinguish between asset classes, and ideally would go down to the level
of individual assets so that one could measure households’ diversification within asset
classes. Fourth, these data would be reported with a high level of accuracy. Finally,
the dataset would follow households over time; that is, it would be a panel dataset
rather than a series of cross-sections.


                                          3
    Most work on household portfolio choice has relied on surveys. The US survey
with the best data on financial wealth is generally thought to be the Survey of Con-
sumer Finances (SCF).3 The SCF scores highly on the first two criteria listed above.
It has good coverage and oversamples the wealthy, who have a disproportionate in-
fluence on asset demands; and it covers all aspects of wealth including both liquid
and illiquid assets. However the SCF is less satisfactory in other respects. It is
only disaggregated enough to address questions of asset allocation; it does not report
holdings of individual assets and thus cannot be used to study diversification. The
SCF, like any survey, relies on the willingness of households to participate and the
accuracy of answers they give when they do participate. Kennickell (1998) reports
that in 1995, about one-third of households chosen for the standard sample refused
to participate in the survey. The refusal rate was higher in the high-wealth sam-
ple: 56% for households in the lowest high-wealth stratum, and 87% for extremely
wealthy households in the highest stratum. Even households that do participate in
the survey may fail to report certain items. In 1995, for example, 64% of stockhold-
ing households reported a numerical value for their stockholdings, 21% stated that
their stockholdings fell within a range, and 15% did not report any value. Finally,
since 1989 the SCF has not followed households over time but has interviewed a fresh
sample of households every three years.4

    There are several ways to improve and check the quality of survey data. The
problem of non-response can be mitigated by oﬀering households the opportunity to
state a range for asset holdings rather than giving a precise answer, possibly using
follow-up questions to narrow the initially chosen range. This approach has been
used with considerable success in the Health and Retirement Survey, which oﬀers
an attractive alternative to the SCF for measuring the behavior of older households
(Juster and Smith 1997, Juster, Smith, and Staﬀord 1999). In some cases it is pos-
sible to cross-check survey evidence against objective external data. For example,
the 1975 Wharton Survey of individual stockholders cross-checked self-reported share
ownership data against corporate records compiled by the New York Stock Exchange
(Blume and Friend 1978); the decennial Residential Finance Survey interviews res-
   3
      Recent studies that use the SCF include Bergstresser and Poterba (2004), Bertaut and Starr-
McCluer (2002), Carroll (2002), Heaton and Lucas (2000), Poterba and Samwick (1997), Tracy and
Schneider (2001), and Tracy, Schneider and Chan (1999).
    4
      Other surveys have similar problems. The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) asks
questions on wealth every five years, but financial assets are divided into only three broad categories
corresponding roughly to cash, bonds, and stocks (Mankiw and Zeldes 1991, Banks, Blundell, and
Smith 2005). The UBS/Gallup survey (Vissing-Jorgensen 2003, Graham, Harvey, and Huang 2005)
relies on telephone interviews, which limits the complexity of the questions that can be asked.

                                                  4
idents of housing units and then contacts their mortgage lenders to verify the data
they provide on their mortgages.

    Given the deficiencies of even the best survey data, there has recently been interest
in alternative data sources. One approach is to use the records of companies that act
as custodians for households, or that lend to households. Schlarbaum, Lewellen, and
Lease (1978) pioneered this approach with a study of approximately 3,000 retail bro-
kerage accounts held during the 1960’s; Odean (1998, 1999) studied 10,000 discount
brokerage accounts held during the 1990’s; and Barber and Odean (2000) expanded
the sample to 78,000 accounts at the same discount brokerage.5 These brokerage
records are highly accurate reports of holdings and trades in individual stocks, but
they sample customers of the brokerage house rather than the entire population and
do not necessarily represent total wealth even of these customers, who may also have
other accounts elsewhere. Similar diﬃculties aﬄict recent studies of asset allocation
in 401(k) accounts and other tax-favored retirement accounts.6

    Some countries maintain centralized registers of shareownership. Grinblatt and
Keloharju (2000, 2001) use data from the Finnish Central Securities Depositary to
measure daily transactions in and holdings of Finnish equities by Finnish individuals
and institutions and foreign investors. These data provide a comprehensive picture of
Finnish household trading behavior in individual stocks, but do not reveal households’
indirect holdings through mutual funds, their holdings of foreign stocks, or their
allocations to other asset classes.

    Government tax records are a tried-and-true source of accurate financial data.
Blume and Friend (1975), for example, use dividend payments reported on income tax
returns, together with dividend-price ratios, to infer taxpayers’ holdings of individual
stocks. Unfortunately this method of inferring wealth from reported income gives
only a partial picture of household assets. The US tax system requires reporting
of wealth itself only in connection with the estate tax, which is levied only on the
holdings of the very rich at the date of death. Blume and Friend (1978) and Kopczuk
and Saez (2004) have used US estate tax records to study household asset allocation.
   5
     Other recent papers using the large discount brokerage dataset include Barber and Odean (2001),
Zhu (2002), Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2003), Ivkovic, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2004), and Goetzmann
and Kumar (2004). Feng and Seasholes (2004) analyze a similar dataset from China.
   6
     Recent studies of such accounts include Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003), Ameriks and
Zeldes (2004), Benartzi and Thaler (2001), Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2002, 2004), and
Madrian and Shea (2001).



                                                 5
    In Sweden, by contrast, households are liable to pay a wealth tax throughout
their lives, and this has led the Swedish government to construct detailed records
of households’ financial assets. Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2006) use Swedish
government records to construct a panel of wealth and income data covering the
entire population of Sweden (almost 5 million households). The dataset provides
highly disaggregated information on the income, wealth, demographic composition,
education and location of all households. Individual financial asset, mutual fund and
real estate portfolios are provided at the single property and security level. Each
individual can be followed over time. The income data begin in 1983 and the wealth
data in 1999. This dataset aﬀords the unique opportunity to analyze the financial
behavior of the entire population of an industrialized country.7


      B. Modelling


    Normative household finance asks how households should invest. This is chal-
lenging because household decision problems involve many complications that are
neglected by standard textbooks. Perhaps most obviously, households must plan
their financial strategies over a lifetime rather than over a single short period. The
seminal work of Merton (1971, 1973) introduced a conceptual framework for long-term
financial planning when investment opportunities vary over time. Merton empha-
sized that long-term investors must consider not only risks to their wealth, but also
risks to the productivity of their wealth–the rate of return at which wealth can be
reinvested. This implies that long-term investors should hedge shocks to any state
variable that predicts expected returns, as well as shocks to wealth itself.

    The Merton framework is much harder to work with than the traditional mean-
variance analysis of portfolio choice, and it was not until the 1990’s that empirically
usable versions of the Merton model were developed. One branch of the literature
concentrates on shocks to the real interest rate, assuming that all movements in invest-
ment opportunities are captured by this variable–that is, assuming that risk premia
are constant through time (Campbell and Viceira 2001, Wachter 2003). A second
branch of the literature concentrates on the equity premium, assuming that it follows
an exogenous time-series process such as an AR(1) (Kim and Omberg 1996, Camp-
  7
    Massa and Simonov (2003) also study the portfolios of Swedish households by merging survey
data on income, wealth, and asset allocation with data on individual stock ownership of Swedish
companies from 1995 to 2000. Stock ownership data were available in this period since Swedish
companies were legally required to report the identity of most of their shareholders.


                                              6
bell and Viceira 1999). More recent work allows for general multivariate processes
to drive both interest rates and risk premia on multiple assets (Brennan, Schwartz,
and Lagnado 1997, Lynch 2001, Campbell and Viceira 2003).

    An appealing feature of these models is that they can explain some obvious discrep-
ancies between the predictions of mean-variance analysis and the financial planning
advice that is usually oﬀered to households. For example, Canner, Mankiw, and
Weil (1997) point out that financial planners typically advise conservative investors
to hold more bonds relative to stocks in their risky portfolios, contrary to the mutual
fund theorem of Tobin (1958). This advice makes sense if bonds are hedges against
time-variation in interest rates.

    An important theme in this work is the distinction between real and nominal
magnitudes. The risk properties of long-term nominal bonds, for example, depend
critically on the properties that one assumes for inflation. If inflation is well con-
trolled, then nominal bonds are safe assets for long-term investors, but inflation can
make them highly risky and poor proxies for inflation-indexed bonds. Because infla-
tion shocks are persistent, the distinction between real and nominal bonds is much
more important than the distinction between real and nominal bills in short-horizon
models.

    Models in the Merton tradition assume that all wealth is held in a liquid, easily
tradable form. But the largest component of wealth for most households is human
capital, which is nontradable. Households receive labor income but cannot sell claims
to that income. If labor income is perfectly correlated with traded assets, and if
households can short those assets, then households can hedge their labor income
risk and undo the eﬀects of labor income on their total portfolio (Bodie, Merton,
and Samuelson 1992). In practice, however, much of the risk in labor income is
idiosyncratic and therefore unhedgeable. This background risk increases eﬀective
risk aversion and leads households to invest more cautiously (Heaton and Lucas 2000,
Viceira 2001). Some households may be able to increase their labor supply in response
to poor investment returns, either by increasing hours worked or by delaying their
retirement; this added flexibility increases households’ willingness to take financial
risks (Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson 1992, Farhi and Panageas 2005).8
   8
    A small recent literature builds on the human capital literature in labor economics, treating
education as a risky investment that is chosen jointly with risky financial assets (Palacios-Huerta
2003, Saks and Shore 2005).




                                                7
    There is a debate in the literature about the risk properties of labor income.
Some authors find that labor income is similar to an implicit holding of safe assets,
stimulating investment in risky financial assets (Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout 2005);
others argue that labor income and capital income covary in the long run (Benzoni,
Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein 2005), or that the volatility of idiosyncratic labor
income risk covaries negatively with stock returns (Lynch and Tan 2004, Storeslet-
ten, Telmer, and Yaron 2004), in which case labor income crowds out stock market
investments.

    Housing is an asset class of dominant importance for middle-class homeowners.
Houses are long-term assets that deliver a stream of housing services to their owners;
in this sense they are like long-term bonds and can be used to hedge changes in the
relative price of housing and non-housing consumption (Pelizzon and Weber 2005,
Sinai and Souleles 2005). But houses are also illiquid assets, so homeowners find
it costly to adjust their consumption of housing services in response to economic
shocks. This illiquidity may discourage homeownership and financial risktaking by
homeowners.9

   Housing, unlike labor income, provides collateral that can be used to facilitate bor-
rowing. Another important aspect of household finance is the existence of borrowing
constraints.10 Households must consider the fact that their future consumption may
be determined not just by their wealth and by investment opportunities, but also by
their net future income if they are borrowing constrained. Financial investments
that do poorly when income is temporarily low may be unattractive for this reason.

    Borrowing constraints are likely to be more important for young households than
for older households that have built up some retirement savings. Life-cycle aspects of
household finance also complicate the normative theory, because one cannot use sta-
tionary infinite-horizon models but instead must use more complicated finite-horizon
models that capture the evolution of financial strategy as households age and accu-
   9
     See Cocco (2005), Flavin and Nakagawa (2004), Fratantoni (2001), Shore and Sinai (2005), and
Yao and Zhang (2005). Davidoﬀ (2006) finds that the covariance between labor income and house
prices aﬀects the size of a household’s position in owner-occupied housing.
  10
     A variety of studies have found that consumption responds to predictable changes in income in
a manner that suggests the relevance of borrowing constraints for many households. Particularly
convincing are recent microeconomic studies of social security tax withholding (Parker 1999), income
tax refunds (Souleles 1999, Johnson, Parker, and Souleles 2004), and paycheck receipt (Stephens
2006).




                                                 8
mulate financial assets.11

    Finally, household decisions must take account of the complexities and non-neutralities
of the tax code. Relevant complications include the taxation of nominal rather than
real interest, the availability of tax-favored retirement accounts, the tax deductibility
of mortgage interest, the taxation of capital gains only when these gains are realized
through asset sales, and the adjustment of the capital gains tax basis at death.12

    A particularly important example that illustrates how these considerations can in-
teract with one another is the choice between an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) and
a fixed-rate mortgage (FRM). An adjustable-rate mortgage is eﬀectively a floating-
rate note issued by a household, while a fixed-rate mortgage is a long-term nominal
bond, typically with a call option that allows the household to repay its loan at face
value and refinance the mortgage if interest rate movements make it desirable to do
so. In textbook financial theory, a floating-rate note is a safer instrument than a
long-term nominal bond; it has a stable value that is almost unaﬀected by movements
in interest rates, while the value of a long-term bond is highly sensitive to interest
rates. Yet financial planners typically describe ARMs as risky for households.13

    This apparent paradox can be resolved by taking account of two special character-
istics of the household financial problem. First, the household is planning over a long
horizon. If real interest rates vary, then an ARM exposes the household to the risk
that real borrowing costs will increase. The household may wish to hedge this risk,
as in the Merton framework, by using a long-term fixed-rate mortgage. The ideal
instrument for this purpose would be an inflation-indexed mortgage, but if inflation
risk is modest a nominal FRM may be an adequate proxy.

       Second, the household faces the risk that borrowing constraints may bind in future
  11
     Gourinchas and Parker (2002) provide a workhorse model of saving over the life-cycle in the
presence of risky labor income. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) extend the model to allow for
portfolio choice. Davis, Kubler, and Willen (2003) argue that the lowest and most realistic equity
demands result from borrowing that is expensive (costing the average rate of return on equity) rather
than impossible. The possibility of expensive borrowing reduces precautionary saving and thus
equity demand later in life.
  12
     Poterba (2002) surveys the vast literature on taxation and optimal portfolio choice. Recent
contributions that emphasize life-cycle eﬀects include Dammon, Spatt, and Zhang (2001, 2004) and
Gomes, Michaelides and Polkovnichenko (2004).
  13
     Fisher and Shelly (2002), for example, write “An ARM can pay oﬀ, but it’s a gamble. Sometimes
there’s a lot to be said for something that’s safe and dependable, like a fixed-rate mortgage.” (p.
319)


                                                 9
periods. If future income declines temporarily, the household may wish to borrow;
but it may be unable to do so if future house prices have fallen so that collateral is
unavailable. If future borrowing constraints are a concern, then ARMs are relatively
risky even when real interest rates are constant. To see this, consider what happens
when expected future inflation increases. The nominal interest rate, and hence
the required monthly payments on an ARM, increase even though the price level
has not yet increased. This accelerated repayment of the loan compensates the
lender for future inflation. It has no eﬀect on a household that can borrow to make
the accelerated payments required by the ARM, but it reduces consumption for a
borrowing-constrained household.

    Campbell and Cocco (2003) solve a numerical model of household mortgage choice
and show that ARMs should be attractive to unconstrained households when infla-
tion risk is large relative to real interest rate risk; they should be attractive to po-
tentially borrowing-constrained households with low risk aversion; but they should
be unattractive to risk-averse borrowing-constrained households, particularly those
that have high mortgage debt relative to their income. In this paper, Appendix A
presents a simple analytical model in which the same points can be understood.

     A fundamental issue that confronts the normative literature is how to specify
the utility function of households. It is common to assume that households have
time-separable power utility or Epstein-Zin utility, so that their relative risk aversion
does not vary with their wealth. Asset pricing models with this feature capture the
stability of interest rates and asset valuation ratios in the face of long-run economic
growth. But some aspects of short-run asset price behavior and cross-sectional vari-
ation in risktaking suggest that relative risk aversion declines with wealth. Carroll
(2002) has proposed a model in which bequest utility has lower curvature than con-
sumption utility, so that risk aversion falls as households accumulate wealth over the
life cycle; and models of habit formation (Campbell and Cochrane 1999) or consump-
tion commitments (Chetty and Szeidl 2005) imply that risk aversion fluctuates with
short-term movements in wealth. Ultimately it should be possible to assess these
alternative models by their consistency with the behavior of households that appear
to be more sophisticated, or with the advice of financial planners (Canner, Mankiw,
and Weil 1997). Until some consensus is reached, normative household finance should
emphasize results that are robust to alternative specifications of household utility.




                                           10
   II. Participation and Asset Allocation

    How do households allocate their assets across broad categories such as money
market instruments, bonds, equities, and real estate? How many households par-
ticipate in these markets at all? Given that they have decided to participate, what
fraction of their assets do they allocate to each category? How does household be-
havior vary with age, wealth, and other household characteristics? These questions
can be answered without having detailed information on individual asset holdings, so
the data problems described in section I.A are not as serious in this context.

    Following Bertaut and Haliassos (1995), Bertaut and Starr-McCluer (2002), and
Tracy, Schneider and Chan (1999), I now summarize the information in the 2001
Survey of Consumer Finances about these questions. Figure 1 presents the cross-
sectional wealth distribution. The horizontal axis in this figure shows the percentiles
of the distribution of total assets, defined broadly to include both financial assets and
nonfinancial assets (durable goods, real estate, and private business equity, but not
defined benefit pension plans or human capital). The vertical axis reports dollars
on a log scale. The three lines in the figure show the average levels of total assets,
financial assets, and net worth (total assets less debts, including mortgages, home
equity loans, credit card debt, and other debt) at each percentile of the total assets
distribution. It is clear from the figure that many households have negligible financial
assets. Even the median household has financial assets of only $35,000, net worth of
$86,000, and total assets of $135,000.

    The figure also shows the extreme skewness of the wealth distribution. Wealthy
households at the right of the figure have an overwhelming influence on aggregate
statistics; if these households behave diﬀerently from households in the middle of
the wealth distribution, then aggregates can tell us very little about the financial
decisionmaking of a typical household. In asset pricing models, the behavior of
wealthy households is disproportionately important for asset price determination,
but household finance is more concerned with the behavior of typical households and
its implications for their welfare.

   A. Wealth eﬀects

    Figure 2 illustrates the participation decisions of households with diﬀerent levels
of wealth. The horizontal axis is the same as in Figure 1, but the vertical axis now

                                           11
shows the fraction of households that participate in particular asset classes. For this
figure I have aggregated the SCF asset data into several broad categories: safe assets,
vehicles, real estate, public equity, private business assets, and bonds.14

    Given the negligible financial assets held by households at the left of the figure, it
should not be surprising that these households often fail to participate in risky finan-
cial markets. Standard financial theory predicts that households should take at least
some amount of any gamble with a positive expected return, but this result ignores
fixed costs of participation, which can easily overwhelm the gain from participation
at low levels of wealth. Figure 2 shows that most households in the bottom quar-
tile of the wealth distribution hold only liquid assets and vehicles, with a minority
participating in real estate through homeownership.

    As we move to the right in the figure we see an increasing fraction of households
participating in equity markets, but participation is far from universal even among
quite wealthy households. This finding has also been emphasized by Mankiw and
Zeldes (1991), Haliassos and Bertaut (1995), and Heaton and Lucas (2000). Limited
participation among the wealthy poses a significant challenge to financial theory and
is one of the main stylized facts of household finance. At the 80th percentile of the
wealth distribution, for example, a typical household has about $200,000 in financial
assets, but almost 20% of these households own no public equity.

    Many wealthy households have significant private business assets. Gentry and
Hubbard (2004) report that private business owners hold as much as 40% of total
net worth even though they are less than 10% of the population, implying that these
households are particularly important for aggregate asset demands and hence for
asset pricing. Figure 2 shows that the fraction of business owners increases from
22% at the 80th percentile of the wealth distribution to 70% at the right tail of
the distribution. Heaton and Lucas (2000) have emphasized that private business
assets substitute for public equity in the portfolios of some wealthy households. The
fraction of households at the 80th percentile of the wealth distribution that hold
neither private business assets nor public equity is just under 10%. Thus private
business assets can explain much of the nonparticipation in public equity markets by
wealthy households, but there remains a significant number of these households who
  14
    Safe assets include checking, saving, money market, and call accounts, CD’s, and US savings
bonds. Public equity includes stocks and mutual funds held in taxable or retirement accounts or
trusts. Bonds include government bonds other than US savings bonds, municipal, corporate, foreign,
and mortgage-backed bonds, cash-value life insurance, and amounts in mutual funds, retirement
accounts, trusts, and other managed assets that are not invested in stock.

                                               12
have no exposure to equity risk of any kind.

    Figure 3 illustrates the asset allocation decisions of households with diﬀerent levels
of wealth. The horizontal axis is the same as in the two previous figures, but the
vertical axis now shows the weight of an asset class in the aggregate portfolio of
households at each level of wealth (equivalently, the wealth-weighted mean share of
the asset class, which is almost identical to the unweighted mean share, for households
within a given wealth range). The figure shows the dominant role of liquid assets and
vehicles for the poor, and real estate–primarily owner-occupied housing–for middle-
class households. Mortgage debt is correspondingly important for these households.
Equity has some importance for the middle class, but takes the largest portfolio share
only for wealthier households at the right of the figure.15

   Figure 3 shows that wealthy households are willing to take greater risk in their
portfolios. This is partly the result of greater participation in risky asset classes by
wealthy households, but also partly the result of higher portfolio shares conditional
on participation. Carroll (2002) emphasizes this phenomenon and shows that similar
patterns exist in several European countries.16


       B. Demographic eﬀects


   Wealth is not the only household characteristic that may predict its willingness to
take financial risk. Income, age, race, education, and self-reported attitudes to risk
may also be important.

   Before one can understand the relative importance of these eﬀects, one must
confront a fundamental identification problem (Heckman and Robb 1985, Ameriks
and Zeldes 2004). At any time t a person born in year b is at years old, where
at = t − b. Thus it is inherently impossible to separately identify age eﬀects, time
  15
     A similar figure, for the median portfolio share rather than the wealth-weighted mean portfolio
share, is shown in Tracy, Schneider, and Chan (1999). Joe Tracy calls it a “whale chart” because
the real estate line defines the body of a whale, while the equity line traces out its tail. Kopczuk
and Saez (2004) use estate tax returns to look at the extreme right tail of the wealth distribution.
They find that the real estate share continues to decline, while the equity share continues to increase,
within the top 0.5% of the population.
  16
     King and Leape (1998) capture the same phenomenon in a diﬀerent way, by estimating wealth
elasticities of demand for diﬀerent asset classes. They find that risky assets tend to be luxury goods
with high wealth elasticities.


                                                  13
eﬀects, and cohort (birth-year) eﬀects on portfolio choice. Even if one has complete
panel data on portfolios of households over time, any pattern in the data can be fit
equally well by age and time eﬀects, age and cohort eﬀects, or time and cohort eﬀects.

    Theory suggests that there should be time eﬀects on portfolio choice if households
perceive changes over time in the risks or expected excess returns of risky assets.
Theory also suggests that there should be age eﬀects on portfolio choice if older
investors have shorter horizons than younger investors and investment opportunities
are time-varying, or if older investors have less human wealth relative to financial
wealth than younger investors (Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson 1992, Campbell and
Viceira 2002). Thus it seems hard to rule out either time or age eﬀects in studying
portfolio choice. Cohort eﬀects are more problematic. In principle cohort eﬀects
could be caused by diﬀerent labor market experiences that aﬀect the ratio of human
to financial wealth held by a cohort at each age, but this eﬀect is unlikely to be
strong in modern US conditions. Cohort eﬀects could also arise from diﬀerences
in preferences, perhaps driven by diﬀerent asset market experiences. Such eﬀects
cannot be identified by the data without modelling them (or age or time eﬀects) in
some way. I will follow Heaton and Lucas (2000) and most other studies by setting
cohort eﬀects to zero. Under this assumption age eﬀects can be estimated in any
cross-section.

    Table I summarizes demographic eﬀects on asset allocation in the 2001 SCF. The
left panel of the table reports logit regressions of asset-class participation onto house-
hold income, wealth, and demographic characteristics.17 The right panel reports
regressions of portfolio shares onto the same variables, conditional on participation.
Within each panel, the first regression looks at public equity (including equity held
in retirement accounts), and the second regression looks at private business assets.
Standard errors are reported below each coeﬃcient, and coeﬃcients significant at the
10% level or better are indicated with stars. To illustrate the quantitative impor-
tance of each eﬀect in the logit regressions, the table also reports the participation
probability for a reference household, and the change in this probability caused by a
change in each dummy variable from zero to one, or a one standard deviation change
in each continuous variable.

       The table shows that in the US in 2001, there was a weak negative age eﬀect on
  17
    The influence of outliers is limited by truncating income and wealth at the 1st and 99th per-
centiles of the cross-sectional distribution. The regressions use logs of income and wealth, but
results are similar using the level of income rather than the log.


                                               14
participation in public equity markets.18 This result is presumably due to increased
participation by younger households during the 1990’s, and the fact that the regression
controls for wealth and income which tend to be higher for middle-aged households.
Unsurprisingly, households that report they have no tolerance for investment risk
are less likely to hold public equity. There are strong positive eﬀects of education,
income, and wealth on public equity participation.

    Results are somewhat diﬀerent for private business ownership. Here there is a
humped age eﬀect, reflecting the tendency for younger households to acquire and
older households to sell oﬀ private businesses. Income has a U-shaped eﬀect on the
incidence of private business ownership, with a minimum at income of $250,000, and
wealth has an extremely powerful, but imprecisely estimated, quadratically increasing
eﬀect. Both these variables capture the strong tendency for the richest and highest-
income households to own private businesses. White households are more likely to
own private businesses, but there are no significant eﬀects of education.

   Turning to portfolio shares for participants, the main influence is wealth. For
both public equity and private business assets there is a quadratic pattern with a
minimum share at $70,000 for public equity and $85,000 for private equity. This
pattern reflects the fact that low-wealth households are likely to hold large portfolio
shares if they participate at all, but in the upper part of the wealth distribution
portfolio shares are strongly increasing in wealth. White and educated households
have higher portfolio shares in public equity than other households.

    The regressions in Table I omit some variables that have been found to be impor-
tant in other studies. Bertaut and Starr-McCluer (2002) show that defined benefit
pension rights increase the allocation to risky assets, while self-employment decreases
it. Rosen and Wu (2004), using the Health and Retirement Study, show that poor self-
reported health decreases the allocation to risky assets. These eﬀects work strongly
through the participation decision, and also to some extent through asset allocation
conditional on participation. Poterba and Samwick (2003) show that households
with higher marginal tax rates are more likely to hold tax-advantaged assets such as
stock and tax-exempt bonds, and more likely to hold assets in tax-deferred accounts.

   I have described household asset allocation at a point in time, but have not at-
  18
     Stronger age eﬀects on equity market participation are reported by Bertaut and Starr-McCluer
(2002) for earlier SCF data, by Banks and Tanner (2002) for the UK, by Guiso and Jappelli (2002)
for Italy, and by Iwaisako (2003) for Japan.



                                               15
tempted to follow households through time to see how their asset allocations evolve.
A small recent literature does this and finds strong evidence for inertia in asset allo-
cation. Participants in retirement savings plans rarely alter the allocations of their
contributions or rebalance their portfolios, and default options have long-lasting ef-
fects on these portfolios (Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden 2003, Ameriks and Zeldes
2004, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick 2002, 2004, Madrian and Shea 2001).
Capital gains and losses also generate little rebalancing in US survey data studied by
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2005).


   C. Interpretation


   How can we make sense of these empirical results? Textbook financial theory
implies that all households, no matter how risk averse, should hold some equities if
the equity premium is positive. Thus limited participation in the equity market must
be due to a failure of one of the standard assumptions.

    One possibility is that some households are unaware of the existence of stocks as
an asset class; over 35% of Italian households reported that they were unaware of
stocks in the late 1990’s (Guiso and Jappelli 2006), but this proportion is likely to be
much smaller in the United States. Alternatively, households may have nonstandard
preferences or may face fixed costs, which may be either one-time-only entry costs or
ongoing participation costs. Fixed costs can explain why participation increases with
wealth, since a larger portfolio is more likely to justify the payment of a fixed cost to
increase return. One-time entry costs imply strong positive age eﬀects, since a house-
hold will continue to participate once a fixed entry cost has been paid; but ongoing
participation costs produce limited participation with weaker age eﬀects. Haliassos
and Bertaut (1995) and Vissing-Jorgensen (2003) show that moderate ongoing par-
ticipation costs can justify the nonparticipation of many US households, although not
the richest households.

    Fixed participation costs can be interpreted in diﬀerent ways. One approach is to
think of fixed costs as capturing time and money that must be spent in order to invest
in the stock market. Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), for example, points out that equity
ownership often complicates the preparation of tax returns. Alternatively, fixed
costs may be an economist’s description of psychological factors that make equity
ownership uncomfortable for some households. Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004),
for example, find that households that interact less with other households in their

                                           16
community are less likely to own stocks, suggesting that households prefer to follow
financial practices that they know they share with others. Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2005) find that households that express reluctance to trust others are less
likely to own stocks. On this interpretation, nonparticipation can be regarded as
an investment mistake, one that households with high fixed costs are more likely to
make.19

    Both interpretations must confront the important eﬀect of education on equity
ownership. Table I shows that education directly predicts equity ownership, even
controlling for age, income, and wealth, and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2005) re-
port that the eﬀect of trust on equity ownership is weaker for educated households. It
is tempting to conclude that educated households have learned that nonparticipation
is an investment mistake, or as Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) put it, that “education
and the free acquisition of information are important in overcoming the barrier to
stockholding erected by ignorance and misperceptions”. While this conclusion is
probably correct, it is also plausible that education reduces the objective costs of
stock market participation. Related to this, in the next section I show that edu-
cated households in Sweden diversify their portfolios more eﬃciently, and therefore
can expect to earn higher returns per unit of risk if they do participate.

    An interesting question is whether stock market participants are more risk-tolerant
than nonparticipants. If nonparticipants are relatively risk-averse, then small fixed
costs suﬃce to deter them from participation. Carroll (2002) proposes a model in
which all agents have a common utility function with declining relative risk aversion,
and argues that this model explains the high participation rate and more aggressive
asset allocation of wealthy households. However Haliassos and Michaelides (2003)
and Gomes and Michaelides (2005) argue that risk-averse households have a strong
precautionary saving motive which leads them to accumulate more wealth. If there is
exogenous cross-sectional variation in risk aversion and the precautionary saving eﬀect
is strong enough, those households that are wealthy enough to pay the fixed costs of
stock market participation may actually be more risk-averse than nonparticipating
households.

   Other features of the data can be explained by the eﬀect of background risk on
portfolio choice. Self-employed households, and households with significant private
  19
    A similar issue of interpretation arises if one accounts for inertia in asset allocation by invoking
fixed costs of portfolio rebalancing. Such fixed costs may be objective, or simply another way to
describe an investment mistake.


                                                  17
business assets, are exposed to private business risk that increases their eﬀective risk
aversion even if it is uncorrelated with returns on publicly traded equities. Private
business risk has an even stronger discouraging eﬀect on equity ownership if, as seems
plausible, it is positively correlated with public equity risk. If I include a dummy
for private business ownership in the public equity participation regression of Table
I, it enters negatively although not significantly. The eﬀect of poor health on asset
allocation can also be understood as the eﬀect of background risk, in this case risk to
spending needs rather than risk to income.

       III. Diversification

    A second major topic in household finance is how households construct their port-
folios within each asset class. Accurate measurement is significantly more challenging
in this context, because we would ideally like to measure the holdings of each indi-
vidual asset, and survey data do not generally give this much detail. However a
large and ingenious empirical literature has explored the composition of household
stock portfolios using partial information from surveys (for example, on the decision
to hold any individual stocks, and the number of individual stocks held), tax re-
turns (which list dividends by payer and thus reveal individual stockholdings), and
brokerage accounts. The main conclusions of this literature are as follows.

    First, many households own relatively few individual stocks. Analyses of the
Survey of Consumer Finances find that among households that hold individual stocks
directly, the median number of stocks held was two until 2001, when it rose to three
(Blume and Friend 1975, Kelly 1995, Polkovnichenko 2005). Of course, many house-
holds own equity indirectly, through mutual funds or retirement accounts, and these
indirect holdings tend to be much better diversified.20 Thus it is not clear that
concentrated individual stockholdings have a large eﬀect on household portfolio risk.

   Second, local bias, well known from aggregate data (French and Poterba 1991,
Cooper and Kaplanis 1994), shows up in household-level data both with respect
to domestic vs. foreign investments, and with respect to regional vs. non-regional
  20
    Curcuru et al. (2004) define households to be undiversified if they hold more than 50% of
their equity in a brokerage account with fewer than 10 stocks. They find that the fraction of
undiversified households has been declining, from almost a third of stockholding households, owning
21% of equity, in the 1989 SCF to 14% of households, owning 12% of equity, in the 2001 SCF.
Polkovnichenko (2005) also emphasizes the co-existence of mutual funds and individual stocks in
household portfolios.

                                                18
companies. Huberman (2001), using company records, finds that individual investors
prefer to own the stocks of their local telecommunications company. Zhu (2002),
using brokerage account data, finds that regional bias is stronger among investors
who do not own international stocks; this suggests a connection between the two
forms of local bias. Feng and Seasholes (2004) find that Chinese investors overweight
not only local companies, but also companies that are traded on a local exchange,
suggesting that familiarity drives local bias.

    Third, many US households have large holdings in the stock of their employer, par-
ticularly within their 401(k) retirement savings accounts (Mitchell and Utkus 2003).
Some of these holdings result from employer policies, but Benartzi (2001) shows that
a substantial fraction of unrestricted employee contributions go to employer stock
rather than diversified alternatives. This is especially true when the employer stock
has performed well over the previous decade, suggesting that households extrapolate
the past performance of the employer.21

    Fourth, discount brokerage customers trade intensively (Odean 1999, Barber and
Odean 2000). This finding contrasts with the inertia in asset allocation found in
studies of retirement savings plans, probably because discount brokerage customers
tend to be households with a particular interest in equity trading. Brokerage cus-
tomers also display a disposition eﬀect: a tendency to sell winners and hold losers.
Odean (1998) shows that the propensity among brokerage customers to realize gains
is substantially greater than the propensity to realize losses, except in December when
tax-loss selling reverses the relationship. Selling winners can be a way to restore di-
versification to a portfolio that has become excessively concentrated, but the tendency
to hold losers is hard to rationalize, both because it is tax-ineﬃcient and because it
lowers pre-tax returns to the extent that stocks display momentum.

   Finally, there is heterogeneity in the strength of these eﬀects across households.
Puri and Robinson (2005), for example, show that households with optimistic beliefs
about their life expectancy place a higher portfolio weight on individual stocks even
though they do not place a higher overall weight on equities. Graham, Harvey,
and Huang (2005) find that investors who claim to be comfortable with investment
products also tend to trade more frequently and to be more diversified internationally.
  21
    However Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2004) find that 401(k) plan participants reallo-
cate their portfolios by selling company stock after the stock rises, consistent with the disposition
eﬀect.




                                                 19
    There is an active debate about the performance of concentrated portfolios. Odean
(1999) finds that the stocks purchased by discount brokerage customers tend to un-
derperform the stocks sold by these households. Zhu (2002) argues that households
with a relatively weak local bias–which tend to have higher income and professional
status–outperform households with a stronger local bias. On the other hand Ivković
and Weisbenner (2003) find that households’ local investments outperform their non-
local ones, and Ivković, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2004) find that among wealthier
households, concentrated portfolios have higher average returns than diversified port-
folios although they also have higher risk and lower Sharpe ratios. All these studies
use account-level data from a discount brokerage.


   A. Household risk exposures in Sweden


    A weakness of this literature is that it cannot directly measure the risk exposures of
households. Surveys do not identify individual stocks or mutual funds, and brokerage
accounts do not reveal total portfolios. In joint research with Laurent Calvet and
Paolo Sodini (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2006), I have used Swedish data to take a
more direct look at the idiosyncratic risk in Swedish household portfolios. We adopt
the perspective that systematic risk is compensated and idiosyncratic risk is not, so
that taking idiosyncratic risk is an investment mistake. Since the time dimension
of our dataset is short, we do not attempt to measure the performance of Swedish
household portfolios directly.

    The Swedish data appear to be broadly consistent with US data as regards asset
allocation: at the aggregate level, real estate accounts for over 70% of household
assets, bank deposits and money market funds for 11%, directly held stocks and
mutual funds for 6% each, and bonds, derivatives, and capital insurance products
for the remainder. At the end of 2002, 62% of households participated in financial
markets by holding financial assets other than bank deposits and money market funds.

    We construct a sample of 100,000 households and measure the composition of
their portfolios at the end of 2002, down to the level of individual stocks and mutual
funds. We calculate the risk properties of these portfolios by estimating a variance-
covariance matrix Σ for the returns of all stocks and mutual funds held by Swedish
households. Then, if a household h has portfolio weight vector ω h , the variance
of its portfolio return is estimated as ω 0h Σω h . This procedure captures the risk
in household portfolios at a point in time, although it does not track the trading

                                           20
decisions of households within the year.

    The median household in our sample has a risky portfolio with a standard devia-
tion of 21%. Part of this standard deviation comes from exposure to systematic risk
in the world equity market, and part comes from unsystematic risk. As a measure
of systematic risk, we calculate the standard deviation of the fitted value in a re-
gression of each household’s portfolio return on the dollar excess return of the MSCI
All World Index. For the median household, this systematic standard deviation is
14%. The standard deviation of the residual, a measure of unsystematic risk, is 16%,
implying that more than half of the median Swedish household’s portfolio variance is
idiosyncratic.

   Although Swedish households can obtain the dollar excess return on international
stocks by hedging their currency exposure when they invest internationally, this may
be an unrealistic benchmark given that international equity funds widely marketed in
Sweden are not currency-hedged. If we repeat the above exercise with the Swedish
krona excess return on the MSCI index, we find that slightly less than half of the
median household’s portfolio variance is idiosyncratic.

    While the median standard deviation of the risky portfolio return is 21%, there is
wide variation in this number across households. Some households take low risk and
hold primarily bond funds; others take high risk. The 95th percentile of the risky
portfolio standard deviation is 51%, and the 99th percentile is 70%. Portfolios with
this level of risk tend to have betas above one, but they also have extremely high
shares of idiosyncratic as opposed to systematic risk.

       To analyze idiosyncratic risk in a portfolio, it is helpful to consider a stylized
symmetrical model in which all the assets in the portfolio of household h have the
same idiosyncratic variance σ 2ah and the same correlation ρah with each other. It
is straightforward to show that the idiosyncratic variance of the household portfolio,
σ 2ih , satisfies
                            σ 2ih = Cah σ 2ah + (1 − Cah )ρah σ 2ah ,                 (1)
where Cah = ω0h ωh is a measure of the concentration of the overall portfolio. Let c̄a
denote the average value of log Cah in the population, and C̄a = exp(c̄a ). A loglin-
earization of (1) around ρah = 0 and cah = c̄a implies
                                                      µ       ¶
                                          1          1 1
                   log(σ ih ) ≈ log σ ah + log Cah +       − 1 ρah .              (2)
                                          2          2 C̄a
This decomposition relates log idiosyncratic portfolio standard deviation to the log

                                           21
of the average idiosyncratic standard deviation of assets in the portfolio, the log con-
centration of the portfolio, and the average correlation across assets in the portfolio.

    The above analysis treats all assets in the portfolio equally, whether they are
stocks or mutual funds. An alternative approach is to assume that mutual funds are
fully diversified, with zero idiosyncratic risk. Let Dh denote the share of directly
held stocks in the risky portfolio, and let Csh = Cah /Dh2 denote the concentration of
the stock portion of the portfolio. Then
                                                           µ       ¶
                                               1          1 1
               log(σ ih ) ≈ log Dh + log σ sh + log Csh +       − 1 ρsh ,          (3)
                                               2          2 C̄s

where s subscripts denote the characteristics of the directly held stocks in the port-
folio. This alternative decomposition attributes idiosyncratic risk to a high share of
stocks rather than mutual funds in the portfolio, volatile stocks, a concentrated stock
portfolio, and correlated stocks.

    In the Swedish data, we find that portfolios with high idiosyncratic risk tend to
have high shares of directly owned stocks, and the directly owned portfolios tend to
be concentrated in one or two volatile stocks. Concentration, however, can be a
misleading statistic; many portfolios with low idiosyncratic risk also contain one or
two directly owned stocks, but these portfolios are dominated by mutual funds and
contain only a small share of directly owned stocks. This pattern illustrates the
danger of looking only at the number of directly held stocks in a portfolio without
considering the broader context within which those stocks are held. Correlation
across stocks in the portfolio contributes very little to the cross-sectional risk pattern
in Swedish portfolios.

    In order to evaluate the consequences of underdiversification for household welfare,
we assume that mean returns on stocks and mutual funds obey an international asset
pricing model (either the CAPM or the three-factor Fama-French model, estimated in
dollars). This assumption avoids the diﬃcult task of estimating average returns on
individual stocks and mutual funds from short historical time series, while enabling
us to plot Swedish household portfolios on a mean-standard deviation diagram. By
assumption, all portfolios must fall below the eﬃcient frontier, which in the case of
the international CAPM is a straight line connecting the riskless rate to the currency-
hedged return on the MSCI world index. We find that many household portfolios
come close to the Sharpe ratio of the unhedged world index (which we estimate at
35%), but almost none attain the eﬃcient Sharpe ratio of the currency-hedged world

                                           22
index, which we estimate at 45%. The Swedish domestic equity index, with an
estimated Sharpe ratio of 27%, lies within the middle of the distribution of household
portfolios.

    There are several ways to measure portfolio ineﬃciency within this framework.
One is to calculate the percentage diﬀerence between a household portfolio’s Sharpe
ratio Sh and the Sharpe ratio of a benchmark index SB , 1 − Sh /SB . A second is
to calculate the return lost, at the portfolio’s given standard deviation, by the lower
Sharpe ratio of the household portfolio. This is wh (SB σ h − μh ), where wh is the
portfolio’s weight in risky assets, σ h is the standard deviation of the household’s risky
portfolio return, and μh is the mean of that return. A third approach is to calculate
the utility lost by a household that correctly perceives its own Sharpe ratio, and
chooses its risk optimally given its risk aversion, but fails to understand that a higher
Sharpe ratio is available by investing eﬃciently. This utility loss is equivalent to a
decrease in the riskless interest rate of wh σ h (SB2 − Sh2 )/2Sh .

    According to the first measure of portfolio ineﬃciency, the median Swedish house-
hold gives up slightly more than a third of the maximum available Sharpe ratio if the
international CAPM holds, and slightly less than a third if the international Fama-
French model holds. The diﬀerence is caused by the fact that Swedish household
portfolios are tilted towards small stocks and value stocks, which earn higher returns
in the Fama-French model than in the CAPM. The Sharpe ratio loss is reduced by
more than half if we take as our benchmark the world index in Swedish kronas rather
than the currency-hedged world index. The median Swedish household portfolio has
a higher Sharpe ratio than the Swedish equity index, reflecting the fact that many
Swedish households hold global equity mutual funds.

    Reductions in Sharpe ratios have little eﬀect on portfolio returns if households
invest conservatively. The second measure of portfolio ineﬃciency places greater
weight on low Sharpe ratios that are accompanied by aggressive investment strategies.
If converted to dollars by multiplying by portfolio value, it also places greater weight
on large portfolios. The median Swedish household loses almost 1.2% return or about
$130 per year relative to the currency-hedged world index under the CAPM. Relative
to the unhedged world index, the median household loses only one quarter as much.
Clearly portfolio underdiversification has only modest eﬀects on the welfare of the
median Swedish household.

   Once again, however, there is wide variation in these numbers across households.
At the right tail of the distribution of return losses, these losses are substantial. The

                                           23
95th percentile of the return loss is 5.0% relative to the hedged world index, and
about half this relative to the unhedged index. In dollar units, the 95th percentile of
the loss is over $2200 per year relative to the hedged world index, and almost $850
per year relative to the unhedged index.

   These numbers suggest that underdiversification in household portfolios is a prob-
lem of a minority. The obvious next question is which households lose the most by
ineﬃcient investing. If the CAPM holds, the overall return loss can be written as
the product of three household-specific and one market-wide component:
                                                 µ       ¶
                                                   SB       e
                      wh (SB σ h − μh ) = wh β h      − 1 Erm .                   (4)
                                                   Sh

Here wh is the share of the household’s portfolio invested in risky assets, β h is the
beta of those risky assets with the benchmark portfolio, (SB /Sh − 1) is a transformed
                                             e
measure of the relative Sharpe ratio, and Erm  is the expected excess return on the
world market portfolio.

    In Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2006) we take logs of both sides of this equation
and then regress the log return loss and its three household-specific components onto
demographic characteristics of households. We find oﬀsetting eﬀects on return losses.
On the one hand, financially sophisticated households with high disposable income,
wealth, education, private pension savings, and financial liabilities tend to invest more
aggressively. They invest a higher fraction of their wealth in risky assets, and those
assets have higher betas. On the other hand these households also tend to invest
more eﬃciently, consistent with the findings of Goetzmann and Kumar (2004) for US
brokerage account data. In the Swedish data we find that the first eﬀect dominates,
so financially sophisticated households actually have higher overall return losses.22

   These results have two important limitations. First, they assume that mutual
fund returns to investors obey the CAPM. If mutual funds hold stocks that obey
the CAPM, and if they charge fees to investors, mutual funds will deliver returns
with negative alphas reflecting the fee drag. This eﬀect is likely to be significant,
as Hortacsu and Syverson (2004) report average fees for equity funds ranging from
almost 100 basis points for S&P 500 index funds to over 225 basis points for global
  22
    We also find an age eﬀect on investment performance. Consistent with the findings of Korniotis
and Kumar (2006) in US brokerage account data, older households invest more cautiously but less
eﬃciently. These two eﬀects work against each other and almost cancel one another, so that overall
return losses are almost invariant to age.


                                               24
and international funds, with wide dispersion across individual funds. A priority for
future research will be to measure the fees charged by each mutual fund available to
Swedish investors and the eﬀect of these fees on household portfolio performance.

    Second, I have treated the financial portfolio in isolation and have not considered
the possibility that financial assets are used to hedge households’ labor income risk.
Massa and Simonov (2003) explore this issue and find that investors in general tend
to hold stocks that are positively correlated with their labor income, possibly because
these stocks are familiar to them, but that wealthy investors have a greater tendency
to pick negatively correlated stocks that can hedge their labor income risk. Massa
and Simonov’s results are consistent with the theme of this paper that sophisticated
households come closer to the investment strategies recommended by standard finan-
cial theory.

   An important question is to what extent the results for Sweden describe house-
hold behavior in other countries. There are several reasons to think that Swedish
households may diversify more eﬀectively than households elsewhere. Sweden is a
country with a well educated population and an unusually high stock market partic-
ipation rate; it is a small country, so Swedish investors are used to the idea that they
must diversify internationally; and Swedish households were exposed to a national
campaign of financial education in the late 1990’s as part of a reform of the pension
system.

    It will also be important to try to understand the implications of underdiversifi-
cation for the wealth distribution. Household underdiversification has the potential
to explain the puzzling dispersion of wealth at retirement reported in US data by
Venti and Wise (2001). Venti and Wise argue that diﬀerences in lifetime earnings
or asset allocation do not explain dispersion, and conclude that it must be caused by
diﬀerences in savings propensities. But poorly diversified stock investments could
also explain a great deal of dispersion.

   B. Diversification and participation

    The demographic predictors of portfolio ineﬃciency in Sweden are strikingly sim-
ilar to the demographic predictors of nonparticipation and cautious investing in both
Sweden and the US (see Table I). This suggests that some households may fail to
invest in stocks, or invest only cautiously in stocks, in part because they are aware
that they lack the skills to invest eﬃciently. They may correctly calculate lower

                                          25
welfare benefits of participation given their investment skills, or they may simply
feel uncomfortable participating in an activity for which they are poorly prepared
(this can be interpreted as a higher psychological fixed cost of participation). To
show the relevance of the first channel, Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini calculate the
extra return that stock market participation can give a household with the typical
demographic characteristics of nonparticipants, assuming that this household invests
with the eﬃciency predicted by a demographic regression. The implied increase in
portfolio return is slightly lower than the increase for a household that invests with
the average eﬃciency of Swedish households, and only about half the increase for a
household that invests fully eﬃciently. Put another way, the fixed costs that are
needed to deter participation are smaller when households correctly anticipate their
own limitations as investors.

    There is other more direct evidence for a relation between skills, knowledge, and
investment behavior. Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) find that people who incorrectly
answer simple questions about investing are less likely to plan for retirement, while
Graham, Harvey, and Huang (2005) find that investors who claim to be comfortable
about their “ability to understand investment products, alternatives, and opportuni-
ties” trade more frequently and are more internationally diversified. Of course, there
could be reverse causality from investment activity to understanding of investments,
but this cannot explain the finding of Benjamin and Shapiro (2005) that people with
low cognitive ability, as measured by standardized tests administered in youth, are
less likely to participate in financial markets or accumulate assets during their subse-
quent adult life. In the next section of this address, I use demographic evidence to
argue that skills and knowledge are also important in another financial context, the
financing of housing by mortgage debt.


       IV. Household Mortgage Decisions


    The data on asset allocation reveal the importance of housing and the associated
mortgage debt for typical households. Yet there has been surprisingly little work on
mortgage decisions from the household point of view. Most research on mortgages
is done by specialists in real estate or fixed-income securities who are interested in
pricing mortgage-backed derivatives.23
  23
   The following classic articles on prepayment of fixed-rate mortgages all concentrate on the
implications of prepayment for the valuation of mortgage-backed securities, and all include the word



                                                26
    Mortgage contracts take a bewildering variety of forms, but the two main types are
nominal fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) and adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). In the
United States, FRMs predominate, accounting for 72% of newly issued mortgages on
average over the period 1985—2005 according to the Federal Housing Finance Board
(FHFB). Since FRMs have a longer average life before repayment, they account for
an even larger fraction of the stock of mortgages at any point in time. Most FRMs
have 30-year maturities at issue, must be refinanced when a borrower moves (that is,
they cannot be assumed by a new borrower), and can be refinanced at the borrower’s
discretion without penalty at any time.

    There is interesting variation over time in the use of ARMs. Figure 4, an update of
a similar figure in Campbell and Cocco (2003), plots the FRM share of new mortgages
originated by major lenders over the period 1985—2005. The figure also plots the
typical ARM rate and 30-year FRM rate, and the spread between them. The figure
shows that homeowners are more likely to use ARMs when the FRM rate has recently
increased, and are more likely to use FRMs when the FRM rate has recently decreased.
There is also some evidence that homeowners respond to the spread between the
ARM rate and the FRM rate, but this does not seem to explain all the movements
in the FRM share. In 1990—93 and 2001—02, for example, the spread widened yet
homeowners did not shift toward ARMs. The correlation between the FRM share
and the spread is -0.42, while the correlation between the FRM share and the lagged
one-year change in the FRM rate is -0.51. If one regresses the FRM share on the
spread and the lagged change in the FRM rate, both variables are highly significant;
and the lagged change in the FRM rate remains significant even if one includes one
lag of the spread to capture inertia in mortgage decisions.

    The problem of choosing an optimal mortgage contract is a complex one, as il-
lustrated by the stylized model of Appendix A and the numerical model solved by
Campbell and Cocco (2003). Households must take into consideration real interest
rate risk, inflation risk, borrowing constraints today and the possibility of borrowing
constraints in the future, their risk aversion, their moving probability, and their abil-
ity to refinance a fixed-rate mortgage optimally. However it is hard to rationalize the
time-series variation shown in Figure 4 using a standard model of household optimiza-
tion. A wide spread between the short-term and long-term interest rate should make
ARMs attractive to households that are currently borrowing-constrained or likely
to move in the near future, but the recent movement of the long-term interest rate
“valuation” in their titles: Dunn and McConnell (1981), Schwartz and Torous (1989), McConnell
and Singh (1994), Stanton (1995), LeRoy (1996), and Longstaﬀ (2004).


                                             27
should not be a relevant state variable except insofar as it predicts future movements
in long-term rates. The data do not suggest that changes in long-term interest rates
are highly autocorrelated, and it would be surprising if they were as this would imply
large predictable variation in bond returns. In summary, some households appear
to choose between FRMs and ARMs as if they irrationally believe that long-term
interest rates are mean-reverting.24


       A. Refinancing


    The option to refinance a fixed-rate mortgage means that households do not have
to pay a fixed rate that greatly exceeds the current level of mortgage rates. When
interest rates fall, households have an incentive to refinance their mortgages, either
reducing their monthly payments for a fixed level of mortgage debt, or increasing their
debt while maintaining the same monthly payments. The latter practice is known as
home equity extraction, and has attracted the attention of the Federal Reserve Board
for its possible impact on consumer spending (Greenspan and Kennedy 2005).

    Refinancing incurs a substantial one-time cost and thus is not optimal unless the
spread between a household’s existing mortgage rate and the currently available rate
is large enough to cover this cost.25 Since interest rates are volatile, the option to
delay refinancing is valuable and the spread must also cover the loss in option value
caused by refinancing. Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2006) estimate the spread
that justifies refinancing at 1.1—1.4% for mortgages between $100,000 and $200,000
in size.

   Declining interest rates in recent years have created large incentives to refinance,
and it is generally thought that households have become more responsive to such
incentives (Bennett, Peach, and Peristiani 2001). Despite this, a large minority of
households pay interest rates on old fixed-rate mortgages that greatly exceed the
currently available rate. Figure 5 summarizes the distribution of rates paid on 30-
  24
      Some personal finance books encourage the belief that long rates are predictable. Steinmetz
(2002), for example, advises “If you think rates are going up, get a fixed-rate mortgage” (p.48), and
Irwin (1996) implicitly assumes mean-reversion when he writes “When interest rates are low, get a
fixed-rate mortgage and lock in the low rate” (p.143).
   25
      The refinancing cost includes the lender’s application and attorney review fees, appraisal and
home inspection fees, title search and title insurance fees, hazard insurance, the loan origination
fee, and mortgage insurance. Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2006) estimate the refinancing cost
during the 1990’s at $2,000 plus 1% of mortgage value.


                                                 28
year fixed-rate mortgages in 1997, 1999, 2001, and 2003. The underlying data are
taken from the American Housing Survey (AHS), a data source described in Appendix
B and analyzed by Schwartz (2006). For each spread over the current mortgage rate,
the figure shows the fraction of households that pay more than this rate. The data
show a striking diﬀerence between the 2003 survey and the surveys conducted in 1997,
1999, and 2001. In the three earlier years, rates had been stable or gently declining
in the two years prior to the survey. Around a quarter of households were paying
mortgage rates more than 1% above the currently prevailing rate, 15-20% were paying
rates more than 1.5% above, 12-14% were paying more than 2% above, and 6-8% were
paying rates more than 3% above the current rate. High mortgage rates tended to
be paid on slightly smaller mortgages, so the shares of mortgage value that paid high
rates were somewhat lower; for example, 9-12% of mortgage dollar value was paying
more than 2% above the currently available rate.

    In 2003, fixed mortgage rates had declined precipitously in the two years prior to
the survey, as illustrated in Figure 4. Although refinancing increased dramatically
in 2002 and 2003, by the time of the 2003 survey this had not caught up with the
lower available mortgage rate, leading the distribution of mortgage spreads to shift to
the right. In 2003 more than half the households surveyed were paying a spread of
more than 1%, more than a third were paying more than 1.5%, a quarter were paying
more than 2%, and an eighth were paying more than 3%. Again these numbers are
slightly lower when calculated as shares of dollar value, but almost 20% of mortgage
dollars were paying spreads of more than 2% in 2003.

   The sluggishness of household refinancing has been a major theme of the literature
on valuation of mortgage-backed securities. Early work by Dunn and McConnell
(1981) assumed costless refinancing, and failed to fit the behavior of mortgage-backed
securities prices. The subsequent literature has either worked with reduced-form
econometric models of prepayment rates (Schwartz and Torous 1989) or has specified
a cross-sectional distribution of refinancing costs across households to account for
the willingness of some households to pay high mortgage spreads. Further realism
can be achieved by adding an exogenous delay to refinancing (McConnell and Singh
1994, Stanton 1995). The parameters of these models themselves evolve over time,
generating random variations in prepayment speed that create an unhedgeable risk in
the cash flows of mortgage-backed securities. Gabaix, Krishnamurthy, and Vigneron
(2006) argue that this accounts for the option-adjusted spread commonly used to
value these securities.



                                          29
    This work generally does not explore the underlying economic causes of slow house-
hold refinancing. Some households may be prevented from refinancing by declines in
their house value that have eroded their home equity, or by declines in their income
that have decreased their creditworthiness. The lock-in eﬀect of declining house prices
is emphasized by Caplin, Freeman, and Tracy (1997), and Archer, Ling, and McGill
(1996) find that households with insuﬃcient collateral value or income are less likely
to respond to refinancing incentives. But it is also plausible that sluggish refinancing
is an investment mistake, on a par with nonparticipation or underdiversification.26

    In support of this view, Table II reports characteristics of households that did
not move but refinanced their fixed-rate mortgages between 2001 and 2003, a period
when rates fell dramatically and created large incentives to refinance. The first panel
of the table reports a probit regression of a refinancing dummy onto household char-
acteristics, using data from the American Housing Survey. The regression includes
dummy variables for the mortgage origination year to control for variation in the
incentive to refinance created by time-series variation in prevailing mortgage rates.
As in Table I, the refinancing probability for a reference household is reported along
with the change in this probability caused by a change in each dummy variable, or a
one standard deviation change in each continuous variable.

    The first two explanatory variables in Table II capture constraints that may pre-
vent some borrowers from refinancing. The variable “loan problem” is a dummy
variable that equals one if the current principal value of the mortgage exceeds 90%
of the self-reported value of the house. The variable “income problem” is a dummy
variable that equals one if the mortgage payments that would be required by a refi-
nanced 30-year FRM exceed 28% of current self-reported income. These dummies
were used by Archer, Ling, and McGill (1996), who emphasized their important ef-
fects on mortgage refinancing during the 1980’s. In Table II they enter with the
theoretically predicted negative signs, but only the loan problem is economically or
statistically significant. The weakness of these eﬀects compared with those reported
by Archer et al. may be due to relaxed standards for mortgage lending in recent
years, or to the rise in house prices that has reduced the fraction of households with
insuﬃcient home equity.
  26
     Consistent with this interpretation, sluggish refinancers are known in the mortgage industry as
“woodheads”. Agarwal, Driscoll, and Laibson (2006) point out that some households make the
opposite mistake, refinancing when the mortgage spread is just enough to cover the fixed cost of
refinancing but ignoring the option to delay and thus refinancing too quickly.




                                                30
   The remaining variables in Table II capture the demographic characteristics of
each household along with its income, the value of its house, and the size of its
mortgage. Quadratic terms are included in the last three variables to capture possible
nonlinearities, but are not of major importance. The results show that younger,
smaller, better educated, better oﬀ white households with more expensive houses
were more likely to refinance their mortgages between 2001 and 2003. These patterns
suggest that prompt refinancing requires financial sophistication.

    A household may rationally fail to refinance its mortgage if it expects to move.
Households that expect to move and actually do move will be dropped from the
refinancing regression, while households that expect to move and do not move will be
recorded as non-refinancers. Thus one explanation for the results in the first panel
of Table II could be that more sophisticated households are less mobile. The second
panel of Table II estimates the determinants of mobility within a larger sample of
households surveyed in 2001. Those that moved between 2001 and 2003 (as identified
by a diﬀerent household answering survey questions at the same address in 2003, about
9% of the sample) are recorded as movers, while those that responded to both the 2001
and 2003 surveys at the same address are recorded as non-movers. The regressions
show that almost all the determinants of refinancing probability, notably age, race,
education, family size, and home value, aﬀect mobility in the same direction. Thus
mobility does not seem to be a plausible explanation for the cross-sectional variation
in the propensity to refinance.27

    As further support for the interpretation that sluggish refinancing is an investment
mistake, the third panel of Table II reports demographic determinants of implausi-
ble self-reported mortgage rates. As discussed in Appendix B, some households
in the AHS report that their current mortgage rates are implausibly low, over two
percentage points below the average mortgage rate prevailing during the origination
period. If these households do not understand that their current rates are high, it is
understandable that they might fail to take advantage of a refinancing opportunity.
About 7% of households report implausibly low mortgage rates, and most of these
households took out their mortgages more than 10 years ago. The third panel of
Table II shows that this reporting error is much more common among less educated
  27
     Some households may have moved as an endogenous response to declining mortgage rates,
refinancing in order to buy a larger house. To the extent that this behavior is more common among
sophisticated households, it will lead the regression in the first panel of Table II, which includes only
non-moving households, to understate the eﬀect of sophistication on refinancing.




                                                   31
households.28

    The last two columns of Table II push this investigation further by examining the
determinants of the mortgage rate that households pay at any point in time. The
regressions are run separately for the 2001 and 2003 surveys. In each case the depen-
dent variable is the self-reported mortgage rate, adjusted to correct for implausible
rates as described in Appendix B. The regression includes dummy variables for the
year of house purchase.

    The variables that predict prompt refinancing behavior also generally predict low
mortgage rates. The loan problem and income problem dummies from Archer et
al. (1996) have a positive and strongly significant eﬀect on mortgage rates paid in
both years. Education has a negative eﬀect in 2001 which strengthens in 2003,
reflecting the importance of education in driving prompt refinancing in 2002 and
2003. The eﬀect of race also becomes significant in 2003. Income and home value
have relatively weak eﬀects on mortgage rates paid, but the value of the mortgage
has a strong eﬀect; a one standard deviation increase in the mortgage size above
the sample mean lowers the mortgage rate by 44 basis points in 2001, and 49 basis
points in 2003. Presumably the mortgage variable captures both mortgage size as a
proxy for household wealth, and a reverse causality eﬀect that households with the
credit quality and sophistication to obtain cheaper mortgages tend to take out larger
mortgages.

    One diﬃculty with these regressions is that they confound the eﬀects of refinancing
decisions with the mortgage rate that a household can obtain at a point in time. It
may well be that better-educated households have better credit quality and can obtain
mortgages on more favorable terms.29 But if one eliminates cross-sectional variation
in rates available at a point in time by replacing self-reported mortgage rates with
average FHLMC rates prevailing at the mortgage origination date, the results are
  28
      The reporting error is relatively rare for the reference household in Table II because this house-
hold has a mortgage of average age rather than an old mortgage. When the reporting error dummy
is included directly in the regression predicting refinancing, it enters negatively but is not statistically
significant. Bucks and Pence (2006) present complementary evidence on ARM borrowers. They
find that many households, especially lower-income households, do not understand the potential
increase in their ARM rate that can be caused by rising interest rates.
   29
      Moore (2003) surveys mortgage borrowers in Washington State, including “victims” who bor-
rowed from a predatory lender. She finds that the victims were more likely to lack basic financial
knowledge, suggesting that they failed to understand the cost of their mortgage loans. However
she also finds that the victims were more likely to be in financial distress, implying that they might
have had diﬃculty obtaining more favorable loans.

                                                    32
similar to those reported in Table II. In particular, the eﬀects of race and education
remain significant.

    An interesting question is whether less sophisticated households can anticipate
their inability to refinance FRMs optimally. If so, a rational response might be to
use an ARM instead. Schwartz (2006) looks at the determinants of ARM usage in
the AHS and finds no evidence that less sophisticated households use ARMs. Dur-
ing the earlier survey years, ARMs were favored by younger households financing
their first houses and with relatively small mortgages. This is consistent with the
model of Campbell and Cocco (2003) and Appendix A, in which mobile and currently
borrowing-constrained households should be attracted by the low initial cost of an
ARM unless a large mortgage makes its interest-rate risk unacceptable. During the
later survey years, and particularly in 2003, ARMs were favored by better educated
households. It is striking that 2003 was a year of an unusually wide spread between
FRM and ARM rates, even though FRM rates were low; thus sophisticated house-
holds should have been attracted to ARMs while unsophisticated households may
have anticipated rapid mean-reversion in long rates and may have avoided ARMs
for that reason.     This interpretation is speculative, but can be tested by a more
systematic investigation of the response of households with diﬀerent education levels
to movements in mortgage rates.

   Overall, it does not seem that households that lack the knowledge to refinance
FRMs substitute away from these mortgage contracts in a way that would be analo-
gous to nonparticipation as a response to lack of knowledge about the stock market.
Presumably the lack of a simple alternative is a barrier to this response in the mort-
gage market.


   V. Equilibrium in Retail Financial Markets


    Given the complexity of the household financial optimization problem, it may
not be surprising that some households make mistakes. For example, to refinance a
fixed-rate mortgage optimally one must solve an irreversible investment problem and
this is a diﬃcult task. What is perhaps surprising is that so many of the contracts
available to households reward sophisticated decisionmaking and continuous monitor-
ing of financial markets. One might expect that simpler contracts would be oﬀered
that would leave less room for expensive mistakes. Economists often recommend
such instruments. Specifically, economists have often recommended mortgages that

                                         33
adjust interest and principal payments for inflation, thereby combining the best fea-
tures of nominal FRMs and ARMs (Statman 1982, Alm and Follain 1984, McCulloch
1986). More recently, Flesaker and Ronn (1993) and Nalebuﬀ and Ayres (2003)
have proposed an automatically refinancing nominal FRM that would eliminate slug-
gish refinancing and also save consumers the considerable costs of current refinancing
procedures.30

   Despite these recommendations, financial innovation in retail markets often ap-
pears to proceed slowly. There is considerable inertia in the general form of mortgage
contracts, despite robust competition by mortgage lenders and changes over time in
credit standards. A related puzzle is that diﬀerent types of mortgages are standard in
diﬀerent countries. In the UK, for example, adjustable-rate mortgages are standard
and fixed-rate mortgages of the US variety are almost unknown (Miles 2003, Green
and Wachter 2005).

    In this section I argue that the existence of unsophisticated households helps to
explain these phenomena. A first and perhaps obvious point is that unsophisticated
households tend to use whatever financial contracts are standard in a particular coun-
try, possibly because they follow the lead of relatives and neighbors. It is expensive
for would-be financial innovators to reach such households, particularly if they need
to explain a complex new financial product. Second, the absence of eﬀective patent
protection in the financial industry makes it hard for financial innovators to recoup
the costs of advertising and financial education needed to establish a new product.

    Even if these two points are valid, why cannot financial innovators establish a
foothold by attracting sophisticated households who understand the benefits of a
new financial product? Once sophisticated households adopt the product, other
households might follow. The explanation here may be that existing products often
involve a cross-subsidy from naive to sophisticated households. A refinanceable
fixed-rate mortgage, for example, oﬀers a low rate in part because many households
do not optimally refinance. Sophisticated households gain by pooling with naive
households, and will not be attracted to a new mortgage if it is only taken up by
other sophisticated households.

   To understand this possibility, consider a market in which a fraction α of the
population is naive (denoted by N) and the remainder is sophisticated (S). An
  30
    Automatic refinancing has a close parallel in the automatically refunding “ratchet” bond issued
by the Tennessee Valley Authority in 1998 (Kalotay and Abreo 1999).


                                                34
existing mortgage contract can be provided at overall cost C0 , but is structured in
such a way that sophisticated households pay a lower cost than naive households.
For example, there may be a refinancing option which only sophisticated households
exercise. In competitive equilibrium with full participation by both groups, their
costs must be related by
                            αC0N + (1 − α)C0S = C0 .                             (5)
Write x for the cross-subsidy from the naive to the sophisticated: x = C0N − C0S .
Then
                                  C0S = C0 − αx.                              (6)
The mortgage costs of the sophisticated fall with the fraction of naive households,
and the size of the cross-subsidy.

    Now suppose that a new mortgage contract is invented that provides the same
benefits at lower cost C1 = C0 − g. The new contract might for example be an auto-
matically refinancing mortgage that reduces the costs of refinancing, or an inflation-
indexed mortgage that reduces the need to refinance. Assume that the new contract
is made available initially to a negligible fraction of the population, so that its intro-
duction does not perturb the pricing of the existing contract. In the simplest setting
only sophisticated households can understand the new product, but all households
can be reached costlessly. Sophisticated households opting for the new product gain
directly from its lower cost, but lose indirectly by giving up the cross-subsidy. They
will switch to the new product only if it oﬀers a social gain–a cost saving–larger
than the per-capita cross-subsidy from naive households using the existing product:

                                        g > αx.                                       (7)

New products with smaller social gains will not be adopted.

    More realistically, suppose that a new product can be advertised at per capita cost
k, but only sophisticated households understand the advertisement. Such households
will switch to the new product if it oﬀers them a cost C0S −s = C1 +g −αx −s, where
s is a switching cost. If a monopolist oﬀering the new product charges this cost, it
will make a profit of g − αx − s on each customer. It will be worth advertising the
new product only if advertising attracts enough customers, that is, if

                               (1 − α)(g − αx − s) > k.                               (8)

Even a product that appeals to sophisticated consumers may not gain a foothold if
such consumers are diﬃcult to reach. In this case financial education–a reduction

                                           35
in the fraction of naive households–has a positive eﬀect on financial innovation both
by increasing the eﬀectiveness of advertising the new product, and by reducing the
cross-subsidy that each sophisticated household receives in the existing product.

    Is it worthwhile for financial innovators to oﬀer financial education privately, con-
verting a small number of households from naive to sophisticated? It may not be,
for the same reason that sophisticated households may not be attracted to new prod-
ucts at a price that covers the cost of recruiting them. Newly educated households
understand the cross-subsidy they receive from naive households, and may refuse to
switch to a new product oﬀered along with financial education. Instead, innovators
may have an incentive to mislead naive households by oﬀering confusing products
with high fees. The possibility of such perverse financial innovation depends on the
details of naive investors’ behavior, and deserves further theoretical and empirical
research.

    These eﬀects are an example of “shrouded equilibrium” (Ellison 2005, Gabaix
and Laibson 2006), in which some consumers are unaware of hidden costs associated
with certain products. It may not pay competitors to reveal these hidden costs
if sophisticated consumers have the ability to avoid them while still purchasing the
products, which are cheaper because of the revenue provided by naive consumers.
Gabaix and Laibson concentrate on examples in which the hidden costs are associated
with expensive add-ons (such as cartridges for ink-jet printers or telephone calls from
hotel rooms), whereas in the example of a refinanceable mortgage the hidden costs
arise from consumer failure to understand an advantageous option.31

    The eﬀect of hidden costs on the equilibrium of a retail financial market has
recently been emphasized by Miles (2003). David Miles was commissioned by the
British Chancellor of the Exchequer to review the state of the UK mortgage market,
and in particular to understand why fixed-rate mortgages are so much less popular
in the UK than in the US and many European countries. His interim report (2003)
argues that in the UK mortgage market, adjustable-rate mortgages are often sold with
discounted initial rates (sometimes called teaser rates) that automatically adjust to
a much higher “standard variable rate” after two years. Borrowers have the right
  31
     Hidden costs may also be important in the mutual fund industry. Barber, Odean, and Zheng
(2003) show that operating expenses have a lower eﬀect on mutual fund flows than more visible
front-end loads. In this case sophisticated investors do not have the ability to avoid such fees so
they do not receive a cross-subsidy from naive investors; but high-fee mutual funds may still survive
if naive investors are costly to reach through financial advertising (Sirri and Tufano 1998, Hortacsu
and Syverson 2004).


                                                 36
to refinance their mortgages without penalty after two years, yet the teaser rates are
extremely attractive relative to prevailing money market rates.32 Miles concludes that
mortgage lenders can only oﬀer these rates because many households (close to a third
of borrowers in 2003) fail to refinance their mortgages and end up paying standard
variable rate. He argues that the resulting cross-subsidy from naive to sophisticated
households inhibits the development of a fixed-rate mortgage market in the UK. By
contrast with the US, where fixed-rate mortgages are standard and are widely used by
naive households, in the UK they are considered only by sophisticated borrowers who
are reluctant to give up the attractive rates available in the adjustable-rate market.

    In the US, a similar mechanism may keep down the cost of standard refinanceable
fixed-rate mortgages. The excess mortgage interest shown in Figure 5 is large enough
to have a noticeable eﬀect on the mortgage rates oﬀered by competitive lenders. In
2001, for example, the total payments made by households in the AHS were higher
by 0.66% of mortgage value than they would have been if interest were capped at 1%
above the current mortgage rate. The excess interest was somewhat lower in 1997
and 1999 at 53 and 43 basis points, respectively, but much higher in 2003 at 107 basis
points. The numbers are similar if one eliminates cross-sectional variation in credit
quality by using the FHLMC rate prevailing at each mortgage origination date rather
than the self-reported mortgage rate. Thus excess interest reflects the failure of
naive borrowers to refinance their mortgages, rather than cross-sectional variation in
credit quality, and can be thought of as a hidden cost of the sort discussed by Gabaix
and Laibson. Of course, these numbers are only suggestive as they reflect outcomes
along a single, declining path for mortgage rates rather than a probability-weighted
average across all possible rate scenarios, and they are measured relative to current
rates rather than minimum rates.

    Hidden costs may also be important in another aspect of US mortgage markets.
Borrowers have the option of paying mortgage origination costs, including perhaps
a fee to a mortgage broker, in the form of cash up front (“points”) or by paying a
higher interest rate on the mortgage. The conventional analysis of this arrangement
(e.g. Stanton and Wallace 1998) emphasizes that it is a way for mortgage lenders to
separate households by moving probability. Households that expect to move soon are
  32
    In October 2003, for example, one-month sterling LIBOR was 3.63%, and the discounted ad-
justable rate was only 7 basis points higher at 3.70%. Two-year LIBOR was 4.51%, and the
discounted initial rate on a mortgage with a two-year fixed interest period was 2 basis points lower
at 4.49%. The adjustable rate for mortgages with no initial discount was 4.51% and the standard
variable rate was 5.42%, 88 basis points and 179 basis points respectively above one-month LIBOR.



                                                37
willing to pay points; they receive a lower rate because the refinancing option is less
valuable for these households, and thus less costly for mortgage lenders to provide to
them. Woodward (2003), however, argues that points also increase the opportunity
for mortgage brokers to confuse borrowers. In a sample of 2700 mortgage loans with
average mortgage broker fees of almost $2500, she finds that households tend to pay
higher broker fees on mortgages with points, and that college education is associated
with a remarkable $1500 reduction in average broker fees. In a competitive market
for mortgage brokerage services, broker fees may be lower for sophisticated households
because of the high fees paid by naive households.

    An important question is whether public policy can improve outcomes in finan-
cial markets with naive households. Financial education is certainly helpful, and an
audience of financial educators is likely to agree on its importance. However one
should not overestimate the power of education; in particular, the education vari-
ables in demographic regressions are endogenous, proxying for cognitive ability and
other omitted factors, and so they may overstate the eﬀects of exogenous increases in
education on investment behavior.

    Regulation to prohibit “predatory lending” and excessive cross-subsidy may also
be helpful, but as Gabaix and Laibson emphasize, it is diﬃcult to design regulations
that protect naive households without also inhibiting helpful innovation. For ex-
ample, regulations that prevent negative amortization in mortgage contracts, which
are intended to protect households from incurring unmanageable debts, also prevent
inflation-adjustment of principal if amortization is defined in nominal terms.

    Public policy can subsidize suitable financial instruments through tax incentives or
credit guarantees. Swensen (2005) argues that low-cost passive mutual funds should
be subsidized in this way. In mortgage markets, the US government plays a major
role through GNMA and its sponsorship of FNMA and FHLMC. The ability of these
agencies to issue low-cost debt has likely reduced the cost of the mortgages they hold
(Green and Wachter 2005). The agencies have traditionally favored nominal fixed-
rate mortgages, and it is plausible that they could encourage the use of mortgages
with inflation adjustment or automatic refinancing features.

   Disclosure requirements can reduce the incidence of investment mistakes, but here
too they must be designed appropriately. Miles (2004) points out that in the UK
the annual percentage rate (APR) on a mortgage–the main cost measure considered
by prospective borrowers–is calculated under the assumption that interest rates will
remain unchanged during the life of the mortgage. This assumption tends to under-

                                          38
state the cost of an adjustable rate mortgage when the yield curve is upward sloping,
for then forward rates exceed spot rates, suggesting that the bond market expects in-
terest rates to rise. Miles recommends that the APR should be calculated under the
assumption that spot rates at all future dates will equal the corresponding forward
rates prevailing at the disclosure date. Disclosure requirements will be increasingly
important if households come to rely more heavily on mortgage calculators and other
financial websites to compare financial products.

   Finally, recent research in behavioral finance has found that default options–
standard choices that households believe to be recommended by authoritative bodies–
have a powerful eﬀect on household behavior (Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick
2002, 2004). The mortgage policies of GNMA, FNMA, and FHLMC may influence
household mortgage decisions through this channel as well as by driving down the
cost of standard mortgage contracts.


   VI. Conclusion


   In this paper I have outlined the field of household finance. I have argued that al-
though many households find adequate solutions to the complex investment problems
they face, some households make serious investment mistakes. These mistakes come
in a variety of forms. I have emphasized nonparticipation in risky asset markets,
underdiversification of risky portfolios, and failure to exercise options to refinance
mortgages.

    Investment mistakes have a number of interesting characteristics that make them
central to the study of household finance. First, it appears that poorer and less
educated households are more likely to make mistakes than wealthier and better edu-
cated households. This pattern reinforces the interpretation of nonstandard behavior
as reflecting mistakes rather than nonstandard preferences.

    Second, some mistakes may result from eﬀorts to avoid others. The same types
of households that tend to invest poorly are more likely not to participate in risky
asset markets at all. Nonparticipating households may be aware of their limited
investment skill and may react by withdrawing from risky markets altogether. Other
households, wishing to delegate financial decisions to professionals, may pay high fees
to financial planners, mutual funds, or banks.

   Third, the presence of households that make investment mistakes may inhibit

                                          39
financial innovation. Many investment products allow some degree of cross-subsidy
from naive households to sophisticated ones that optimally exploit embedded options.
It may be diﬃcult for new investment products to gain acceptance if sophisticated
households, who are the natural early adopters, must give up the benefit of a cross-
subsidy when they move from an existing product to a new one.

    Inevitably I have neglected many important issues. I have discussed portfolio
choice but not household savings decisions, mortgage debt but not credit card debt
(Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, Liu, and Souleles 2005, Bertaut and Haliassos 2006). I
have not tried to review the large literature on the fees charged by mutual funds,
banks, and other financial intermediaries. I have not discussed evidence that some
households fail to exploit tax incentives for retirement saving (Amromin, Huang, and
Sialm 2005, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2005). I have emphasized financial markets
that are relevant for middle-class households, but I have said nothing about payday
lending and other forms of credit that are used by poor households (Bolton and
Rosenthal 2005). I have likewise ignored issues that are important for extremely
wealthy households, such as estate tax management and the role of hedge funds. I
have treated households as unitary entities and have not considered the possibility
that bargaining between family members influences household decisions.

    I have also sidestepped the issue of whether investment mistakes influence the
pattern of returns available in asset markets. This issue is important because it
may aﬀect the welfare cost of mistakes. For example, nonparticipation in equity
markets may increase the equity premium and worsen the welfare loss caused by this
mistake. There is an active debate about the magnitude of such eﬀects. On the one
hand, asset prices are ultimately determined by supply and demand; and household
investment mistakes are surely relevant for household asset demands. On the other
hand, asset prices are disproportionately influenced by the demands of wealthy, risk-
tolerant investors and professional arbitrageurs, so investment mistakes may be less
important in asset pricing than they are in household finance.

    Even if asset prices are set eﬃciently, investment mistakes can have large welfare
costs for households. Since investment mistakes are particularly likely when new
financial markets are created, or when households are asked to take on new financial
planning responsibilities, they may greatly reduce the welfare gains that can be real-
ized from the current period of financial innovation and from proposed new financial
instruments (Shiller 2003). If household finance can achieve a good understanding of
the sources of investment mistakes, it may be possible for the field to contribute ideas


                                          40
to limit the costs of these mistakes. For example, we can try to define the core ele-
ments of financial literacy that make it possible for households to undertake financial
planning (Bernheim 1998, Lusardi and Mitchell 2005). We can propose more infor-
mative disclosures and can help to structure the customized advice that is oﬀered by
financial planning websites. We can suggest appropriate default investment options.
We can encourage public provision or tax subsidy of simple financial products such
as well designed US savings bonds (Tufano and Schneider 2005). Work of this sort
extends the innovative spirit of financial engineering to the retail marketplace.

    The possibility that household finance may be able to improve welfare is an in-
spiring one. Keynes (1932) wrote that he looked forward to a distant future when
economists would be “thought of as humble, competent people, on a level with den-
tists.” Today, dentists spend much of their time delivering advice and easy-to-use
products that promote oral hygiene; economists for their part can deliver, or at least
design, advice and innovations that promote financial hygiene.




                                          41
   Appendix A: A Normative Model of Mortgage Choice


   To clarify the issues that arise in mortgage finance, I consider a simplified example.
Campbell and Cocco (2003) present a richer model with a similar spirit and solve it
numerically.

    I assume that at an initial date 0, a household buys a house and finances it with a
mortgage having face value M. For simplicity, I assume that the house is also worth
M, so the loan-value ratio is 100%. At date 1, the household pays interest on the
mortgage. At date 2, the household sells the house and repays the mortgage with
interest. The household also receives income and chooses non-housing consumption
at each date.

    Mortgage contracts are specified in nominal terms, so the debt M is nominal. The
house, however, is a real asset whose nominal value grows with inflation. I assume
that inflation can take two values, low or high, and uncertainty about inflation is
resolved between dates 0 and 1. Thus inflation between date 0 and date 1 is either
(1+π L ) or (1+π H ), and cumulative inflation between dates 0 and 2 is either (1+π L )2
or (1 + π H )2 . This structure captures the historical tendency for inflation movements
to be highly persistent.

    The household can choose between two standard mortgage contracts. A nomi-
nal fixed-rate mortgage requires a nominal payment of RF M at date 1, and a final
repayment of (1 + RF )M at date 2. The fixed mortgage rate RF is set at date 0,
before inflation is observed. An adjustable-rate mortgage requires nominal payments
of RAH M at date 1 and (1 + RAH )M at date 2 if inflation is high, and RAL M at date
1 and (1 + RAL )M at date 2 if inflation is low.

    These mortgages do not correspond exactly to real-world mortgages, because they
repay principal in one lump sum at maturity (like Treasury bonds), rather than
amortizing the debt to produce level payments over the life of the mortgage. Level-
payment mortgages, however, repay principal slowly at first and more rapidly later,
and the assumptions of the model capture this pattern within a simplified two-period
structure.

    I assume that the riskless real interest rate is a constant r, and I ignore default
risk in mortgage lending. Thus the interest rate on an adjustable mortgage is

                        RAH = (1 + r)(1 + π H ) − 1 ≈ r + π H

                                           42
if inflation is high, and

                            RAL = (1 + r)(1 + πL ) − 1 ≈ r + π L

if inflation is low. The required real mortgage payment in period 1 is
                                         µ           ¶
                              RAi               πi
                                    M = r+             M
                             1 + πi           1 + πi

for i = H, L. The required real payment in period 2 is
                                             µ           ¶
                      (1 + RAi )                    πi
                                  M = (1 + r) 1 −          M
                      (1 + π i )2                 1 + πi

for i = H, L. The sum of all real payments, discounted back to date 0 at the real
interest rate r, does not depend on inflation and is always equal to M. In this sense
an adjustable-rate mortgage is a riskless liability, just as a floating-rate note is a
riskless investment.

    Note however that the timing of required payments does depend on inflation. An
increase in inflation raises the nominal interest rate and accelerates the repayment of
the mortgage debt. Each percentage point increase in inflation requires an increased
mortgage payment of about 1% of the face value of the mortgage. This is compen-
sated by a reduced real payment when the mortgage matures. In other words, an
adjustable-rate mortgage is a shorter-duration liability when inflation is high.

   A fixed-rate mortgage has a very diﬀerent sensitivity to inflation. The interest
rate on a fixed-rate mortgage is RF , regardless of whether inflation is high or low.
The required real mortgage payment in period 1 is
                                           RF
                                                M
                                         1 + πi
for i = H, L, and the required real payment in period 2 is

                                        (1 + RF )
                                                    M.
                                        (1 + π i )2

The sum of all real payments, discounted back to date 0 at the real interest rate r, is
declining in inflation; thus a fixed-rate mortgage benefits the borrower when inflation
is high.

                                             43
    What is the optimal mortgage contract in this model? I will assume that the
household has real income Y each period. If the household can borrow or lend freely
at the riskless real interest rate, then the household does not care about the timing
of mortgage payments and is concerned only with the expected level and variability
of lifetime resources. The adjustable-rate mortgage gives the household lifetime
resources, discounted to time 0, of
                            "          µ      ¶2 #
                                1         1
                                     +             (Y − rM),
                              1+r        1+r

allowing the household to consume a riskless (Y − rM) each period.

    If mortgage rates are set by lenders who are risk-neutral with respect to inflation
risk, then the fixed mortgage rate will be set to equate the expected present values
of fixed and adjustable mortgage payments.33 In other words, the expected value of
household lifetime resources will be the same under fixed and adjustable mortgages.
However lifetime resources are random under a fixed-rate mortgage, so a risk-averse
household will always prefer an adjustable-rate mortgage. This conclusion is only
strengthened if mortgage lenders are averse to inflation risk and charge a premium
rate for bearing it.

    How then can we understand the observed predominance of long-term nominal
fixed-rate mortgages in the US mortgage market? First, it is important to consider
that many households are borrowing-constrained, particularly in the early years of
homeownership. Borrowing-constrained households care not just about lifetime re-
sources, but about the resources available in each period. A borrowing-constrained
household with an adjustable-rate mortgage will have real consumption in period 1
  33
     Note that this does not mean the fixed mortgage interest rate will equal the gross expected
inflation rate times the gross real interest rate. The present value formula is convex in inflation, so
fixed-rate lenders gain more from low inflation than they lose from high inflation. This convexity
eﬀect lowers the equilibrium fixed mortgage rate. The fixed mortgage rate satisfies the equation
                            ∙      ¸        µ      ¶2 "µ        ¶2 #
                      1         1               1            1
                         E           RF +            E               (1 + RF ) = 1.
                    1+r       1+π             1+r          1+π
                                                            ∗
  The solution to this equation is lower than the rate RF     that would equate expected first-period
mortgage payments with those of an adjustable-rate mortgage, which in turn is lower than the gross
real interest rate times the expected gross inflation rate.




                                                  44
of                                     µ                ¶
                                                 πi
                            CA1i   =Y − r+                  M
                                               1 + πi
and real consumption in period 2 of
                                   µ                     ¶
                                             πi
                        CA2i   =Y − r−            (1 + r) M.
                                           1 + πi
A borrowing-constrained household with a fixed-rate mortgage will have real con-
sumption in period 1 of
                                            RF
                              CF 1i = Y −        M
                                          1 + πi
and real consumption in period 2 of
                                       µ                 ¶
                                              1 + RF
                         CA2i = Y + M 1 −                  .
                                             (1 + π i )2
This consumption profile has less variability in period 1, because inflation shocks
aﬀect period-1 consumption only in proportion to the product of the nominal interest
rate and the face value of the mortgage, and not in proportion to the whole face value
of the mortgage. A Taylor expansion around the average inflation rate, π, shows
that for small inflation volatility, the standard deviation of period-1 consumption
is Mσ π /(1 + π)2 for the adjustable-rate mortgage, and only RF times as large for
the fixed-rate mortgage. On the other hand, the fixed-rate consumption profile
has greater variability in period 2, because inflation shocks aﬀect the whole value
of the mortgage and are not compensated by interest rate variations. A similar
Taylor expansion shows that for small inflation volatility, the standard deviation of
period-2 consumption is (1 + r)Mσ π /(1 + π)2 for the adjustable-rate mortgage, and
2(1 + RF )/(1 + r)(1 + π) times as large for the fixed-rate mortgage.

    What about the average levels of real consumption in period 1 and period 2? If
inflation is deterministic, then fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgages deliver the same
time path of payments and thus the same average levels of consumption in the two
periods. If inflation is random, the convexity of fixed-rate mortgages lowers the fixed
mortgage rate below the level that would equate expected real payments in period 1
with those required by an adjustable-rate mortgage. Fixed-rate mortgages are thus
back-loaded relative to adjustable-rate mortgages.

   A borrowing-constrained household will find the back-loading of a fixed-rate mort-
gage attractive, as a way to increase expected period-1 consumption relative to

                                          45
period-2 consumption. If the household is risk-averse, it will in addition find the
reduced volatility of period-1 consumption attractive. For both reasons, a borrowing-
constrained household with a suﬃciently high time discount rate will prefer a fixed-
rate mortgage.


   Refinancing


    So far I have ignored an important feature of fixed-rate mortgages, that they give
the household an option to refinance. This option aﬀects both the interest rate and
the risk characteristics of a fixed-rate mortgage. To model refinancing, suppose that
the fixed-rate mortgage can be repaid without penalty in period 1, after the period-1
fixed interest payment has been made. The household will find it worthwhile to
refinance, and take out a new mortgage in period 1, if inflation turns out to be low
so that nominal rates are lower in period 1 than they were in period 0. Thus a
refinanceable fixed-rate mortgage makes fixed payments if inflation is high, but if the
mortgage is refinanced because inflation is low, it makes payments of
                                        RF
                                             M
                                      1 + πL
in period 1, and
                                      (1 + r)
                                                M
                                     (1 + π L )
in period 2. The household now avoids making high period-1 interest payments
when inflation turns out to be high, and has partial protection against a high real
debt burden when inflation turns out to be low. (The refinancing option protects
against one period of low inflation but not two, since a period elapses between initial
financing and refinancing.)

    Of course, the option to refinance does not come for free. The rate on a refinance-
able fixed-rate mortgage must be higher than on a fixed-rate mortgage that prohibits
refinancing. A refinanceable fixed-rate mortgage must also require higher period-1
payments than does an adjustable-rate mortgage. If lenders are risk-neutral, then
the expected present value of real lifetime payments is the same for all mortgages. A
refinanceable FRM has lower expected real payments in period 2 than does an ARM;
therefore the refinanceable FRM must have higher expected payments in period 1.
This means that a borrowing-constrained household that is risk-neutral will prefer an


                                          46
ARM, because such a household wishes to increase average period-1 consumption rel-
ative to period-2 consumption, and does not care about the randomness of mortgage
payments.34

    A risk-averse constrained household, however, may prefer a refinanceable FRM
because the reduction in first-period consumption risk may outweigh both the increase
in second-period consumption risk and the reduction in the average level of first-period
consumption. This is a striking reversal of the analysis for unconstrained households,
which find ARMs to be safer than FRMs. The lesson is that perceptions of risk can
be profoundly aﬀected by the presence of borrowing constraints.

     The nature of risk aversion in this model deserves some discussion. If the house-
hold has a utility function defined over consumption in each period, then under stan-
dard assumptions about the utility function, the derived risk aversion with respect to
mortgage payment risk is increasing in the level of consumption risk aversion. It is
also increasing with respect to randomness in real income that is uncorrelated with in-
flation. Such randomness creates a “background risk” that makes the consumer more
averse to mortgage risk. Finally, the randomness of mortgage payments is relatively
more important the larger the mortgage relative to the household’s income. Thus the
model implies that a household should be more likely to prefer a refinanceable FRM
if it is naturally conservative, has a volatile income, or has a large mortgage relative
to its income. Campbell and Cocco (2003) obtain these results in their multi-period
numerical model.

    It is possible to enrich this model further to allow for refinancing that is driven
by decisions to move house rather than by movements in interest rates. Households
that move must refinance their mortgages even if interest rates are high rather than
low. Refinancing of this sort reduces the period-2 benefits of refinanceable FRMs to
borrowers, and lowers the equilibrium interest rate on these mortgages. For a given
moving probability in the population as a whole, and thus a given refinanceable FRM
rate, a household that is more likely to move gets a lower benefit from a refinanceable
FRM and is more likely to prefer an ARM.

  Finally, one can allow for the fact that many households do not refinance their
mortgages, even when it is optimal to do so. A household that fails to refinance a
  34
     This result is consistent with statements in some personal finance guides. Orman (1999), for
example, writes that “ARMs are best utilized... when your cash flow is currently tight but you
expect it to increase as time goes on” (p.254), while Irwin (1996) writes “Sometimes ARMs have
lower initial loan costs. If cash is a big consideration for you, look into them.” (p.144).


                                               47
FRM when the interest rate falls pays additional mortgage interest, so the presence of
such households in the population reduces the equilibrium mortgage rate. Given the
aggregate prepayment rate, and thus the refinanceable FRM rate, a household that
believes itself to be more likely than average to refinance optimally will get a higher
benefit from a refinanceable FRM and is more likely to prefer this type of mortgage.

   Appendix B: Household-Level Mortgage Data

   The household-level mortgage data studied in this paper and in Schwartz (2006)
come from two data sources: the American Housing Survey (AHS), conducted by the
US Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Residential Finance
Survey (RFS), conducted by the Census Bureau. Both surveys provide basic infor-
mation on housing units, their residents, and their mortgages. However they have
diﬀerent strengths and weaknesses.

    The AHS is conducted in every odd year. Interviewers have returned to the same
housing units since 1985, adding new units to reflect new housing development; thus
the AHS is a panel dataset with a long time dimension. The AHS follows housing
units rather than households, but asks detailed questions about the residents of each
housing unit, including demographic and educational information. Interviewers also
ask whether residents own their housing unit, whether they have a mortgage, what
is the form of the mortgage, and what rate is being paid on the mortgage.

    The main weaknesses of the AHS have to do with data quality. Participation
in the survey is voluntary, and many residents either refuse to participate or give
only partial answers to survey questions. Even a simple question such as whether a
housing unit’s residents lived in the unit at the time of the previous survey is answered
unreliably. To establish whether a household is the same as the one that responded
to the previous survey, one can combine the answer to this question with demographic
data.

    Mortgage data are even more problematic. A detailed review of the AHS by Lam
and Kaul (2003) shows that as mortgages age, households’ reports of the original
principal value, monthly payments, and mortgage rates can change from one survey
to the next. Schwartz (2006) handles this problem by following households through
time, assuming at each point in time that their mortgage was originated at the most
recent date they have ever previously reported as a mortgage origination date, and
assuming that the terms of the mortgage are those they reported in the most recent

                                           48
survey following the origination date. The motivation for this procedure is that
households are more likely to report the terms of their mortgage accurately if they
recently took out the mortgage. Mortgage rates derived in this manner track the
historical rates reported by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC)
much more accurately than the raw reported rates. However there are still some
implausibly low rates, and I replace any rate that is more than two percentage points
below the average FHLMC rate prevailing during the mortgage origination period
with the average FHLMC rate less two percent. The results are robust to reasonable
variations in this truncation procedure, for example replacing self-reported mortgage
rates with FHLMC rates.

    The RFS has been conducted every ten years since 1951 as part of the decennial
census. Each survey draws a diﬀerent subsample from the census population, so
the RFS is a series of cross-sections and not a panel. The RFS asks homeowners to
identify their mortgage lenders and then cross-checks mortgage data with the lenders,
resulting in much greater accuracy of mortgage terms. The main weakness of the RFS
is that it contains relatively little information on homeowners; in particular, it lacks
the educational information contained in the AHS. I use the RFS as a cross-check on
the mortgage rates reported in the AHS. In particular, I find that the distribution
of mortgage spreads in the 2001 RFS closely matches the distribution extracted from
the 2001 AHS and reported in Figure 5.




                                          49
  References


Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Soule-
    les, 2005, Do consumers choose the right credit contracts?, unpublished paper,
    University of Pennsylvania.

Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, and David I. Laibson, 2006, When should bor-
    rowers refinance their mortgages?, unpublished paper, Brown University and
    Harvard University.

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi and Annika Sunden, 2003, Portfolio choice and
   trading in a large 401(k) plan, American Economic Review 93, 193—215.

Alm, James and James R. Follain, Jr., 1984, Alternative mortgage instruments,
    the tilt problem, and consumer welfare, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 19, 113—126.

Ameriks, John, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolio shares vary
   with age?, unpublished paper, Columbia University.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, and Clemens Sialm, 2005, Responsible fools? The
   tradeoﬀ between mortgage prepayments and tax-deferred retirement savings,
   unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, University of Texas, and
   University of Michigan.

Archer, Wayne R., David C. Ling, and Gary A. McGill, 1996, The eﬀect of in-
    come and collateral constraints on residential mortgage terminations, Regional
    Science and Urban Economics 26, 235—261.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith, 2005, Wealth portfolios in
   the United Kingdom and the United States, in David A. Wise ed. Perspectives
   on the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).

Banks, James and Sarah Tanner, 2002, Household portfolios in the United Kingdom,
   in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios,
   MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth:
    The common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of
    Finance 55, 773—806.

                                       50
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: gender, overcon-
    fidence, and common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116,
    261—292.

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2003, Out of sight, out of mind:
    the eﬀects of expenses on mutual fund flows, unpublished paper, University of
    California and University of Michigan.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) ac-
    counts to company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747—1764.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2001, Naive diversification strategies in de-
    fined contribution saving plans, American Economic Review 91, 79—98.

Benjamin, Daniel J. and Jesse M. Shapiro, 2005, Who is “behavioral”? Cognitive
    ability and anomalous preferences, unpublished paper, Harvard University and
    University of Chicago.

Bennett, Paul, Richard Peach, and Stavros Peristiani, 2001, Structural change in the
    mortgage market and the propensity to refinance, Journal of Money, Credit, and
    Banking 33, 955—975.

Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2005, Portfolio
    choice over the life-cycle in the presence of ‘trickle down’ labor income, NBER
    Working Paper 11247.

Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2004, Asset allocation and asset location:
    Household evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Journal of Public
    Economics 88, 1893—1915.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1998, Financial illiteracy, education, and retirement saving,
    in Olivia Mitchell and Sylvester Schieber eds. Living with Defined Contribution
    Pensions, 38—68, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA.

Bertaut, Carol C., and Michael Haliassos, 2006, Credit cards: facts and theories,
    forthcoming in G. Bertola, R. Disney, and C. Grant eds. The Economics of
    Consumer Credit Demand and Supply, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bertaut, Carol C., and Martha Starr-McCluer, 2002, Household portfolios in the
    United States, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. House-
    hold Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

                                        51
Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios
    and some implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30, 585—603.

Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend, 1978, The Changing Role of the Individual In-
    vestor, John Wiley, New York, NY.

Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William Samuelson, 1992, Labor supply flexibility
    and portfolio choice in a life cycle model, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
    Control 16, 427—449.

Bolton, Patrick and Howard Rosenthal eds., 2005, Credit Markets for the Poor,
    Russell Sage Foundation, New York, NY.

Brennan, Michael J., Eduardo S. Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1997, Strategic
    asset allocation, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1377—1403.

Brunnermeier, Markus and Stefan Nagel, 2005, Do wealth fluctuations generate
    time-varying risk aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals’ asset allocation,
    unpublished paper, Princeton University and Stanford University.

Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence, 2006, Do homeowners know their house values and
    mortgage terms?, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2006, Down or out: Assess-
    ing the welfare costs of household investment mistakes, NBER Working Paper
    12030.

Campbell, John Y., and João F. Cocco, 2003, Household risk management and
   optimal mortgage choice, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449—1494.

Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: a consumption-
   based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 107, 205—251.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 1999, Consumption and portfolio decisions
   when expected returns are time varying, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114,
   433—495.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2001, Who should buy long-term bonds?,
   American Economic Review 91, 99—127.



                                        52
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2002, Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio
   Choice for Long-Term Investors, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira, 2003, A multivariate model of strategic
   asset allocation, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 41—80.
Canner, Niko, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Weil, 1997, An asset allocation puzzle,
   American Economic Review 87, 181—191.
Caplin, Andrew, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy, 1997, Collateral damage: Re-
    financing constraints and regional recessions, Journal of Money, Credit, and
    Banking 29, 496—516.
Carroll, Christopher D., 2002, Portfolios of the rich, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos
    and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl, 2005, Consumption commitments: neoclassical foun-
    dations for habit formation, unpublished paper, University of California Berke-
    ley.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, De-
    fined contribution pensions: Plan rules, participant decisions, and the path of
    least resistance, in James Poterba ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 16, 67—113.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004a, Em-
    ployees’ investment decisions about company stock, in Olivia S. Mitchell and
    Stephen P. Utkus eds. Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Be-
    havioral Finance, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 121—137.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004b, For
    better or for worse: Default eﬀects and 401(k) savings behavior, in David Wise
    ed. Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian, 2005, $100 bills on the side-
    walk: Suboptimal saving in 401(k) plans, unpublished paper, Yale University,
    Harvard University, and University of Pennsylvania.
Cocco, João F., 2005, Portfolio choice in the presence of housing, Review of Financial
    Studies 18, 535—567.
Cocco, João F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, 2005, Consumption
    and portfolio choice over the life cycle, Review of Financial Studies 18, 491—533.

                                          53
Cohen, Randolph B., 1999, Asset allocation decisions of individuals and institutions,
    unpublished paper, Harvard Business School.

Cooper, Ian, and Evi Kaplanis, 1994, Home bias in equity portfolios, inflation hedg-
   ing and international capital market equilibrium, Review of Financial Studies
   7, 45—60.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: local equity
    preference in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045—2073.

Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment:
    informed trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109, 811—841.

Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore, 2004, Het-
    erogeneity and portfolio choice: Theory and evidence, forthcoming Handbook of
    Financial Econometrics.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2001, Optimal con-
   sumption and investment with capital gains taxes, Review of Financial Studies
   14, 583—616.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2004, Optimal as-
   set location and allocation with taxable and tax-deferred investing, Journal of
   Finance 59, 999—1037.

Davidoﬀ, Thomas, 2006, Labor income, housing prices, and homeownership, forth-
    coming Journal of Urban Economics.

Davis, Steven J., Felix Kubler, and Paul Willen, 2003, Borrowing costs and the
    demand for equity over the life cycle, unpublished paper, University of Chicago
    and Stanford University.

Dunn, Kenneth B. and John J. McConnell, 1981, Valuation of mortgage-backed
   securities, Journal of Finance 36, 599—617.

Ellison, Glenn, 2005, A model of add-on pricing, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     120, 585—638.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Stavaros Panageas, 2005, Saving and investing for early re-
    tirement: A theoretical analysis, unpublished paper, MIT and University of
    Pennsylvania.

                                        54
Feng, Lei and Mark S. Seasholes, 2004, Portfolio choice and location of trade, un-
    published paper, University of California Berkeley.

Fisher, Sarah, and Susan Shelly, 2002, The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Personal
    Finance in Your 20’s and 30’s (Alpha Books, Indianapolis, IN), second edition.

Flavin, Marjorie and Shinobu Nakagawa, 2004, A model of housing in the presence
    of adjustment costs: A structural interpretation of habit persistence, NBER
    Working Paper 10458.

Flesaker, Bjorn and Ehud I. Ronn, 1993, The pricing of FIREARMs (“falling in-
    terest rate adjustable-rate mortgages”), Journal of Real Estate Finance and
    Economics 6, 251—275.

Fratantoni, Michael C., 2001, Homeownership, committed expenditure risk, and the
    stockholding puzzle, Oxford Economic Papers 53, 241—259.

French, Kenneth and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and interna-
    tional equity markets, American Economic Review 81, 222—226.

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2006, Limits of arbi-
   trage: Theory and evidence from the mortgage-backed securities market, forth-
   coming Journal of Finance.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2006, Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia,
   and information suppression in competitive markets, forthcoming Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 121.

Gentry, William and Glenn Hubbard, 2004, Entrepeneurship and household saving,
    Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy 4(1), Article 8.

Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar, 2004, Why do individual investors hold
    under-diversified portfolios?, unpublished paper, Yale University and University
    of Notre Dame.

Gollier, Christian, 2001, The Economics of Risk and Time (MIT Press, Cambridge,
     MA).

Gomes, Francisco and Alexander Michaelides, 2005, Optimal life-cycle asset alloca-
   tion: Understanding the empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 60, 869—904.



                                        55
Gomes, Francisco, Alexander Michaelides, and Valery Polkovnichenko, 2004, Port-
   folio choice and wealth accumulation with taxable and tax-deferred accounts,
   unpublished paper, London Business School, London School of Economics, and
   University of Minnesota.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker, 2002, Consumption over the life
   cycle, Econometrica 70, 47—89.

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Hai Huang, 2005, Investor competence,
    trading frequency, and home bias, NBER working paper 11426.

Green, Richard K. and Susan M. Wachter, 2005, The American mortgage in histori-
    cal and international context, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(4), 93—114.

Greenspan, Alan and James Kennedy, 2005, Estimates of home mortgage origi-
    nations, repayments, and debt on one-to-four family residences, Finance and
    Economics Discussion Series 2005-41, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and perfor-
    mance of various investor-types: a study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal
    of Financial Economics 55, 43—67.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, How distance, language, and culture
    influence stockholdings and trades, Journal of Finance 56, 1053—1073.

Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli eds, 2002, Household Portfolios
    (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).

Guiso, Luigi and Tullio Jappelli, 2002, Household portfolios in Italy, in Luigi Guiso,
    Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios, MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.

Guiso, Luigi and Tullio Jappelli, 2006, Awareness and stock market participation,
    forthcoming Review of Finance.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2005, Trusting the stock market,
    unpublished paper, University of Chicago and Northwestern University.

Haliassos, Michael, and Carol Bertaut, 1995, Why do so few hold stocks?, Economic
    Journal, 105, 1110-1129.



                                         56
Haliassos, Michael, and Alexander Michaelides, 2003, Portfolio choice and liquidity
    constraints, International Economic Review 44, 143—177.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The
    importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163—1198.
Heckman, James and R. Robb, 1985, Using longitudinal data to estimate age, period,
    and cohort eﬀects in earnings equations, in W. Mason and S. Fienberg eds.
    Cohort Analysis in Social Research: Beyond the Identification Problem, 137—
    150, Springer-Verlag, New York.

Hong, Harrison, Jeﬀrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy Stein, 2004, Social interaction and
   stock-market participation, Journal of Finance 59, 137—163.

Hortacsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, 2004, Product diﬀerentiation, search costs, and
    competition in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 403—456.
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies
   14, 659—680.
Irwin, Robert, 1996, Tips and Traps When Buying a Home, (McGraw-Hill, New
    York, NY), 2nd ed.
Ivković, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner, 2004, Portfolio concentration
    and the performance of individual investors, NBER working paper 10675.
Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2003, Local does as local is: information
    content of the geography of individual investors’ common stock investments,
    NBER working paper 9685.
Iwaisako, Tokuo, 2003, Household portfolios in Japan, NBER working paper 9647.

Johnson, David, Jonathan Parker, and Nicholas Souleles, 2004, Household expendi-
    ture and the income tax rebates of 2001, NBER working paper 10784.

Juster, Thomas and James Smith, 1997, Improving the quality of economic data:
    lessons from the HRS and AHEAD, Journal of the American Statistical Asso-
    ciation 92, 1268—1278.
Juster, Thomas, James Smith, and Frank Staﬀord, 1999, The measurement and
    structure of household wealth, Labor Economics 6, 253—275.

                                       57
Kalotay, Andrew and Leslie Abreo, 1999, Ratchet bonds: maximum refunding eﬃ-
    ciency at minimum transaction cost, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 12,
    40—47.

Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2004, Individual investor sentiment
    and stock returns, unpublished paper, Duke University, NYU, and University
    of Texas.

Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversification of US
     households, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87—96.

Kennickell, Arthur B., 1998, Multiple imputation in the Survey of Consumer Fi-
   nances, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Board, available at:
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/method.html.

Keynes, John Maynard, 1932, Economic possibilities for our grandchildren, in Essays
   in Persuasion, Harcourt Brace, New York, NY.

Kim, Tong Suk and Edward Omberg, 1996, Dynamic nonmyopic portfolio behavior,
   Review of Financial Studies 9, 141—161.

King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape, 1998, Wealth and portfolio composition:
    Theory and evidence, Journal of Public Economics 69, 155—193.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez, 2004, Top wealth shares in the United
   States, 1916—2000: evidence from estate tax returns, NBER working paper
   10399.

Korniotis, George and Alok Kumar, 2006, Does investment skill decline due to cogni-
    tive aging or improve with experience?, unpublished paper, University of Notre
    Dame.

Lam, Ken and Bulbul Kaul, 2003, Analysis of housing finance issues using the Amer-
   ican Housing Survey (AHS), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop-
   ment, Oﬃce of Policy Development and Research, Washington, DC.

LeRoy, Stephen F., 1996, Mortgage valuation under optimal prepayment, Review of
   Financial Studies 9, 817—844.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, Optimal recursive refinancing and the valuation of
    mortgage-backed securities, NBER Working Paper 10422.

                                       58
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell, 2006, Financial literacy and planning:
    Implications for retirement well-being, unpublished paper, Dartmouth College
    and University of Pennsylvania.

Lynch, Anthony W., 2001, Portfolio choice and equity characteristics: characterizing
    the hedging demands induced by return predictability, Journal of Financial
    Economics 62, 67—130.

Lynch, Anthony W. and Sinan Tan, 2004, Labor income dynamics at business cycle
    frequencies: Implications for portfolio choice, NBER Working Paper 11010.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
   participation and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 1149—
   1188.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders
   and nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97—112.

Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2003, Hedging, familiarity and portfolio
   choice, CEPR working paper 4789, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

McConnell, John J. and Manoj Singh, 1994, Rational prepayments and the valuation
   of collateralized mortgage obligations, Journal of Finance 49, 891—921.

McCulloch, J.H., 1986, Risk characteristics and underwriting standards for price
   level adjusted mortgages versus other mortgage instruments, Housing Finance
   Review 5, 65—97.

Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-
    time model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373—413.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Economet-
    rica 41, 867—887.

Miles, David, 2003, The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-Term View, Interim
    Report: Information, Incentives, and Pricing (HM Treasury, London).

Miles, David, 2004, The UK Mortgage Market: Taking a Longer-Term View, Final
    Report and Recommendations (HM Treasury, London).




                                        59
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Stephen P. Utkus, 2003, The role of company stock in defined
    contribution plans, in Olivia S. Mitchell and Kent Smetters eds. The Pension
    Challenge: Risk Transfers and Retirement Income Security, Oxford University
    Press, Oxford, 33—70.

Moore, Danna, 2003, Survey of financial literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
   behavior, attitudes, and experiences, Social and Economic Sciences Research
   Center, Washington State University, Technical Report 03-39.

Nalebuﬀ, Barry and Ian Ayres, 2003, Why Not? How to Use Ordinary Ingenuity to
    Solve Problems Big and Small, Harvard Business School Press.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of
   Finance 53, 1775—1798.

Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review
   89, 1279—1298.

Orman, Suze, 1999, The Courage to Be Rich (Riverhead Books, New York, NY).

Palacios-Huerta, Ignacio, 2003, An empirical analysis of the risk properties of human
    capital returns, American Economic Review 93, 948—964.

Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, The reaction of household consumption to predictable
    changes in social security taxes, American Economic Review 89, 959—973.

Pelizzon, Loriana and Guglielmo Weber, 2005, Eﬃcient portfolios when housing is a
     hedge against rent risk, unpublished paper, University of Venice and University
     of Padua.

Polkovnichenko, Valery, 2005, Household portfolio diversification: A case for rank
    dependent preferences, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Poterba, James M., 2002, Taxation, risk-taking, and household portfolio behavior,
    in Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein eds. Handbook of Public Economics
    Vol. 3, 1109—1171, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Poterba, James M. and Andrew Samwick, 2003, Taxation and household portfolio
    composition: Evidence from tax reforms in the 1980’s and 1990’s, Journal of
    Public Economics 87, 5—39.



                                        60
Puri, Manju, and David Robinson, 2005, Optimism and economic choice, NBER
    working paper 11361.

Rosen, Harvey S. and Stephen Wu, 2004, Portfolio choice and health status, Journal
    of Financial Economics 72, 457—484.

Saks, Raven E. and Stephen H. Shore, 2005, Risk and career choice, Advances in
    Economic Analysis and Policy 5(1), Article 7.

Samuelson, Paul A.„ 1938, A note on the pure theory of consumer’s behavior, Eco-
   nomica 5(17), 61—71.

Schlarbaum, Gary G., Ronald C. Lease, and Wilbur G. Lewellen, 1978, The common-
    stock-portfolio performance record of individual investors: 1964—1970, Journal
    of Finance 33, 429—441.

Schwartz, Allie, 2006, Who makes mistakes in mortgage decisions?, unpublished
    paper, Harvard University.

Schwartz, Eduardo S. and Walter N. Torous, 1989, Prepayment and the valuation
    of mortgage-backed securities, Journal of Finance 44, 375—392.

Shiller, Robert J., 2003, The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century, Prince-
     ton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Shore, Stephen H. and Todd Sinai, 2005, Commitment, risk, and consumption: Do
    birds of a feather have bigger nests?, unpublished paper, University of Pennsyl-
    vania.

Sinai, Todd and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2005, Owner-occupied housing as a hedge
    against rent risk, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 763—789.

Sirri, Erik R. and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal
     of Finance 53, 1589—1622.

Souleles, Nicholas S., 2000, The response of household consumption to income tax
    refunds, American Economic Review 89, 947—958.

Stanton, Richard, 1995, Rational prepayment and the valuation of mortgage-backed
    securities, Review of Financial Studies 8, 677—708.



                                        61
Stanton, Richard and Nancy Wallace, 1998, Mortgage choice: what’s the point?,
    Real Estate Economics 26, 173—105.

Stanton, Richard and Nancy Wallace, 1999, Anatomy of an ARM: The interest-rate
    risk of adjustable-rate mortgages, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Eco-
    nomics 19, 49—67.

Statman, Meir, 1982, Fixed rate or index-linked mortgages from the borrower’s point
    of view: a note, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 17, 451–457.

Steinmetz, Thomas C., 2002, The Mortgage Kit (Dearborn Trade Publishing, Chicago,
     IL), 5th ed.

Stephens Jr., Melvin, 2006, Paycheck receipt and the timing of consumption, forth-
    coming Economic Journal.

Storesletten, Kjetil, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Cyclical dynamics in
    idiosyncratic labor-market risk, Journal of Political Economy 112, 695—717.

Swensen, David F., 2005, Unconventional Success: A Fundamental Approach to
    Personal Investment (Free Press, New York, NY).

Tracy, Joseph, Henry Schneider, and Sewin Chan, 1999, Are stocks overtaking real
    estate in household portfolios?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current
    Issues in Economics and Finance 5(5), 1—6.

Tufano, Peter, and Daniel Schneider, 2005, Reinventing savings bonds, unpublished
    paper, Harvard Business School.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise, 2001, Choice, chance, and wealth dispersion at
    retirement, in S. Ogura, T. Tachibanaki, and D. Wise eds. Aging Issues in the
    United States and Japan, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2003, Perspectives on behavioral finance: does “irra-
     tionality” disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions, in
     Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003
     (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).

Wachter, Jessica, 2003, Risk aversion and allocation to long-term bonds, Journal of
   Economic Theory 112, 325—333.



                                       62
Woodward, Susan, 2003, Consumer confusion in the mortgage market, unpublished
   paper, Sand Hill Econometrics, available at:
    http://www.sandhillecon.com/pdf/consumer_confusion.pdf.

Yao, Rui and Harold H. Zhang, 2005, Optimal consumption and portfolio choices
    with risky housing and borrowing constraints, Review of Financial Studies 18,
    197—239.

Zhu, Ning, 2002, The local bias of individual investors, unpublished paper, Yale
    University.




                                      63
                                   Table I: Equity Participation and Portfolio Share
Dependent variable                   Whether a household owns a given asset                          Portfolio share for participants
                                     Public Equity          Private Business                        Public Equity Private Business
                                             Probability              Probability
                                Coefficients             Coefficients                                            Coefficients
                                             Estimates                Estimates
reference household 1                               56.5%                                 0.7%
                                                             2
no tolerance in                    -1.173 ***     -40.9%             0.189                0.5%            -0.032 **                    0.061 *
investment risk                     0.121                            0.167                                 0.014                       0.032
age                                -0.034 *       -20.2%             0.094 ***           -0.6%             0.002                   -0.003
                                    0.019                            0.031                                 0.002                    0.008
age squared                      3.9E-05                         -1.3E-03 ***                          -1.7E-05                 -5.6E-06
                                 1.8E-04                          3.0E-04                               2.4E-05                  7.6E-05
white                               0.133            5.3%            0.335 *              0.4%             0.032 **                    0.000
                                    0.128                            0.198                                 0.014                       0.038
high school diploma                 0.401 ***       14.9%           -0.086               -0.2%             0.009                       0.028
                                    0.157                            0.236                                 0.020                       0.048
college diploma                     0.848 ***       27.9%           -0.211               -0.3%             0.037 *                 -0.041
                                    0.186                            0.275                                 0.021                    0.052
graduate school                     1.051 ***       32.2%           -0.210               -0.3%             0.040 *                 -0.038
                                    0.239                            0.280                                 0.023                    0.051
number of children                 -0.010           -0.5%           -0.068               -0.1%            -0.011 **                    0.003
                                    0.049                            0.058                                 0.005                       0.011
ln(income)                          2.650 *         17.3%           -2.507 **            -0.4%             0.038                       0.106
                                    1.452                            1.036                                 0.153                       0.283
ln(income) squared                 -0.101                            0.101 **                             -0.002                   -0.007
                                    0.070                            0.047                                 0.007                    0.012
ln(wealth)                          0.094           37.3%            0.315              30.6%             -0.312 ***               -0.409 ***
                                    0.372                            0.583                                 0.047                    0.120
ln(wealth) squared                  0.026                            0.029                                 0.014 ***                   0.018 ***
                                    0.017                            0.023                                 0.002                       0.005
N                                            4304                            4304                           2822                        1245
Standard errors are underneath the coefficients. Coefficients significant at the 10% level are denoted by *, 5% by **, and 1% by ***
All regressions control for gender and marital status
1
  In the reference household, the household head is a married white male with no high school diploma
2
    Change in percentage points from the reference person by changing variables from 0 to 1 if binary and by 1 standard deviation if continuous
                                                           Table II: Mortgage Refinancing and Mortgage Rates
Dependent variable                Whether a household refinanced              Whether a household               Whether a household      Mortgage rate for Mortgage rate for
                                    a 30 year fixed mortgage                  moved between 2001             reported a rate 2 or more %  30 year fixed     30 year fixed
                                      between 2001 & 2003                          and 2003                 points below FHLMC in 2001 mortgages in 2001 mortgages in 2003
                                                           Probability                       Probability                         Probability
                                  Coefficients                              Coefficients                 Coefficients                                Coefficients     Coefficients
                                                           Estimates                         Estimates                           Estimates
                            1
reference household                                          27.9%                                4.5%                                 1.3%
                                                                       2
loan problem                             -0.179 ***           -4.6%           -0.050               -0.5%         0.233 ***                2.2%            0.097 **         0.060 **
                                          0.071                                0.088                             0.082                                    0.048            0.031
income problem                           -0.076               -0.2%            0.132                1.4%        -0.064                   -0.6%            0.139 **         0.364 ***
                                          0.099                                0.130                             0.107                                    0.063            0.065
first house                               0.104 **             3.6%            0.001                0.0%        -0.037                    0.2%           -0.039           -0.057 **
                                          0.043                                0.054                             0.053                                    0.035            0.029
age                                      -0.026 **            -4.3%           -0.078 ***           -1.6%         0.003                   -0.1%            0.007            0.004
                                          0.011                                0.012                             0.013                                    0.008            0.007
age squared                            1.5E-04                               6.8E-04 ***                     -2.3E-05                                  -4.6E-05         -4.1E-06
                                       1.1E-04                               1.3E-04                          1.2E-04                                   9.2E-05          8.3E-05
white                                     0.250 ***            7.7%            0.251 ***            1.9%         0.071                   -0.1%            0.002           -0.202 ***
                                          0.056                                0.081                             0.071                                    0.041            0.038
high school diploma                       0.163 **             5.4%            0.293 ***            3.5%        -0.272 ***               -0.6%           -0.156 **        -0.170 ***
                                          0.077                                0.115                             0.076                                    0.062            0.052
college diploma                           0.268 ***            9.2%            0.364 ***            4.6%        -0.203 **                -0.5%           -0.095           -0.195 ***
                                          0.083                                0.122                             0.091                                    0.067            0.055
graduate school                           0.261 ***            8.9%            0.316 **             3.9%        -0.296 ***               -0.7%           -0.070           -0.154 **
                                          0.091                                0.132                             0.104                                    0.074            0.063
number of children                       -0.006               -0.3%           -0.060 **            -0.6%      2.5E-04                     0.1%            0.006            0.004
                                          0.017                                0.024                            0.023                                     0.013            0.011
number of adults                         -0.094 ***           -2.6%           -0.124 ***           -0.8%        -0.005                   -0.1%           -0.015            0.053 ***
                                          0.028                                0.041                             0.031                                    0.022            0.020

ln(income)                                0.274 **             1.3%           -0.528 **             0.9%         0.049                   -0.3%           -0.037            0.018
                                          0.140                                0.224                             0.107                                    0.110            0.095
ln(income) squared                       -0.011 *                              0.028 ***                        -0.007                                    0.000            0.000
                                          0.007                                0.011                             0.006                                    0.005            0.005
ln(house value)                           1.259 *              6.6%            1.589 *             -0.2%         1.422 *                  0.1%            1.101 **        -0.233
                                          0.747                                0.960                             0.822                                    0.464            0.440
ln(house value)                          -0.042                               -0.068 *                          -0.056 *                                 -0.045 **         0.010
squared                                   0.031                                0.040                             0.034                                    0.019            0.018
ln(mortgage)                             -0.024               -0.1%           -0.024                0.0%        -0.057 *                  0.0%            0.335 ***        0.447 ***
                                          0.136                                0.045                             0.031                                    0.079            0.054
ln(mortgage) squared                      0.003                                0.002                            -0.003 *                                 -0.027 ***       -0.038 ***
                                          0.007                                0.002                             0.002                                    0.004            0.003
N                                                   5190                                5735                                7610                        7610             9749
Standard errors are underneath the coefficients. Coefficients significant at the 10% level are denoted by *, 5% by **, and 1% by ***
All regressions contain year and region fixed effects, and also control for gender, marriage status, whether the house is located in an urban area
1
  In the reference household, the household head is a married white male with no high school diploma
2
    Change in percentage points from the reference person by changing variables from 0 to 1 if binary and by 1 standard deviation if continuous
                                                  Figure 1: The US Wealth Distribution
                  10,000,000



                   1,000,000



                    100,000
Mean Assets ($)




                     10,000



                      1,000



                        100



                         10
                               0   10       20         30        40         50           60   70      80       90   100

                                                 Percentile of distribution of total assets


                                        Total Assets                  Financial Assets             Net Worth
                                                 Figure 2: Participation Rates by Asset Class
                        100%




                        80%
Percent Participation




                        60%




                        40%




                        20%




                         0%
                               0          10       20          30     40         50           60   70         80      90           100

                                                   Percentile distribution of total assets

                                   safe assets          real estate        private business        vehicles        public equity
                           Figure 3: Asset Class Shares in Household Portfolios
              100%




              80%
Mean Ratios




              60%




              40%




              20%




               0%
                     0       10    20       30      40          50    60       70       80        90         100

                                   Percentile of distribution of total assets

                     safe assets    real estate      vehicles        private business        public equity
             Figure 4: Fixed Rate Mortgage Share and Mortgage Rates
100                                                                                      14

90
                                                                                         12
80

70                                                                                       10


60
                                                                                         8
50
                                                                                         6
40

30                                                                                       4

20
                                                                                         2
10

 0                                                                                       0
JAN1985           JAN1989        JAN1993         JAN1997              JAN2001


          Proportion FRM    30 year fixed rate    1 year adjustable rate        Spread
                                                    Figure 5: Distribution of Mortgage Spreads
                                                            1.0
Fraction of 30 year fixed rate mortgage
   holders paying a higher spread




                                                            0.8



                                                            0.6



                                                            0.4



                                                            0.2



                                                            0.0
                                          -2   -1              0              1             2     3      4
                                                      Spread over current 30 year mortgage rate

                                               2003                 2001               1999       1997
