                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PREFERENCES AND HETEROGENEOUS TREATMENT EFFECTS IN A PUBLIC
                       SCHOOL CHOICE LOTTERY

                                        Justine S. Hastings
                                         Thomas J. Kane
                                        Douglas O. Staiger

                                       Working Paper 12145
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12145


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2006




The authors thank the Charlotte-Mecklenburg School district for making this project possible. Sean
Hundtofte and Orkun Sahmali provided outstanding research assistance. We would also like to thank
Joseph Altonji, Patrick Bayer, Steven Berry, David Card, Kenneth Chay, Philip Haile, Fabian Lange,
James Powell and participants at various seminars for helpful comments and discussion. The project
is funded by grants from the Institution for Social and Policy Studies at Yale University and the US
Department of Education. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Preferences and Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in a Public School Choice Lottery
Justine S. Hastings, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 12145
April 2006, Revised July2007
JEL No. I0,I2,I20,I28

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper combines a model of parental school choice with randomized school lotteries in order to
understand the effects of being assigned to a first-choice school on academic outcomes. We outline
a simple framework in which those who place the highest weight on academics when choosing a school
benefit the most academically when admitted. Although the average student does not improve academically
when winning a school lottery, this average impact conceals a range of impacts for identifiable subgroups
of students. Children of parents whose choices revealed a strong preference for academic quality experienced
significant gains in test scores as a result of attending their chosen school, while children whose parents
weighted academic characteristics less heavily experienced academic losses. This differential effect
is largest for children of parents who forfeit the most in terms of utility gains from proximity and racial
match to choose a school with stronger academics. Depending on one's own race and neighborhood,
a preference for academic quality can either conflict with or be reinforced by other objectives, such
as a desire for proximity and same-race peers.

Justine S. Hastings                                  Douglas O. Staiger
Yale University                                      Dartmouth College
P.O. Box 208264                                      Department of Economics
New Haven, CT 06520-8264                             HB6106, 301 Rockefeller Hall
and NBER                                             Hanover, NH 03755-3514
justine.hastings@yale.edu                            and NBER
                                                     douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
Thomas J. Kane
Harvard Graduate School of Education
Gutman Library, Room 455
Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu
I.      Introduction

        Public school choice plans are intended to improve academic achievement, by
allowing parents to choose a school other than their neighborhood school and by giving
local schools an incentive to attract and retain students. Many urban public school
districts are experimenting with some form of school choice. In fact, the federal No Child
Left Behind Act (NCLB) requires that school districts give students at persistently under-
performing public schools the option to choose a higher-achieving public school.
Nevertheless, there is little empirical evidence that offering disadvantaged students more
choices will lead to any substantial increase in academic achievement.
        A number of papers have used random assignment to estimate the effect on
academic outcomes of attending a school other than the local public school. Most of these
papers identify the average treatment effect using lottery assignment to over-subscribed
public schools or the randomization of private school vouchers (Witte et al. (1995),
Greene et al. (1997), Rouse (1998), Peterson et al. (1998), Mayer et al. (2002), Krueger
and Zhu (2004), Cullen et al. (2006), Hastings et al. (2006b)).1 Taken together, these
papers fail to find robust impacts on average academic outcomes.
        However, as noted in many of these papers, parents may have a variety of reasons
for choosing schools, and we might expect this to lead to heterogeneous impacts of
attending a first choice school on academic achievement (Heckman et al. (1997),
Heckman (1997), Heckman, et al. (2006)). The child of an academically oriented parent
who chooses to send her child across town to attend a high-performing school may
experience larger gains from school choice than the child of a parent who chooses a
school primarily for convenience – particularly when the most convenient school is low
performing. Thus, the average effect of attending a first choice school may be zero even
if schools do have offsetting positive and negative impacts for subsets of children.



1
  An earlier non-experimental literature compared academic outcomes of those students who chose to
attend private, charter or magnet schools to those students who remained in their neighborhood school
(Coleman et al. (1982), Bryk et al. (1993), Blank (1983), Gamoran (1996), Evans and Schwab (1995), Neal
(1997), Altonji et al. (2002)).


                                                                                                     3
         In this paper we use the choice rankings of parents following the introduction of
district-wide school choice in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg School District (CMS) along
with lottery assignment of students to first choice schools to shed light on the factors that
drive parental choice and their relationship to subsequent student outcomes. In 2002,
CMS introduced a district-wide choice plan to end three decades of busing for
integration. All parents in the district were asked to provide their top three school choices
and a lottery was used to determine admission to oversubscribed schools. We show that
parents’ choices were very heterogeneous, and outline a simple model that illustrates how
the academic gains from attending a first-choice school should be positive for parents
who place a high implicit weight on academics when choosing a school, and potentially
negative for parents who place low weights on academics and high weights on other
factors that are negatively correlated with academics (e.g. geographic proximity or
fraction minority). We then use the rich choice data and lottery assignment to test this
model in the data, explicitly allowing for heterogeneity in treatment effects generated by
the underlying preferences that drove parents’ school choices.
         In order to estimate the implicit weight each parent placed on academics when
choosing a school, we first estimate the distribution of preferences for school
characteristics using a mixed logit model (McFadden and Train (2000),Train (2003)).2
This random utility model allows parents to have heterogeneous preferences for school
characteristics that depend on observable demographics as well as idiosyncratic factors.
The estimates from this model can be used to calculate a posterior estimate of the implicit
weight that each parent placed on academics when choosing a school.3 This implicit
weight is effectively a non-linear index of baseline characteristics, combining all of the
information about the student, their proximity to each school, the characteristics of each
school and the schools their parents selected into a single summary statistic. It measures
how unexpected a parent’s choices were relative to what a typical parent would have
chosen given their demographics and geographic location. For example, if a parent
chooses schools with high test scores in each of their three choices, passing over closer

2
  For a more complete discussion of the effect of school characteristics in determining parental demand, see
Hastings et al. (2006a).
3
  Because of the availability in our data of multiple ranked choices for each parent, we are able to identify
idiosyncratic heterogeneity in preferences based on systematic differences in the sequential choices made
by parents of similar students facing similar school options (Berry et al. (2004)).


                                                                                                           4
schools that most other parents would have preferred, we would infer that they place a
high implicit weight on academics.
       We then turn to the lottery assignments to investigate if students experience
academic gains from attending a first-choice school. Consistent with the prior literature,
we find no average gain in test scores from attending a first choice school. We do,
however, find significant positive gains among white students and students of higher-
income families, and negative but insignificant impacts for African Americans and
children of lower-income families. We show that this pattern of subgroup differences in
gains is consistent with differences in underlying preferences and the trade-offs parents
face. We do this in two ways. First, we show that the average weight placed on
academics is positively correlated with the average treatment effect across subgroups
(although the differences in subgroup impacts are too imprecisely estimated to be
statistically distinguishable). Second we allow the treatment effect of attending a first
choice school to vary explicitly with the implicit weight that parents place on academics.
We find that the treatment effect varies significantly and positively with this weight.
Students with estimated weights on school test scores at the 95th percentile experienced
significant rises in End of Grade test scores of approximately 0.1 standard deviations.
These students are most likely to be white and have higher income levels, thus generating
the significant subgroup impacts by race and income. In contrast, students placing little
value on academics actually experienced declines in academic achievement. We show
that this is strongest for African Americans, who must trade-off academic gains against
utility gains from attending a school with a high proportion of minority students.
       This paper offers a model and an approach that explains and gives an economic
interpretation to heterogeneous treatment effects across subgroups of students. Prior
research has speculated that differing preferences may contribute to the observed
differences in impacts across subgroups, but has not had a setting in which to both
estimate the underlying determinants of school choice and the resulting outcomes from
attending a first choice school. Our results suggest that differing impacts across
subgroups can be largely explained by underlying differences in parents’ willingness to
trade off expected gains in academic achievement for gains in utility along other
dimensions, such as proximity or school racial composition. More generally, this implies



                                                                                        5
that the impact of school choice on academic outcomes will depend on both the
willingness of parents to make these tradeoffs, and the extent to which the available
school choices require such tradeoffs to be made.
       This paper proceeds in five main sections. The first section lays the background
for the data and estimation by describing key details of the CMS school choice plan. The
second section outlines the relationship between expected academic outcomes and
preferences in a school choice plan, where parents choose schools based on expected
academic achievement and other school characteristics, and students are then granted
admission to schools by lottery. In the third section, we generate estimates of the
preferences for academic achievement. We incorporate these preference estimates into
our final estimation of the effect of attending a first choice school on academic outcomes.
The final section concludes.


II.    Background: The CMS School Choice Plan

       Before the introduction of a school choice plan in the fall of 2002, the Charlotte-
Mecklenburg public school district (CMS) operated under a racial desegregation order for
three decades. In September 2001, the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals declared the
school district “unitary” and ordered the district to dismantle the race-based student
assignment plan by the beginning of the next school year. In December of 2001, the
school board voted to approve a new district-wide public school choice plan.
       In the spring of 2002, parents were asked to submit their top three choices of
school programs for each child. Each student was assigned a “home school” in their
neighborhood, often the closest school to them, and was guaranteed a seat at this school.
Magnet students were similarly guaranteed admission to continue in their current magnet
programs. Admission for all other students was limited by grade-specific capacity limits
set by the district. Students could choose any school in the district. However,
transportation was only guaranteed to schools in a student’s quadrant of the district (the
district was split into 4 quadrants called ‘choice zones’). The district allowed significant
increases in enrollment in many schools in the first year of the school choice program in
an expressed effort to give each child one of their top three choices. In the spring of 2002,



                                                                                           6
the district received choice applications for approximately 105,000 of 110,000 students.
Admission to over-subscribed schools was determined by a lottery system as described
below.
         Once the district was declared “unitary” and the court order requiring race-based
busing was terminated, they could no longer draw boundaries based on the racial
composition of a neighborhood. As a result, the former school assignment zones, which
often paired non-contiguous black and white neighborhoods, were dramatically redrawn.
Under the choice plan, 43 percent of parcels were assigned to a different elementary
grade ‘home school’ than they were assigned to the year before under the busing system.
At the middle school and high school levels this number was 52 and 35 percent
respectively. Therefore, the 2002-2003 home school for many students is often not the
school they would have been assigned at the time they chose their residence. This
dramatic change in school assignment zones, the simultaneous introduction of a sweeping
school choice plan, and the assignment of students to high-demand schools by lottery
provides a unique opportunity to estimate parental preferences for schools and model the
heterogeneous impact of attending a chosen school on academic outcomes.


Lottery Assignments
         Approximately one third of the schools in the district were oversubscribed. The
district implemented a lottery system for determining enrollments in those oversubscribed
schools. Under the lottery system, students choosing non-home schools were first
assigned to priority groups and student admission was then determined by a lottery
number. The priority groups for district schools were arranged in lexicographic order
based on the following priorities:

Priority 1:     Student who had attended the school in the prior year. (Students were
                subdivided into 3 priority groups depending upon their grade level, with
                students in terminal grades—grades 5, 8 and 12—given highest priority.)
Priority 2:     Free-lunch eligible student applying to school where less than half the
                students were free-lunch eligible.
Priority 3:     Student applying to a school within their choice zone.



                                                                                          7
        Students listing a given school as their first choice were sorted by priority group
and a randomly assigned lottery number.4 Any slots remaining after home school students
were accommodated were assigned in order of priority group and random number.5 If a
school was not filled by those who had listed it as a first choice, the lottery would repeat
the process with those listing the school as a second choice, using the same priority
groups as above. However, for many oversubscribed schools, the available spaces were
filled up by the time the second choice priority groups came up.
        Students who were not assigned one of their top choices were placed on a waiting
list. About 19% of students winning the lottery to attend their first choice schools
subsequently attended a different school, with 13% choosing to attend their home school
instead and another 6% choosing to attend a different school entirely, with most of these
students changing address. When slots became available, students were taken off the wait
list based on their lottery number alone, without regard for their priority group.


Potential for Strategic Choice
        The lottery mechanism used by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools was a ‘first-
choice-maximizer,’ in which slots were first assigned to all those listing a given school as
a first choice before moving to those listing the school as a second or third choice. In
such a mechanism, parents with poor home school options may have an incentive to
misstate their preferences – not listing their most preferred school if it had a low
probability of admission (Glazerman and Meyer (1994), Abdulkadiroglu and Sonmez
(2003), Abdulkadiroglu et. al (2006)). Instead, they may have hedged their bets by listing
a less preferred option with a higher probability of admission in order to avoid being
assigned to their home school. Such strategic behavior would imply that student choices
would not reflect true preference orderings for schools—to the extent that students are
not listing their preferred match due to strategic hedging on quality.


4
  The random number was assigned by a computer using an algorithm that we verified with CMS computer
programmers.
5
  Once any sibling was admitted to a school, other siblings could choose to attend the school. We dropped
those who were admitted to a school because of a sibling preference.



                                                                                                        8
         However, there were a number of reasons why such strategic behavior was
probably rare in the first year of the choice plan that we are studying. First, parents did
not know the details of how the lottery system would be operated. The handful of district
officials who knew the lottery details were not allowed to communicate them to parents.
Parents were never given their actual lottery numbers. The district also told parents that
they would make every attempt to give each student admission to one of their chosen
schools, and instructed them to list what they wanted. In order to accommodate demand,
the district substantially expanded capacity at popular schools. In addition, the district
gave a ‘priority boost’ to low-income students choosing to attend schools with low
concentrations of low income students. Hence, choices for top schools by students with
under-performing home schools would be given top priority. This would counteract the
incentive for these students to hedge their choices as outlined above.
         If there were widespread strategic behavior by parents, we would expect those
with low-quality default schools to hedge their bets and list less desirable schools for
which they might have a higher probability of admission. In another paper, Hastings et al.
(2006a), we test whether parents with exogenous changes in the quality of their default
school produced by the redistricting had lower preferences for high-quality schools as
would be predicted if parents were behaving strategically. Perhaps because of the
uncertainty about the mechanism and the newness of the system, we did not find
evidence that strategic behavior played a significant role in this first year of school
choice.6


III.     Preferences, Choices and Expected Treatment Effects

         We have access to administrative data for all students in CMS for the year before
and after the implementation of school choice. Throughout the analysis, we focus on
students entering grades 4 through 8 since we have baseline test scores for this group of
students for North Carolina End of Grade Tests. For each student, we have the choice
forms submitted to CMS, allowing a parent to specify up to three choices for their child’s
school. In addition to the student choices, our data contain student characteristics for the

6
 For the details of this test, as well as for further specification checks on the mixed logit demand
estimation, please see Hastings et al. (2006a), Section VIII, pp. 21-27.


                                                                                                       9
years before and after school choice, including geo-coded residential location, race,
gender, lunch-subsidy recipient status, and student test scores for standardized North
Carolina End of Grade exams in math and reading, and school assignment. The data also
include student-level lottery numbers, lottery outcomes and school assignments for the
2002-2003 school choice lottery.
        It is clear that parents have very heterogeneous preferences over school
characteristics. As reported in Figure 1, approximately 20% of students chose schools
that had lower test scores than the school they had guaranteed admission to. In addition,
among those with the same elementary home school for 2002-03, parents on average
listed 10 different elementary schools as their first choice.7 The range of choices made
suggests that heterogeneous preferences may play a key role in school selection, and may
therefore generate differential gains in academic achievement.
        A simple model illustrates how the expected gains in academic achievement will
depend on parental preferences. Suppose that parents choose schools for both the
expected academic gain for their child, but also for other reasons, such as proximity or
racial composition. Consider the following utility function of parent i for school j
(1)      U ij = β iA Aij + Vij

where Aij is the expected academic achievement of student i if she attends school j, Vij is

the utility for student i from attending school j along non-academic dimensions, and β iA is
the weight that parent i places on academic achievement relative to non-academic
dimensions. The utility gain from attending the first choice over the alternative school is:
(2)      ΔU = β iA ΔA + ΔV
where delta denotes the difference in variables between school alternatives k and j. A
student will choose an alternative school over their home school only if the utility gain is
positive, i.e. ΔU > 0 . Among students choosing an alternative school over their home




7
  This statistic excludes heterogeneity in choices generated solely by heterogeneity in prior-year school
assignment under the bussing system. If we include choices driven by preferences for prior-year schools by
students with different prior-year schools under bussing, but the same new home-school assignment area
under choice, this statistic increases to 14.6.


                                                                                                       10
school, the expected academic gain of a student randomized into their 1st choice school is
given by:8
(3)      E (ΔA | β iA ΔA + ΔV > 0)

         In this simple framework, students with high β iA have a positive expected
treatment effect (gain in academic achievement from attending the first-choice school). In
fact, as β iA gets very large, the expected treatment effect alone determines choice and,
therefore, must be positive for all students who choose an alternative school. For a
student with low β iA (near zero), the expected treatment effect is ambiguous. If ΔA and

ΔV are independent and ΔA is mean zero, then the expected treatment effect is zero, i.e.
E (ΔA | ΔV > 0) = 0 . If ΔA is negatively correlated with ΔV - as may be the case for
some non-academic dimensions such as proximity and percent African American - then
the treatment effect will be negative for students, unless their parents’ preference for
academic quality is sufficiently strong to overcome the negative trade-off. That is, the
parent of a student in a neighborhood served by a low-performing school or the parent of
a minority student who wants her child to attend a school with same-race peers may give
up gains in her child’s academic achievement if her preference for academics is not large
enough to counter-balance her preferences for non-academic factors. Hence, this basic
framework generates the prediction that the expected treatment effect is positive for all
students with a strong preference for academic achievement. Among students with
weaker preferences for academic achievement, the expected treatment effect will depend
on the tradeoffs that parents face. The treatment effect could even be negative if expected
academic achievement is sufficiently negatively correlated with other valued school
characteristics.


Estimating Preferences Using a Random Utility Model
         Accordingly, we use parents’ school choices to infer preferences for academic
achievement and then use them to test if differences in underlying preferences and the
trade-offs parents face affect the impact that attending a first choice school has on a


8
 As noted earlier, the lottery was run as a ‘first-choice maximizer’. Because of this, most students who did
not win the lottery for their parents’ first choice school were assigned to their home school.


                                                                                                          11
student’s academic achievement. Let Uij be the expected utility of individual i from
attending school j. Suppose that utility is a linear function of the academic achievement
of student i at school j, Aij , and other school-student characteristics, Z ij , such as distance

from home, busing availability, and racial composition. Thus, expected utility is given
by:
(4)      U ij = β iA Aij + γ i Z ij + ω ij

where β iA and γ i represent preference parameters for person i, and ω ij represents an

unobserved idiosyncratic preference of student i for school j.
         Furthermore, suppose that the expected academic achievement for student i
attending school j depends on the average test score at school j ( S j with a coefficient

normalized to one), other observable characteristics of the school ( Z ij ), plus a mean zero

deviation that is known to the parent ( υ ij ).

(5)      Aij = S j + α Z ij + υ ij

In this model, parents base their expectations of academic achievement on observable
school characteristics plus idiosyncratic factors affecting their child.9 This specification
allows for the possibility that non-academic factors such as proximity may affect
academic achievement (for example, through longer bus rides) and also allows for the
possibility that parents adjust school test scores for racial composition of the school (the
“value-added” approach). This adjustment can be different for parents with different
observables (such as race) if preferences for school characteristics are allowed to vary
with student observable characteristics.
         Using equation (5), we can re-write the indirect utility function as:
(6)      U ij = β iA S j + β iZ Z ij + ε ij = X ij β i + ε ij




9
  An alternative specification would further multiply the right hand side of (5) by an individual-specific
coefficient, representing an individual-specific return to attending a more academically oriented school.
This alternative specification results in an identical empirical specification of indirect utility in (6), but
with a different interpretation – a higher coefficient on school test score could represent either a stronger
preference for academics or a higher return to academic achievement from attending an academically
oriented school.


                                                                                                          12
where ε ij = β iAυ ij + ω ij , β iZ = γ i + β iAα , X ij = [ S j , Z ij ] , and β i = [ β iA , β iZ ] . Assuming

that the ε ij are independently distributed extreme value, we get the typical logit functional

form for the probability of choosing school j.10 With distributional assumptions on the
preference parameters, we have a mixed logit utility model. The mixed logit can
approximate any random utility model, given appropriate mixing distributions and
explanatory variables (Dagsvik (1994), McFadden and Train (2000)).
           Even though the expected academic achievement for student i attending school j
( Aij ) is not observed directly, the weight placed on academic achievement can be

estimated. The weight on academic achievement ( β iA ) is identified in the mixed logit
model because school test scores are assumed to influence utility only through their effect
on academic achievement, whereas other school characteristics in Z ij may affect utility

directly as well as indirectly through expected academic achievement. Obtaining direct
estimates of Aij would require additional structural assumptions to identify how

academic achievement depends on observable school characteristics and idiosyncratic
factors affecting a child’s academic performance at each school ( α Z ij + υ ij ).11 Rather

than impose additional assumptions, our analysis focuses on the more fundamental
implication that parents placing a high weight on school test scores (high- β iA ) should be
more likely to choose schools that increase their child’s academic achievement. While
parents may prefer schools with high test scores for non-academic reasons as well (e.g.,
status or social connections), it is reasonable to assume academics are their primary
concern. An important benefit of this approach is that we do not have to completely
specify how school and student characteristics combine to produce academic


10
     Note that estimation involves normalizing the variance of εij. Since Var(εij )is an increasing function of
 β iA , normalization will reduce the estimate of β iA for high- β iA types. While this will act to understate
the estimated variation in β iA in the final model, it does not affect the relative rankings of individuals with
respect to β iA – which is the information we use to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects.
11
   For example, if Aij = Xjβi + vij and Vij = Zijγi + ωij, with vij i.i.d. normal and ωij i.i.d. extreme value, and
no common variables in X and Z, then one can estimate E(∆A|∆U>0) directly from the random utility
model. We estimated models of this form and found that they performed poorly in terms of predicting the
magnitude of the treatment effect, suggesting that either our assumptions were too restrictive or the
necessary student-choice level idiosyncratic parameters were poorly identified.


                                                                                                               13
achievement: we just need to know that academic achievement was important to the
parent in choosing a school.
        We estimate the underlying preference parameters in this random utility model
using simulated maximum likelihood techniques (Train (2003)). The probability that
individual i chooses schools (j1,j2, j3) is given by:

           (                )                {(                             ) (                    ) (
         Pi j1 , j 2 , j 3 = Pr U ij1 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i1 ∩ U ij 2 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i2 ∩ U ij 3 > U ik ∀k ∈ J i3    )}
                              X          β
                3                 ij c
                          e
         = ∫∏                                     f (β | μ ,θ )dβ
(7)
               c =1   ∑   k ∈J ic
                                     e X ik β

        We assume that β ~ f (β | μ , θ ) , where f ( ⋅) is a joint-normal mixing distribution,

μ denotes the mean, and θ represents the variance parameters. The term inside the
integrand represents the probability of observing the three ranked choices conditional on
the preference coefficients (β): this is the product of three logit probabilities evaluated
at β i , corresponding to the probability of making each choice from among the remaining

options.12 This conditional probability is integrated over the distribution of β to yield the
unconditional probability of observing the ranked choices. Estimation was by the method
of maximum simulated likelihood, using 100 draws of β from f ( ⋅) for each individual

in the data set. The results were not sensitive to the number of draws used. We assume
that all random parameters are drawn from a normal or log normal distribution, and allow
for correlation among some of the main preference parameters as reported in the tables.
        The maximum likelihood results yield parameter estimates for the mean and
variance of preferences in the population. We then use Bayes’ rule to calculate posterior
estimates of the weight each student placed on school scores in the following way (Revelt
and Train (1998), Train (2003)):

                                             ∫ β P(y               | X ij , β ) f (β | μ , θ )dβ
                                                           A

(8)        (
         E β i | y i , X ij
               A
                                  , μ ,θ ) =
                                                       i       i

                                                               P ( y i | X ij , μ , θ )

Where yi denotes the choices the student made. This equation is the expected value of
student i’s preference for academics given her characteristics, the choices she made, the

12
  For students submitting fewer than three choices, the likelihood is modified in an obvious way to reflect
only the probability of the submitted choices.


                                                                                                         14
characteristics of the schools given her location, and the estimated distribution of
preferences in the population. We calculate this posterior for each student in our
randomized lottery admission group using 1000 draws from the estimated preference
distributions in from the mixed logit demand estimation. 13
         This posterior weight on average test scores is what we will use to examine if
heterogeneous preferences drive choices and expected treatment effect. Notice that it will
vary with demographics if we allow mean preferences to vary with observable family
characteristics such as race, lunch status, family income, and student baseline score.
However, the posterior weight also captures baseline information on how the choice of
the parent differed from the choices of observationally similar parents facing the same
choice set. Thus the posterior weight incorporates a large amount of information into one
summary statistic in a way that would be difficult to capture with simple subgroups based
on student demographics or characteristics of the chosen school.


IV.      Demand Estimation Results
         We follow Hastings et al. (2006a) and present mixed logit results from that model
here. The model includes key observable school characteristics: the distance from student
i to school j (measured in miles along roads), an indicator if the student was eligible for
busing to the school, and an indicator if the school was designated as the student’s
neighborhood school, an indicator if the child attended the school in the prior year, the
percent black in the school (in Spring 2003) and its square, and a measure of average test
scores in the school (the school level average of all students’ standardized math and
reading scores in spring of 2003).14 Table I lists the independent variables in the indirect
utility function and describes how they were constructed.
         We allow the mean preference for academic achievement (the coefficient on
school test scores) to vary linearly with the student’s standardized baseline test score
(from the spring of the prior year, standardized by grade level across the district) and the
13
   See Train (2003) p. 270 for Monte Carlo Simulations of the accuracy of individual-level parameter
estimates and the number of observed choice situations.
14
   We use the average test scores at the end of the first year of choice instead of those at the end of the year
before school choice was implemented. Hastings et al. (2006a) presents demand estimation results for
various measures of school academic achievement. They find for example that value added measures do a
poor job of explaining choices, and that the choice data imply that parents are choosing schools based on
levels instead of changes in academic achievement.


                                                                                                            15
median household income in the student’s neighborhood for the student’s race (measured
in $1000’s, using their census block group in 2000, and de-meaned with the countywide
median of $51,000). Preferences for distance are constrained to be negative with a log
normal distribution. We allow preferences for proximity and academic quality to be
correlated. All other preference distributions are assumed to be independently and
normally distributed. We estimate the parameters of the preference distribution separately
by race and lunch-subsidy status, thus allowing for full interactions with race and lunch
status.
          As discussed in more detail in Hastings et al. (2006a), several aspects of the CMS
school choice data and experiment are helpful for identifying preferences in our demand
estimation. First, the large scale redistricting that occurred with the introduction of school
choice helps to identify preference parameters separately from residential sorting.
Without redistricting and the multiple-choice responses, residential sorting would
potentially confound the preferences for proximity with preferences for other desired
school attributes. 15
          Second, historic placement of schools for busing in CMS provides wide variation
in school characteristics for families in all socio-economic groups, dampening
collinearity problems that may be present in other settings.16 Third, approximately 95%
of the 110,000 students submitted choices for the choice plan. Thus we have data for
nearly the entire student population—whereas most work using school choice data has
been dependent on limited and potentially non-representative subgroups of students.
          Fourth, the multiple responses create variation in the choice set by effectively
removing the prior chosen school from the subsequent choice set. This choice-set
variation allows us to estimate the distribution of preferences for school characteristics
from observed substitution patterns for each individual – a stronger source of variation
for identification than cross-sectional changes in the choice set based on geographic
location (Train (2003), Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (2004)). Intuitively, when only a
15
   In addition, multiple choices listed by those selecting their home school first further separates preferences
for school characteristics from residential sorting by simulating the unavailability of the neighborhood
school. For a comparison of preference estimates for the redistricted sub-sample versus the full sample,
please see Hastings, Kane and Staiger (2006a). They show that preferences are very similar for the
redistricted subsample of students relative to the population.
16
    Hastings et al. (2006a) show that average distance to a top-tier school is the same across all socio-
economic groups.


                                                                                                            16
single (1st) choice is observed for every individual, it is difficult to be sure whether an
unexpected choice was the result of an unusual error term ( ε ij ) or unusual preferences by

the individual ( β i ) for some aspect of the choice. However, when an individual makes
multiple choices that share a common attribute (e.g. high test scores) we can infer that the
individual has a strong preference for that attribute, because independence of the additive
error terms across choices would make observing such an event very unlikely in the
absence of a strong preference.
       The final estimation sample includes 36,816 students entering grades 4-8.
Estimation is limited to these grades because of the lack of test scores (either baseline or
school test scores) in other grades. The means and standard deviations of these variables
across the 2.4 million school, student, and choice rank interactions available to our
sample of students and schools are reported in Table II. Table III presents the results from
the mixed logit demand estimation by race and lunch-recipient status. All of the point
estimates were precisely estimated and statistically different from zero at less than the 1
percent level. We report the estimates for the means, standard deviations, and correlation
coefficients (where appropriate) for the preference distributions. The discussion of results
is focused around the parameters most relevant for our final estimation of the effect of
attending a first choice school on academic achievement. For a further discussion of the
results and their implications for student sorting and competition on quality in public
school choice, please see Hastings et al. (2006a).
       The first four rows of coefficients in Table III report the preferences for school
test scores by race and lunch-recipient status. The first row of coefficients reports the
mean preference for school scores for the average student. It is positive for all four
demographic groups, implying that school test scores have a positive effect on choosing a
school for the average student. For a student with average baseline test scores and
average income, the mean preference for school scores is larger for non-white students
(1.80) than for white students (1.17) among students not receiving lunch subsidies. These
coefficients imply that a 0.1 increase in average test scores at a school (one tenth of a
student-level standard deviation) is associated with a 10%-20% increase in the odds of
choosing that school for an average student not receiving lunch subsidies. Preference for




                                                                                         17
school scores among students receiving lunch subsidies are lower for both whites and
nonwhites, but the difference between whites and nonwhites is similar.
         We also allow the mean preference for school test scores to vary with the
student’s baseline test score and their neighborhood income level.17 The third and fourth
rows of parameter estimates report the coefficient on the interaction of school scores with
income and the student’s baseline score respectively.18 The coefficients on the income
interaction imply that mean preferences for a school’s test score (conditional on its racial
composition) are increasing with income. The magnitudes of these parameters are
roughly consistent with the differences in the mean preferences for test scores between
lunch-recipients and non-lunch recipients within race. Similarly, the mean preference for
school scores is increasing in the student’s baseline test score. The coefficient on the
interaction between the student’s baseline test score and the school mean test score is
positive - implying that those with higher test scores relative to their baseline peer group
value a school’s test scores more. The effect of a student’s baseline score on the
preference for school test scores is similar in magnitude to the effect of income. A one
standard deviation increase in the baseline test score is associated with a 0.3-0.6 increase
in the mean preference for school test scores, while a one standard deviation increase in
neighborhood income (about $25,000) is associated with a 0.3-0.4 increase in the mean
preference for school test scores.
         The coefficients on the interactions of income and baseline score with school
scores demonstrate that preferences for school test scores vary considerably with
observable characteristics. Parameter estimates for the standard deviation in idiosyncratic
preferences for academics are reported in Row 2. While differences in baseline test scores
and income each generate a standard deviation in preferences of roughly 0.3-0.6 based on
the calculations from the previous paragraph, the estimated standard deviation in
idiosyncratic preferences for school test scores is also around 0.3 for non-whites and 0.65
for whites. Hence, there is substantial unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for test
17
   For students who are eligible for lunch subsidies, we did not include the interaction with neighborhood
income because all of these students are presumably very low income. In initial specifications using a
conditional logit, income interactions with the preference for school scores were generally insignificant for
the lunch-recipient segments.
18
   Recall that both neighborhood income and the student’s baseline score are “de-meaned”, so that the
coefficient on the main effect of school score measures the value of school test score for a student with
average income and baseline test score (both equal to zero).


                                                                                                         18
scores. The substantial variation across students in the weight placed on academics
suggests that we may expect to see strong school choice selection on academic outcomes
for some students and not for others. The fact that much of the heterogeneity in
preferences is unobservable implies that the traditional approach of allowing the
treatment effect to vary with observable characteristics, such as race or lunch status, may
not completely capture heterogeneous treatment effects by preferences for academics.
         The parameter estimates for the remaining coefficients indicate that parents face
important trade-offs between academic and non-academic factors when choosing schools.
Rows 5 and 6 report the parameter estimates for the lognormal distribution of preferences
for distance. Rows 7 and 8 report the mean preference and standard deviation for the
neighborhood (or ‘home’) school.19 Parents dislike distance and prefer their
neighborhood school. These coefficients indicate that the average parent must trade-off
utility for proximity in order to gain utility from expected academic outcomes. For most
students, attending a high-achieving school will require them to choose a school that is
farther than their home school and a school that is not their home school. Hence there is a
negative correlation between school characteristics that measure proximity and those that
capture academic achievement. This implies that parents of all races must, on average,
trade-off utility for academic gains against utility gains for proximity.
         In addition to trading-off proximity for academics, African American parents
must trade-off academic gains against the racial composition of peers. The preference
coefficients on percent black imply that the average African American parent prefers
schools where approximately 70% of the student body population is black (the peak of
the mean quadratic preference for race), while the district as a whole is approximately
45% African American. However, the percent black at a school is negatively correlated
with average test scores (correlation is around -0.65). The negative correlation between
test scores and racial composition implies that African American parents must value
academic achievement much more than their white counterparts in order to induce them
to choose a higher performing school that also has, on average, fewer African American


19
  Hastings et al. (2006a) discuss the interpretation of the neighborhood school. They test if this coefficient
represents a non-linearity in the preference for proximity or if it is potentially consistent with a default
effect. They provide evidence that the preference for the neighborhood school is a neighborhood preference
that is not generated by default behavior.


                                                                                                           19
students. Given the coefficients for the quadratic term in racial preferences, the loss in
utility for black families is highest when percent black is low (less than 40%), which is
precisely the range in which school average test scores are highest.
        Based on the estimates in Table III, we used (8) to calculate a posterior estimate
of the weight that each parent placed on academics when choosing schools for their child.
Table IV reports the means and standard deviations for these posterior weights by the
four demographic subgroups used in TableIII. There is considerable variation in these
posterior weights in our sample, with a standard deviation that is more than one half of
the sample mean (0.845 versus 1.348). The mean posterior weights vary across
demographic subgroups as expected: however, there is also considerable variation in the
posterior weights within each subgroup. This implies that parents’ reasons for choosing a
school can differ substantially across race and lunch subsidy status; two prominent
baseline characteristics focused on in the prior literature.


V.      Estimating the Impact of Attending a 1st Choice School on Academic
        Achievement


        In this section we estimate the effect of attending a 1st choice school on academic
achievement, and examine how it varies across subgroups and with the estimated weight
parents placed on test scores when choosing a school. We focus on the subset of students
choosing schools that were over-subscribed and limit our sample to the marginal priority
groups within those schools for whom lottery number alone determined initial admission.
We ignore members of priority groups in which all students were either admitted or
denied admission—since the assignment of lottery numbers had no impact on their
admission status. This allows us to use the random admission of students into a school,
conditional on the school they chose.20
        We began with the choice forms submitted by 105,706 students in the first year.21
After dropping students who were not in grades 4-8, who had special disabilities needs,

20
   In some schools, the marginal priority group will consist of those who attended the school the year
before, or free-lunch eligible students, or students from the choice zone. The marginal priority group may
also be different for different grade levels in a school.
21
   Reflecting the district’s intensive outreach efforts, choice forms were received for over 95% of all the
students enrolling that fall.


                                                                                                        20
and students who were admitted because of siblings, we were left with a sample of
37,115. Of these, 22,872 listed their guaranteed home school (n=19,669) or magnet
continuation school (n=3,203) and, therefore, were not subject to randomization. Another
7,583 students were in groups sufficiently high on the priority list that they were not
subject to the randomization. There were 3,065 students in marginal priority groups,
described above as those priority groups within the schools where slots were allocated on
the basis of a random number. Finally, there were 3,595 students in priority groups that
were sufficiently low on the priority list that all members of the priority group were
denied admission and placed on the waitlist.
        Table V compares descriptive statistics on the baseline characteristics of students
in the marginal priority group to other students in the district. Overall, students in the
marginal priority group appear to be fairly representative of students who chose a non-
guaranteed school. The only notable differences are that the marginal priority group was
more likely to be eligible for lunch subsidies than the waitlisted group (reflecting the
priority given to eligible students), and applied to schools with higher test scores than did
the admitted group (reflecting capacity constraints at schools with higher test scores). Not
surprisingly, students choosing non-guaranteed schools differed from students who chose
a guaranteed school: they had home schools with lower test scores and higher proportions
of minority and lunch-eligible students, and were more likely to minority, poor, and
doing poorly in school themselves. Thus, the marginal priority group should provide a
reasonable estimate of the impact of attending one’s first choice school for a typical
student who chose a non-guaranteed school (i.e., treatment on the treated). In addition,
the final row in Table V shows the mean weight placed on academics ( βˆiA ) for students

in the marginal priority group versus other students in the district. The mean βˆiA for
students in the randomized group is very similar to that for students in the district as a
whole.22
        Within the marginal priority groups, we want to estimate the impact of attending a
first-choice school on academic outcomes using:

22
  The low mean weight for students in the admitted group is consistent with the fact that these students
were typically choosing lower-scoring and capacity unconstrained schools, as can be seen from the
differences in sample means for the Average Combined Scores of the chosen school (row 8 in Table V).


                                                                                                           21
(9)     Yij = X iα + γ 1 Attended1stChoiceij + δ j + ε ij

where Xi includes student baseline characteristics and δj are school lottery fixed-effects.
Our controls include: gender, race/ethnicity, free lunch status, home school dummy
variables, baseline test scores, income, absences, suspensions, and grade retentions. The
fixed effects, δj, are included for each school and grade, to account for the fact that the
probabilities of winning the lottery varied across lotteries (Rouse 1998). Our outcomes of
interest, Yij, include absences, suspensions, and standardized test scores. In addition the
testing data in North Carolina also includes student self-reports on the number of hours of
home work they did each week, and we include this as an outcome as well. Since not all
of those who won the lotteries actually chose to attend their first choice school, and some
of those who lost the lotteries were subsequently admitted off the waiting lists, we used
the randomized lottery outcome as an instrument for attending a first choice school.
Random assignment by lottery implies that the impact of winning the lottery, γ1, is
consistently estimated even without these control variables, but the additional control
variables greatly improve precision. We report robust standard errors, allowing for
correlations in outcomes among students with the same first-choice school (which may
include more than one grade with a lottery).
       To verify that winning the school lottery was truly random within the marginal
priority group, we examine whether the baseline characteristics of lottery winners and
losers differ in our estimation sample. Our estimation sample excludes 181 students who
were in marginal priority groups but missing needed baseline characteristics such as
address (which was used in the choice model). Table VI reports mean baseline
characteristics for lottery winners and losers, as well as adjusted differences from an OLS
regression that included fixed effects for the school program and grade for which the
lottery was conducted. All of the differences in baseline characteristics were small and
not significantly different from zero, verifying that lottery assignment was independent of
student characteristics in our sample.
       Table VII shows reduced form estimates of the impact of winning the lottery on
attrition and the characteristics of the school attended. These reduced form regressions
used a specification identical to (9), but replacing the indicator for attending a first choice
school with an indicator for winning the lottery. The first row shows that lottery winners


                                                                                            22
were 53 percentage points more likely to attend their first choice school than the lottery
losers. 23 The second row gives the effect of winning the lottery on whether or not the
student was enrolled in any CMS school in the 2002-2003 school year. This estimate
shows that there was no differential attrition across lottery winners and lottery losers.24
The remaining rows show that students who won the lottery attended schools with
approximately one-tenth of a student-level standard deviation higher test scores, and
seven percent fewer students who were eligible for lunch subsidies.
         Table VIII presents the results from the instrumental variables regression in (9) on
measures of academic outcomes. Among these outcome measures, the average treatment
effect is significant and negative for retention rates. Winning the lottery to attend a first
choice school led to a reduction in retentions – a 2.3 percentage point decrease of an
average base of 2.2%. However, we do not find a significant impact on absences or
suspensions. In addition, we find that students who are randomized into their first choice
school report spending more time on homework. The outcome measure is an indicator if
the student reports spending more than 3 hours per week on homework on self-reported
surveys given to students with the End of Grade exams. Even though students who attend
their first choice school report a significant increase in homework hours, we find no
measurable average effect on standardized test scores. The final row of estimates in Table
VIII shows no significant impact of attending a first choice school on standardized test
scores.25 The point estimate is nearly zero, but there is a relatively large standard error.


Heterogeneous Treatment Effects on Test Score Outcomes
         Table IX shows estimates of the average treatment effect on student test scores in
various subgroups of students defined on the basis of student demographics or


23
   This is the first stage regression for the instrumental variables regression of the impact on test scores of
attending a first choice school. This estimate is not equal to 100 percent for two reasons: first, some of
those who were given the opportunity to attend their first choice did not do so and, second, some of those
who were originally waitlisted at their first choice were subsequently called off the waitlist. Overall,
approximately 75% of lottery winners and 25% of lottery losers attended their first choice school.
24
   Average attrition rates were fairly low at 9.8%, and consistent with estimates of inter-county mobility
rates from the Census. The estimated effect of winning the lottery on attrition is small in size (-0.018) and
not significantly different than zero, indicating that there was no significant differential attrition by the end
of the 2002-2003 school year.
25
   Regression estimates show the same effect on math and reading scores when run separately, so we use
the combined score to improve precision.


                                                                                                             23
characteristics of the school chosen. Prior studies have used these subgroups of students
who on a priori grounds may have different underlying reasons for choosing schools that
may be correlated with the expected treatment effect. Estimates for most of the subgroups
remain insignificant. However, the estimated treatment effect is positive and significant
for two of the subgroups (whites, and students with above median income) and there is an
apparent pattern of positive treatment effects for higher SES students and students
applying to higher-scoring schools.
       The pattern of subgroup impacts is strongly related to the average weight ( βˆiA )
that parents place on school test scores. Columns 3 and 4 of Table IX report the mean
βˆiA and its standard deviation, respectively, for students in each of the subgroups. There is

a positive correlation between βˆiA and the estimated subgroup impacts across each of the

subgroups. Figure 2 plots the subgroup estimates from Table IX against the mean βˆiA for
each subgroup. The strong positive correlation between the two (correlation=0.89)
suggests that differences in impacts across subgroups may be generated by differences in
the underlying determinants of choice, but the large variation in βˆiA within each
subgroup reported in Table IX, suggests that subgroup impacts may be insignificant if
differences in the weights parents place on academics are driving heterogeneous
treatment effects.
       This evidence highlights three advantages of using estimates of βˆiA to identify
heterogeneous treatment effects over subgroup estimation based on observables such as
race and income. First, using a single index, rather than estimating differences in impacts
for an arbitrary number of subgroups, increases the precision with which we can identify
heterogeneous treatment effects by exploiting all of the within and between subgroup
variation in preferences. Second, the βˆiA incorporate information on the choice set,
distinguishing between students who pick a good school because it is convenient versus
students who pick it for its academics. Third, the βˆiA give us an economic interpretation
for subgroup impacts, allowing us to evaluate the impact of school choice outside of the
estimation sample, and to potentially design school choice plans that address differences




                                                                                           24
in the underlying drivers of parental choice (Hastings et al. (2007), Hastings and
Weinstein (2007)).
        We therefore allow the impact of attending a first choice school on standardized
test scores to vary explicitly with βˆiA by estimating:

(10)    Yij = X iα + γ 1 Attended1stChoiceij + γ 2 Attended1stChoiceij ∗ βˆiA + δ j + ε ij

We estimate (10) by instrumental variables, using winning the lottery and winning the
lottery interacted with βˆiA as instruments, and adding βˆiA as a control variable. Note that
all of the information used to derive the preference weights was observed prior to
randomization. Since βˆiA depends only on baseline data that is independent of whether
the student won the lottery, its interaction with winning the lottery is a valid instrument
once one has conditioned on baseline data. Finally, note that coefficient estimates for
terms involving βˆiA are not attenuated by the usual measurement error bias – the

measurement error ( β iA − βˆiA ) is uncorrelated with the posterior estimate βˆiA by
construction (Hyslop and Imbens (2001)). The results from (10) are presented in Table X.
        The coefficients imply that the effect of attending one’s first choice school on a
student’s test scores is significantly increasing with the weight that a student placed on
test scores in choosing a school. The regression estimates imply that a one standard
deviation increase in the weight that an individual places on school test scores raises the
treatment effect on the student’s own test score by 0.062 standard deviations. For
students who place no weight on test scores in their school choice, the coefficient on
attending one’s first-choice school implies a negative (although not significant) treatment
effect – their test scores fall by 0.105 standard deviations if they attend their first-choice
school. These estimates imply a small negative impact (-0.002 standard deviation score
gain) of attending a first-choice school on test scores for an average student with a βˆiA of
1.34, and a large positive effect on test scores (about 0.10) for students at the 95th
percentile of the βˆiA distribution.
        A 0.1 standard deviation increase in a student’s test score results is equivalent to a
3-4 percentile rank gain in test scores. Child development psychologists suggest that a 5
percentile rank gain in a student’s test score translates into a significant cognitive gain in


                                                                                             25
academic aptitude. Alternatively, estimates of the impact that test scores have on future
earnings suggest that a 0.1 standard deviation in increase in test scores is worth $10,000
to $20,000 in net present value of future earnings (Kane and Staiger (2002)).


       Parents Who Face Significant Tradeoffs
These estimates are consistent with our general prediction that students with high βˆiA
should have a positive expected treatment effect (gain in academic achievement from
attending the first-choice school). However, the treatment effect for a student with
low βˆiA (near zero) is theoretically ambiguous and depends on whether parents face trade-
offs – if expected academic achievement is negatively correlated with other valued school
characteristics. Since the percent black at a school is negatively correlated with average
test scores in CMS schools (correlation is around -0.65), the racial composition of a
school is an important trade-off that many African American parents face. We estimate
(from the mixed logit results) that the average African American parent prefers schools
where approximately 70% of the student population is black. Parents that prefer a school
with a high proportion of African American students must value academic achievement
more in order to induce them to choose a higher performing school that also has, on
average, fewer African American students. Thus, all students with strong academic
preferences (high- βˆiA ) will have a positive gain in academic achievement from attending

the first choice school, but among students with weak academic preferences (low- βˆiA ) we
might expect a negative treatment effect among students that prefer a school with a high
proportion African American. In other words, the interaction effect between βˆiA and
winning the school choice lottery should have a negative intercept and a steeper slope for
students who have strong preferences for predominantly African American schools.
       Table XI presents the results from specifications identical to those in Table X, but
estimated separately for students who prefer a school that is less than 55 percent black
(primarily white students) and students of parents who prefer a school that is more than
55 percent black (primarily non-white students). Posterior estimates of student-level
preferences for school racial composition were calculated in the same way as the βˆiA ’s



                                                                                        26
were. The average treatment effect is positive for students who prefer a predominantly
white school, and there is no significant interaction with the weight that the student
places on test scores in their school choice. Among students of parents who prefer
predominantly white schools, both relatively high- and low- βˆiA students experience
academic gains from attending their first choice school. In contrast, for students of
parents who prefer a predominantly black school there is a significant interaction between
their estimated preference for academics and the treatment effect. High- βˆiA students
experience academic gains from attending their first choice school that are similar to
students who prefer a predominantly white school. In contrast, low- βˆiA students who
prefer a predominantly black school experience a negative effect on academic
performance from attending their first choice school. This evidence suggests that the
relationship between preferences and treatment effects may depend importantly on the
trade-offs that parents face given their preferences and their school choice options. These
results also highlight the potential importance of the underlying decision-making process
to understanding the heterogeneous impacts that public school choice has on student
academic outcomes.


Schools versus Student-school Interactions
       Our results show that the school one attends has a causal impact on student
academic outcomes, but not all parents choose a school that maximizes their child’s
academic gains. Students of parents who choose schools primarily based on academic
characteristics are able to get those gains from attending their chosen schools. An
interesting secondary question is whether all students (even those students whose parents
put little weight on academics) would gain academically from attending these same
schools. Do students of parents who place a high weight on academics simply choose
better schools in the sense that any student attending such a school would receive a
positive treatment effect? If so, efforts to identify these schools and steer students
towards them may increase the impact of school choice on academic outcomes.
Alternatively, academic gains may be student-school specific, with the impact of
attending a school depending on the student’s ability to gain academically at that school.



                                                                                        27
In this case, students whose parents choose for academic achievement at a particular
school will have gains in academics that students whose parents chose the same school
for convenience will not.
       In Table XII, we investigate the extent to which the heterogeneity in treatment
effects associated with individual preferences for academics can be explained by
characteristics of the school chosen (suggesting common school quality). The first
column of the table replicates the base estimates for comparison. The next two columns
add an interaction to allow the treatment effect to depend on the difference in average test
scores between the 1st-choice school and the home school. This interaction is
insignificant on its own, and has no impact on the interaction with βˆiA , suggesting that
the gap in test scores in not a good indicator of the likely treatment effect. Columns 4 and
5 add an interaction with the average test score in the 1st-choice school (not relative to the
home school), and the results are similar. Since average test scores may be a poor proxy
for academic quality of a school, the remaining columns of the table try interacting the
treatment with the average weight ( βˆiA ) among all students participating in the school’s
lottery (a high average indicates the school attracts students who care about academics)
and a full set of school effects (allowing each school to have its own average impact on
student outcomes). In both of these specifications, we find no significant evidence of
heterogeneity in treatment effects across schools, and the coefficient on the interaction
with βˆiA is little changed (although the standard errors are larger).
       Overall, the heterogeneity in treatment effects associated with individual
preferences for academics do not appear to be explained by characteristics of the school
chosen, although the estimates are not very precise. The general pattern of results
suggests that student and school interactions play a more important role in determining
academic outcomes.


VI.    Conclusion


       When given the choice to attend a public school other than the home school to
which they have been assigned, the parents of 49 percent of the students in Charlotte took



                                                                                           28
the opportunity and listed a school other than their assigned school as a first choice. In
this paper, we evaluate the impact of switching schools on various academic and non-
academic outcomes. On average, among those applying to the oversubscribed schools,
winning the lottery had no discernable impact on students’ own reading and math scores
overall, even though lottery winners attended schools with higher math and reading
scores than did lottery losers. Winning the lottery had only modest impacts on other
outcomes, such as increasing homework time and reducing grade retentions.
       However, parents seem to choose schools for many different reasons. Indeed, one
quarter of parents were willing to switch chose schools with lower mean test scores than
their assigned schools. Overall, the results presented in this paper imply that the impact of
attending one’s first choice school on academic outcomes is significantly increasing with
the value that students parents placed on test scores when choosing a school. Students of
parents who placed a high weight on school test scores experienced gains in tests scores
as a result of attending the first-choice school. In contrast, students of parents who placed
a low weight on school test scores experienced (insignificant) declines in test scores as a
result of attending their first-choice school.
       A number of recent papers have found no impact on average of attending a first-
choice school on academic achievement. Our evidence suggests that the absence of any
academic gains on average does not imply that school choice is ineffective. On the
contrary, parents appear to get what they want. When parents want improved academic
outcomes, they are able to get them. When parents value other school attributes, and are
willing to trade off academic gains for utility gains on other dimensions, school choice
will allow them to make that choice—even if maximizing parental utility does not
maximize academic achievement. In general the marginal impact of school choice on
academic outcomes will depend on both the willingness of parents to make these
tradeoffs, and the extent to which the available school choices require such tradeoffs to
be made.




                                                                                          29
       References

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila and Tayfun Sonmez (2003), “School Choice: A Mechanism
      Design Approach,” American Economic Review, 93(3):729-747.

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Parag A. Pathak, Alvin E. Roth, and Tayfun Sonmez (2006),
      “Changing the Boston School Choice Mechanism: Strategy-proofness as Equal
      Access,” working paper, Harvard University.

Altonji J.G., T.E. Elder, C. Taber (2002), “An Evaluation of Instrumental Variable
       Strategies for Estimating the Effect of Catholic Schools,” National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper No. 9358.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn and Ariel Pakes (2004), "Differentiated Products
       Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car
       Market," Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 68-105.

Blank, R.K. (1983), Survey of Magnet Schools: Analyzing a Model of Quality Integrated
       Education. Washington, DC, ABT Associates for the Department of
       Education,1983.

Bryk, A., V. Lee and P. Holland (1993), Catholic Schools and the Common Good.
      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.

Cullen, Julie, Brian Jacob and Steven Levitt (2006), “The Effect of School Choice on
       Student Outcomes: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” Econometrica,
       74(5):1191-1230.

Coleman, James S., Thomas Hoffer and Sally Kilgore (1982), High School Achievement:
      Public, Catholic, and Private Schools Compared. New York: Basic Books.

Dagsvik, John K (1994), "Discrete and Continuous Choice, Max-Stable Processes, and
      Independence from Irrelevant Attributes," Econometrica, 62(5):1179-1205.

Evans, William and Robert Schwab (1995), “Finishing High School and Starting College:
       Do Catholic Schools Make a Difference?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110
       (4): 941-974.

Gamoran, A. (1996), “Student Achievement in Public Magnet, Public Comprehensive,
      and Private City High Schools,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 18
      (1): 1-18.

Glazerman, Steven and Robert H. Meyer (1994), “Public School Choice in Minneapolis,”
      in T.A. Downes and W.A. Testa, eds., Midwest Approaches to School Reform.
      Proceedings of a conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
      pp.110-126.


                                                                                  30
Green, J. P., P.E. Peterson, and J. Du (1997), “The Effectiveness of School Choice: The
       Milwaukee Experiment,” Cambridge, MA, Program on Education Policy and
       Governance, Harvard University.

Hastings, Justine S., Thomas Kane, and Douglas Staiger (2006a), “Parental Preferences
       and School Competition: Evidence from a Public School Choice Program,”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.11805, November
       2005, revised May 2006.

Hastings, Justine S., Thomas Kane and Douglas Staiger (2006b), “Gender, Performance
       and Preferences: Do Girls and Boys Respond Differently to School Environment?
       Evidence from School Assignment by Randomized Lottery,” American Economic
       Review Papers and Proceedings, 96 (2): 232-236.

Hastings, Justine S., Richard Van Weelden, and Jeffrey M. Weinstein (2007),
       “Preferences, Information, and Parental Choice Behavior in Public School
       Choice,” National Bureau of Economic Research Paper Working Paper No.
       12995.

Hastings, Justine S., Jeffrey Weinstein (2007), “No Child Left Behind: Estimating the
       Impact on Choices and Student Outcomes,” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Paper Working Paper No. 13009

Heckman, James (1997), “Instrumental Variables: A Study of Implicit Behavioral
     Assumptions Used In Making Program Evaluations,” Journal of Human
     Resources, 32(3):441-462.

Heckman, James J., Jeffrey Smith, and Nancy Clements (1997), “Making the Most Out of
     Programme Evaluations and Social Experiments: Accounting for Heterogeneity in
     Programme Impacts,” Review of Economic Studies, 64:487-535.

Herckman, Urzua and Vittacil (2006), “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models
      with Essential Heterogeneity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2006, 88(3):
      389-432.

Hyslop, Dean R. and Guido W. Imbens (2001), "Bias From Classical And Other Forms
      Of Measurement Error," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 19(4): 475-
      481.
Kane and Steiger (2002), ”The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School
Accountability Measures,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4):91-114, Fall 2002.

Krueger, Alan B. and Pei Zhu (2004), "Another Look at the New York City School
      Voucher Experiment," American Behavioral Scientist, pp.658-98.

Mayer, Daniel P., Paul E. Peterson, David E. Myers, Christina Clark Tuttle, and William
      G. Howell (2002), School Choice in New York City After Three Years: An


                                                                                        31
       Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program. Princeton, NJ:
       Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000). “Mixed Multinomial Logit Models for Discrete
     Response,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 15(5): 447-470.

Neal, D. (1997), “The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational
      Achievement,” Journal of Labor Economics, XV, 98-123.

Peterson, P. E., D. Myers and W. G. Howell (1998), “An Evaluation of the New York
       City School Choice Scholarship Program: The First Year,” Cambridge, MA,
       Mathematica Policy Research and the Harvard Program on Education Policy and
       Governance.

Revelt, David and Kenneth E. Train (1998), “Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices:
       Households’ Choices of Appliance Efficiency Level,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 80 (4): 647-657.

Rouse, Cecilia. E. (1998), “Private school vouchers and student achievement: An
       evaluation of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 113(2):553-602.

Train, Kenneth E. (2003), Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge
       University Press.

Witte, John F., Troy D. Sterr and Christopher A. Thorn (1995), Fifth-Year Report:
       Milwaukee Parental Choice Program. Madison, Wisconsin, University of
       Wisconsin.




                                                                                    32
Figure 1: Distribution of Difference in Average Standardized School Score Between
Student’s First Choice School and Home School.
      1
      .8.6
   Density
      .4
      .2
      0




             -2                  -1               0                  1               2
                  Difference between average reading score in choice and home school




                                                                                         33
Figure 2. Subgroup Estimates of the Effect of Attending a 1st-choice School


                      .2


                                                                                                White
  Effect of Attending 1st-Choice School




                                                                                                  High Income

                                                                                                            Academic Magnet
                             .1




                                                                                                    Not Free
                                                                                                    High     Lunch
                                                                                                         Student Score
                                                                                        High School Score
            0




                                                                         All Students
                                                                Not Academic Magnet
                                                           Low  School
                                                  Low Student Score    Score

                                               Free Lunch
                                                                Non-White
                      -.1




                                                            Low Income

                                          .5           1                  1.5                        2                   2.5
                                                                     Average Weight




                                                                                                                               34
Table I: Key Explanatory Variable Definitions
 Variable         Description

Distance          Driving distance from student i to school j calculated
                  using MapInfo with Census Tiger Line files.

School Score      Average of the student-level standardized scale score for
                  students in school j on math and reading End of Grade exams for
                  the 2002-2003 school year. This is the average of the test score
                  variable described below across all students in school j.

Test Score        The sum of student i's scale score on End of Grade math and
                  reading exams in baseline year 2001-2002 standardized by the
                  mean and standard deviation of district-wide scores for students
                  in his or her grade.

Income            The median household income reported in the 2000 Census
                  for households of student i's race in student i's block group.
                  Income is demeaned by the county-wide average of
                  approximately $51,000 and is reported in thousands of dollars.

Percent Black     The percent of students in school j who are black according
                  to 2002-2003 school year administrative data.




Table II: Key Explanatory Variable Summary Statistics
 Summary Statistics Using First Choice Data
 Variable          Obs.      Mean      Std. Dev. Min         Max
 Distance          2434113 13.0071        6.7254      0.0010 42.4069
 School Score      2434113 -0.1087        0.4487     -0.9537  1.9478
 Test score        2434113      0.0567    0.9886     -2.9113  3.0255
 Income            2434113      5.1226   27.5669   -48.5010 149.0010
 Percent Black     2434113      0.5252    0.2507      0.0584  0.9801




                                                                                     35
Table III: Estimates from Mixed Logit Model

                                                           Parameter Estimates*

                                              Not Receiving Lunch          Receiving Lunch
                                                   Subsidies                  Subsidies
Variable                       Parameter       White       Black          White       Black
Preferences for Scores
   School Score                Mean              1.1732        1.8035          0.3671   0.9396
                               Std. Dev.         0.5674        0.2688          0.6175   0.2706
   Income*School Score         Mean              0.0151        0.0126          --       --
                               Std. Dev.         --             --             --       --
   Baseline own score *
   School Score                Mean              0.5558        0.5734          0.2924   0.4995
                               Std. Dev.         --             --             --       --
Preferences for Proximity
  Distance**                   Mean              -0.3526      -0.2684      -0.3784      -0.2751
                               Std. Dev.          0.0684       0.0413       0.1273       0.0639
   Home School                 Mean               2.1300       1.7373       1.9816       1.7710
                               Std. Dev.          0.5130       0.6799       0.8248       0.7752
Preferences for Race
  Percent Black                Mean               3.3068       5.1340       1.9268       3.1409
                               Std. Dev.          2.6417       1.6447       2.0795       0.8745
   Percent Black Sqaured       Mean              -5.4580      -3.6790      -3.5385      -2.3005
                               Std. Dev.          --            --          --           --

   Implied Mean
   Preferred % Black                             0.3029        0.6977          0.2723   0.6827
                               Std. Dev.         0.2420        0.2235          0.2938   0.1901
Other Preferences
  Last-year School             Mean              3.7941        3.3837          3.5016   2.8495
                               Std. Dev.         2.4977        2.7896          3.4651   3.3825
   Choice Zone (busing)        Mean              1.1909        1.2484          1.9203   1.6132
                               Std. Dev.         0.8285        1.2418          1.5083   1.2442


Estimated Correlation Coefficients:
   Corr(Distance, School Score)                   0.4939      -0.1055       0.3379      -0.6355
   Corr(Distance, Home School)                   -0.0788       0.0007      -0.2623      -0.1122
   Corr(School Score, Home School)               -0.7888      -0.6016      -0.8411      -0.5895

* All estimates are significant at the 1% level or higher
** Distribution of preference on distance follows a log normal distribution.




                                                                                              36
Table IV: Summary Statistics of Posterior Weight Placed On Academics when Choosing a School
                                             Not Receiving                  Receiving
                                           Lunch Subsidies               Lunch Subsidies
                     All Students        White          Black         White           Black

Mean                              1.348              1.872                1.746                 0.343                 0.632
Standard Deviation                0.845              0.676                0.598                 0.381                 0.448
10th Percentile                   0.256              1.005                0.994                -0.121                 0.052
Median                            1.320              1.882                1.729                 0.320                 0.621
90th Percentile                   2.461              2.700                2.515                 0.838                 1.221


Table V: Comparison of Student Characteristics
                                                                    Chose
                                                      All         Guaranteed   Chose Non-guaranteed School
                                                   Students         School   Admitted Randomized Waitlisted
Student demographics
  Black                                             44.3%             34.6%           62.5%             59.7%             54.8%
  Free or reduced lunch                             39.2%             31.3%           60.3%             51.3%             34.3%
Student's prior year performance
  Reading test score (SD units)                      0.02              0.15            -0.26             -0.09             -0.11
  Math test score (SD units)                         0.02              0.16            -0.26             -0.12             -0.15
  Absent 18 or more days                             8.5%              6.8%           11.7%             10.8%             10.7%
  Retained                                           1.5%              1.2%            2.0%              1.9%              1.9%
  Suspended                                         12.2%              9.3%           17.7%             16.5%             15.4%
Choice school characteristics
  Average combined scores                            0.05              0.09           -0.09              0.08              0.10
  Percent free or reduced lunch                     40.6%             38.6%           50.9%             36.6%             35.6%
  Percent black or hispanic                         49.4%             46.2%           59.8%             50.0%             47.0%
Home school characteristics
  Average combined scores                            -0.08             0.03           -0.28             -0.23             -0.27
  Percent free or reduced lunch                     47.0%             40.7%           59.3%             53.3%             56.0%
  Percent black or hispanic                         53.6%             47.1%           65.3%             61.6%             63.8%
School assignment
  Assigned to 1st choice                            85.4%            100.0%           100.0%            40.4%             0.0%
  Assigned to guaranteed school                     72.5%            100.0%            0.0%             44.6%             74.5%
School attendance 02-03
  Attended 1st choice                               78.7%             92.1%           81.6%             45.4%             16.2%
  Attended home school                              58.8%             79.4%           9.7%              35.0%             51.3%
Posterior Weights
   Weight Placed on Academics - βˆiA                  1.36             1.44             1.09             1.33                 1.39

Number of students                                  37115             22872            7583             3065              3595
Notes: Data from Charlotte-Mecklenberg Schools (CMS). Sample includes all students in grades 4-8 who applied to a regular or
magnet school as their 1st choice for the 2002-2003 school year and were enrolled in CMS in the 2001-2002 school year. Students
guaranteed placement because of siblings or in ESL are excluded.



                                                                                                                 37
Table VI: Baseline Characteristics by Treatment and Control Group
                                                                                               Adjusted
Variable                                          Admitted         Waitlisted       Difference Difference

Student demographics
  Black                                              0.614             0.585            0.030            0.011
                                                                                       (0.067)          (0.022)

   Free or reduced lunch                             0.467             0.531            -0.064           -0.015
                                                                                       (0.078)          (0.012)

   Median income ($1000s) by race                     48.4             49.4               -1.0             -0.7
   and block-group in 2000 census                                                        (3.6)            (0.7)

Student's prior year performance
  Reading test score                                 -0.127           -0.069            -0.058           -0.025
                                                                                       (0.110)          (0.031)

   Math test score                                   -0.135           -0.113            0.023            0.025
                                                                                       (0.106)          (0.030)

   Absent 18 or more days                            0.097             0.106            -0.009           -0.007
                                                                                       (0.013)          (0.016)

   Suspended                                         0.152             0.162            -0.010           -0.022
                                                                                       (0.028)          (0.015)

   Retained                                          0.019             0.018            0.001            0.001
                                                                                       (0.005)          (0.006)
Home school characteristics
  Average combined score                             -0.241           -0.213            -0.028           0.003
                                                                                       (0.051)          (0.013)

   Percent free or reduced lunch                     0.543             0.524            0.019            0.001
                                                                                       (0.034)          (0.007)

   Percent black                                     0.625             0.607            0.018            -0.003
                                                                                       (0.036)          (0.007)

   Number of students                                 1175             1709             2884              2884
Notes: Sample limited to students in randomized priority groups with complete baseline data. Difference is
between students admitted (won the lottery) and waitlisted (did not win the lottery). Each adjusted difference
is from a separate regression of the given baseline characteristic on whether the student was randomly
assigned to her first-choice school, controlling for lottery fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for clustering at
the level of the first-choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).




                                                                                                                       38
Table VII: The Impact of Being Randomly Assigned to 1st Choice School on
Characteristics of School Attending at End of 2002-2003 School Year

Characteristic of School Attending                                  Mean                  Estimated Impact

First choice school                                                 0.460                        0.533***
                                                                                                (0.054)

Not attending CMS in 2002-2003 (Attrition)                          0.098                        -0.018
                                                                                                (0.011)

School average combined score                                      -0.073                         0.129**
                                                                                                (0.040)

Percent free or reduced lunch                                       0.463                     -0.070***
                                                                                               (0.019)

Percent black or Hispanic                                           0.576                        -0.049
                                                                                                (0.026)

Number of Students                                                                                2884
Note: Each entry in the table is from a separate regression of the given characteristic of the school a student was
attending at the end of the year on whether the student was randomly assigned to her first choice school,
controlling for lottery fixed effects, home school fixed effects, and the baseline covariates listed in Table V.
Sample includes only students in the randomized priority group with complete baseline data. Standard errors
adjust for clustering at the level of the first choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01,
***=.001).




                                                                                                                      39
Table VIII. Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Impact of Attending 1st
Choice School on Student Outcomes in 2002-2003
                                                                Average
Student Outcome                              Mean          Treatment Effect
Non-academic Measures
      Absent 18 or more days                 0.135                -0.001
                                                                 (0.023)

        Suspended                                              0.201                      0.012
                                                                                         (0.032)

        Retained                                               0.022                     -0.023*
                                                                                         (0.009)

        > 3 hrs. homework per week                             0.303                     0.122*
                                                                                         (0.050)
Academic Performance
     Combined test score                                      -0.086                      -0.005
                                                                                         (0.050)

Note: Each entry in the table is from a separate IV regression of the given student outcome on whether the
student was attending her first choice school, using random assignment to the first choice school as an
instrument. These regressions control for lottery fixed effects, home school fixed effects, and the baseline
covariates listed in table V. Sample includes 2884 students in the randomized priority group with
complete baseline data. Sample sizes for homework (N=2554) and combined test score (N=2581) are
smaller due to missing data on the dependent variable for some students. Standard errors adjust for
clustering at the level of the first choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).




                                                                                                                 40
Table IX: Subgroup Estimates of the Effect of Attending a 1st-choice School
                                                   IV Estimate of
                                                Effect of Attending                               Standard
                                               1st-Choice School on                               Deviation         Number of
                                                   Combined Test
                                                                              Mean βˆiA             of βˆi   A       Students
Sample                                                 Score

All Students                                            -0.005                    1.34                0.81             2581
                                                       (0.050)
Race:
          Non-White                                     -0.067                    1.12                0.71             1790
                                                       (0.058)
          White                                        0.172*                     1.85                0.77              791
                                                       (0.073)
Income:
          Below Median                                  -0.100                    1.01                0.61             1601
                                                       (0.058)
          Above Median                                 0.130*                     1.90                0.78              980
                                                       (0.063)
Free Lunch Eligibility
       Eligible                                         -0.061                    0.74                0.44             1296
                                                       (0.078)
          Not Eligible                                  0.070                     1.95                0.62             1285
                                                       (0.043)
Baseline Test Score
        Below Average                                   -0.040                    0.83                0.52             1386
                                                       (0.055)
          Above Average                                 0.066                     1.94                0.65             1195
                                                       (0.064)
1st-Choice School Combined Score
        Below Median                                    -0.036                    1.07                0.69             1337
                                                       (0.080)
          Above Median                                  0.047                     1.64                0.82             1244
                                                       (0.043)
Note: Each row of column 2 reports estimates for a different student sub-sample, as indicated. Column 2 reports IV estimates of
the impact of attending the first choice school on the combined student test score, using random assignment to the first choice
school as an instrument. Regressions control for lottery fixed effects, home school fixed effects, and the baseline covariates
listed in table V. Sample includes only students in the randomized priority group with complete baseline data. Standard errors
adjust for clustering at the level of the first choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001). Column 3
reports the average weight that parents place on test scores (Weight) in their school choice decision calculated according to
equation (8). The second column reports the standard deviation of Weight among families in each of the subgroup categories.




                                                                                                                      41
Table X: IV Estimates of the Impact of Attending 1st Choice School with
Heterogeneous Treatment by Weight Placed on Academics in Choice Decision
Dependent Variable:
     Combined Score                                (1)                  (2)

Attended 1st-choice school                                         -0.005                        -0.105
                                                                  (0.050)                       (0.074)

Weight * attended 1st-choice school                                                             0.077*
                                                                                                (0.031)

P-value for interaction with Weight                                                              0.016

Joint p-value on reported coefficients                              0.924                        0.031

Observations                                                        2581                          2581

Notes: Each column in the table is from a separate IV regression. The dependent variable is a student's
combined standardized test score in the spring of 2003. Each specification reports the coefficients on attending
the first choice school and its interaction with the weight that the student places on test scores (Weight) in the
school choice decision, using random assignment to the first-choice school and its interaction with Weight as
instruments. All specifications control for lottery fixed effects, home school fixed effects, the baseline
covariates listed in Table V, and a direct control for the student's Weight estimate. Sample includes only
students in the randomized priority group with complete baseline data. Standard errors adjust for clustering at
the level of the first choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).




                                                                                                                     42
Table XI: IV Estimates of the Impact of Attending 1st Choice School with
Heterogeneous Treatment by Weight Placed on Academics in Choice Decision,
Estimated Separately by Student Preference for Racial Mix at School
                                      Students Who Prefer      Students Who Prefer
Dependent Variable:                     School Less Than          School at Least
     Combined Score                        55% Black                55% Black

Attended 1st-choice school                             0.115           0.186            -0.054          -0.164*
                                                      (0.058)         (0.158)          (0.059)          (0.078)

Weight * attended 1st-choice school                                   -0.041                            0.098*
                                                                      (0.065)                           (0.041)

P-value for interaction with Weight                                    0.533                             0.019

Joint p-value on reported coefficients                 0.052           0.097            0.250            0.053

Observations                                            870              870            1711             1711

Notes: Each column in the table is from a separate IV regression. The dependent variable is a student's
combined standardized test score in the spring of 2003. Each specification reports the coefficients on attending
the first choice school and it interaction with the weight that the student places on test scores (Weight) in the
school choice decision, using random assignment to the first-choice school and its interaction with Weight as
instruments. All specifications control for lottery fixed effects, home school fixed effects, the baseline
covariates listed in Table V, and a direct control for the student's Weight estimate. Sample includes only
students in the randomized priority group with complete baseline data. Student preference for racial
composition in the school is each student’s posterior estimate of the value that maximizes their quadratic utility
in %black at the school. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the level of the first choice school. Asterisks
indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).




                                                                                                                     43
Table XII. IV Estimates of the Impact of Attending 1st Choice School with Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Associated With
Characteristics of the School Chosen.
                                                         Interaction With     Interaction with  Interaction With    Interaction With
                                                           Difference in     Average Score in   Average Weight      1st-Choice School
                                                Base      Average School     1st-Choice School of Students in 1st-    Fixed-Effects
                                               Model           Sores                             Choice Lottery

Attended 1st-choice school                                    -0.105       0.000         -0.100       -0.015        -0.089       -0.164        -0.166        n.a.          n.a.
                                                             (0.074)      (0.057)       (0.077)      (0.049)       (0.073)      (0.132)       (0.132)

Attended 1st-choice school *

          Weight                                             0.077*                     0.077*                      0.061                      0.043                      0.074
                                                             (0.031)                    (0.032)                    (0.041)                    (0.053)                    (0.071)

          Difference in average school scores                              -0.017        -0.019
                                                                          (0.072)       (0.077)

          Average score in 1st-choice school                                                          0.136         0.082
                                                                                                     (0.090)       (0.114)

          Average Weight of students in lottery                                                                                  0.121         0.081
                                                                                                                                (0.075)       (0.112)

P-value for interaction with Weight                         0.016                        0.018                      0.149                      0.427                      0.293

P-value for other interaction(s)                                           0.813         0.803        0.136         0.474        0.109         0.472        0.066         0.203

Joint p-value on reported coefficients                        0.031        0.963         0.071        0.241         0.02          0.13         0.039        0.069         0.177

Observations                                                  2581          2581         2581          2581         2581          2581         2581          2475         2475

Notes: Each column in the table is from a separate IV regression. The dependent variable is a student's combined standardized test score in the spring of 2003. All specifications
include the same controls as in Table X. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the level of the first choice school. Asterisks indicate significance (*=.05, **=.01, ***=.001).




                                                                                                                                                                               44
                                                                                                                                                                               38
