NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT TAXES AND EQUITY RETURNS
Clemens Sialm
Working Paper 12146
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12146
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006

I thank Gene Amromin, Long Chen, Dhammika Dharmapala, Bob Dittmar, Ken French, Michelle Hanlon,
Jim Hines, Li Jin, Marcin Kacperczyk, Gautam Kaul, Nellie Liang, Roni Michaely, Lubos Pastor, Monika
Piazzesi, Jim Poterba, Steve Sharpe, John Shoven, Joel Slemrod, Moto Yogo, Lu Zheng, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the University of Michigan, and Wharton for helpful
comments and suggestions. I am grateful to Zhuo Wang for outstanding research assistance and to the Mitsui
Life Center at the University of Michigan for financial support. The paper was previously circulated under
the title “Tax Changes and Asset Pricing: Cross-Sectional Evidence." Address: Stephen M. Ross School of
Business; University of Michigan; 701 Tappan Street; Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234; Phone: (734) 764-3196;
Fax: (734) 936-0274; E-mail: sialm@umich.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Investment Taxes and Equity Returns
Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 12146
March 2006
JEL No. G12, H20, E44
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates whether investors are compensated for the tax burden of equity securities.
Effective tax rates on equity securities vary due to frequent tax reforms and due to persistent
differences in propensities to pay dividends. The paper finds an economically and statistically
significant relationship between risk-adjusted stock returns and effective personal tax rates using a
new data set covering tax burdens on a cross-section of equity securities between 1927 and 2004.
Consistent with tax capitalization, stocks facing higher effective tax rates tend to compensate taxable
investors by generating higher before-tax returns.
Clemens Sialm
Stephen M. Ross Business School
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu

1

Introduction

If the marginal investor is subject to taxes, then before-tax asset returns should reflect
the tax burden in equilibrium. In particular, assets facing higher tax burdens should
offer higher risk-adjusted returns than less highly taxed assets. On the other hand,
taxes should not be related to asset returns if the marginal investor is effectively taxexempt, as first discussed by Miller and Scholes (1978). This study tests empirically
whether before-tax equity returns are related to their effective tax rates using a new
data set covering personal tax burdens on a cross-section of equity securities between
1927 and 2004.
McGrattan and Prescott (2005) derive the quantitative impact of tax and regulatory changes on aggregate equity values using a growth theory model. They show
that regulatory changes can explain the large secular movements in corporate equity
values relative to GDP. McGrattan and Prescott (2005) base their inferences on a
carefully calibrated growth model. However, they do not perform an econometric
analysis of the relationship between tax rates and asset valuations and they do not
investigate the cross-sectional implications of taxes.
My paper demonstrates that effective tax burdens vary substantially over time
and cross-sectionally. Based on the average marginal tax rates derived by Poterba
(1987b), I compute effective tax rates on equity securities. The aggregate tax burden on equity securities has declined over the last couple of decades as tax reforms
reduced the statutory tax rates on dividends and capital gains. Furthermore, corporations replaced a significant fraction of relatively highly taxed dividends with share
repurchases. For example, effective tax rates on the market portfolio of common
stocks exceeded 25 percent in 1950 and declined to less than 5 percent in 2004. In
addition to the time-series variation in tax burdens, there is also a significant crosssectional variation in tax burdens. Due to differences in the taxation of dividends
1

and capital gains, stocks that distribute a larger fraction of their total returns as dividends tend to be taxed more heavily than stocks that distribute a smaller fraction
of dividends. Dividend paying stocks faced, on average, an effective tax rate that is
almost three times higher than the effective tax rate of non-dividend paying stocks.
The empirical test presented in this paper uses the time-series and the crosssectional variation in tax burdens to determine whether the average returns of different equity securities depend on their tax burden. To obtain the effective tax burdens,
I sort all publicly traded common stocks in the U.S. into portfolios according to the
lagged annual dividend yield and compute effective tax rates on these portfolios. The
results indicate that the average returns of these stock portfolios are positively related
to their effective tax rates even after controlling for size, book-to-market, and momentum effects. Adjusting for common factors in stock returns is important because
dividend yields can capture risk effects (e.g., Fama and French (1992)) or mispricing
due to behavioral biases (e.g., Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994)).
The impact of taxes on asset returns is economically and statistically significant.
A one percentage point increase in the effective tax of an equity portfolio increases
the average return of the portfolio by 1.54 percentage points after adjusting for the
common factors of Carhart (1997). Numerous additional tests indicate that this
relationship is robust over several sub-periods, using various measures of the effective
tax rate, and using different econometric specifications.
Although the dividend yield is highly correlated with the effective tax rate, I
demonstrate that the effective tax burden and not the dividend yield is the driving force behind the higher expected returns. In particular, regressing the abnormal
Carhart returns on the dividend yield and on the interaction term between the dividend yield and the dividend tax rate results in a significantly positive coefficient
on the interaction term and in an insignificantly negative coefficient on the dividend
yield. Thus, stocks paying high dividend yields tend to have relatively high risk2

adjusted returns particularly in periods when taxes are high. This result indicates
that the reported effects are likely due to taxes and not due to the fact that dividend
yields might proxy for additional risk or style effects not captured by the common
factors of Carhart (1997).
These results are related to Fama and French (1998), who study whether the
market value relative to the book value of a firm is related to dividends. Simple tax
hypotheses would imply a negative relationship between dividends and relative asset
valuations. However, they find the opposite result and infer that dividends convey
information about the future profitability of a company, which is missed by a wide
range of control variables. They argue that the information about the profitability
obscures any tax effects of financing decisions. In my paper, I analyze the crosssectional distribution of equity returns instead of relative valuation ratios.
The fact that taxes have an impact on asset returns implies that there are important limits to arbitrage as discussed by Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and Fama and
French (2005). There are several frictions that prevent investors to take advantage
of the before-tax return differentials. First, tax arbitrage can cause trading costs
that reduce the return of any strategy that generates high turnover. For example, a
short-term dividend capturing strategy around ex-dividend days can cause significant
trading costs due to the relatively small and frequent dividend payments. Second,
significant risk remains in a long-term trading strategy that buys dividend paying
stocks and shorts non-dividend paying stocks. The significant residual risk decreases
the incentives for tax-neutral arbitrageurs to eliminate these price discrepancies.
Over the last several decades, the empirical effect of personal dividend and capital
gains taxes on stock prices and stock returns has received a lot of attention in the
finance, economics, and accounting literatures.1 A first group of papers has analyzed
1

See Auerbach (2002), Poterba (2002), and Allen and Michaely (2003) for reviews of this literature.

3

whether asset returns depend on dividend yields, based on the after-tax version of the
CAPM by Brennan (1970).2 The results are sensitive to how dividends are measured
and whether some omitted risk factors that are correlated with dividend yields do
explain the positive yield coefficient. In my paper, I compute the effective tax rates
on different stock portfolios and relate the average returns on these portfolios directly
to their tax burdens and not just to their dividend yields. By computing effective tax
rates of equity securities, I take advantage of the substantial time-series variation in
tax burdens of equity securities over the last eight decades.
A second group of papers analyzes the relationship between tax rates and dividend yields using ex-dividend date price data.3 Elton and Gruber (1970) argue in
their seminal paper that stock prices should fall by less than the dividend if taxes
affect investor’s choices, because dividends are taxed more heavily than capital gains.
While the existence of a price drop on the ex-dividend day less than the dividend
has been widely documented, it remains controversial whether this effect is due to
taxes or alternative explanations, such as arbitrage by short-term traders or market
microstructure. Analyzing long-term realized returns instead of ex-dividend day price
behavior has the advantage that it is less susceptible to microstructure effects.
A third group of papers investigates directly whether there are capitalization effects around tax reforms.4 These studies generally find supporting evidence that tax
changes have an impact on asset valuations. However, event studies of tax reforms are
plagued by several challenges. First, the events are often not easily identifiable due
2

The papers in this literature include, for example, Black and Scholes (1974), Litzenberger and
Ramaswamy (1979, 1980, 1982), Blume (1980), Gordon and Bradford (1980), Miller and Scholes
(1982), Poterba and Summers (1984), Chen, Grundy, and Stambaugh (1990), Fama and French
(1998), Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998), Dhaliwal, Li, and Trezevant (2003).
3
The papers in this literature include, for example, Elton and Gruber (1970), Kalay (1982),
Eades, Hess, and Kim (1984), Barclay (1987), Michaely (1991), Eades, Hess, and Kim (1994), Bali
and Hite (1998), Frank and Jagannathan (1998), Green and Rydqvist (1999), Graham, Michaely,
and Roberts (2003), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2005), and Chetty, Rosenberg, and Saez (2005).
4
The papers in this literature include, for example, Guenther (1994), Lang and Shackelford
(2000), Ayers, Cloyd, and Robinson (2002), Sinai and Gyourko (2004), Amromin, Harrison, and
Sharpe (2005), Auerbach and Hassett (2005).

4

to a multi-stage political process. It might take a relatively long time period from the
initial proposal and the final enactment of the tax reforms. Second, many political
decisions often are reversed relatively soon, resulting in relatively small capitalization
effects if market participants recognize that these tax reforms are only temporary.
This substantial literature has not yet reached a consensus on whether dividend
taxes are capitalized or not. My paper sheds light on this controversy by relating
abnormal stock returns directly to effective tax burdens instead of investigating exdividend effects or particular events.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 derives the effective tax rates on
various portfolios of equity securities. Section 3 reports the results of the empirical
test investigating whether there is a relationship between average asset returns and
effective tax rates, taking advantage of both the time-series and the cross-sectional
variation in effective tax rates. Section 4 shows that the tax capitalization results are
robust to numerous alternative specifications. Section 5 concludes.

2

Derivation of Effective Tax Rates

This section describes the derivation of the effective tax rate of equity securities between 1927 and 2004. I compute the average tax rate faced by domestic taxable
investors and investigate whether this measure of the aggregate tax burden is related
to abnormal returns of equity securities. However, due to data limitations it is necessary to make several simplifying assumptions about the equity holdings of investors.
In particular, it is not possible to observe the identify of the investors. This could
potentially be problematic since clientele effects might induce highly taxed investors
to avoid high dividend yield stocks.5 Thus, the derived effective tax rate might be a
5

For example, Allen, Bernardo, and Welch (2000) and Baker and Wurgler (2004) discuss why
firms might pay dividends. Graham and Kumar (2006) Grinstein and Michaely (2006) are recent
empirical studies of dividend clientele effects for individual and institutional investors.

5

noisy measure for the tax rate of the marginal investor. However, measurement error
in the effective tax rate should bias the results against finding an impact of taxes on
asset returns. I show in Section 4 that the tax capitalization results are robust using
numerous alternative assumptions for computing effective tax rates.

2.1

Definition of the Effective Tax Rate

The effective tax rate of an equity security depends not only on the statutory tax
rates but also on the management style of the stock portfolio. The tax burden on a
stock portfolio can be reduced by holding assets with low dividend yields, by deferring
the realization of capital gains, and by accelerating the realization of capital losses.
The expected effective tax yield of portfolio k at time t is given by:
scg scg
lcg lcg
div div
κ̂k,t = ŷk,t
τt + ŷk,t
τt + ŷk,t
τk,t .

(1)

The expected effective tax yield depends first on the marginal tax rates on dividends τ div and short- and long-term capital gains τ scg and τ lcg , which are simply the
statutory marginal tax rates for specific income brackets.6
Furthermore, the composition of the sources of income from equity investments
has an important impact on the tax burden of a portfolio. The expected dividend
yield ŷ div is defined as the sum of the expected taxable dividends divided by the
initial value of the portfolio.7 Similarly, the expected short- and long-term capital
gains yields ŷ scg and ŷ lcg are defined as the anticipated proportions of the portfolio
values that will be realized either as short- or long-term capital gains.8 The tax yield
6

This section assumes that the statutory tax rates are known to investors at the beginning of
each year. However, Section 4 shows that the empirical results are not affected qualitatively if the
current tax rate is replaced by the lagged tax rate.
7
Expected variables include a “hat” to distinguish between expected and actual variables. For
div
example, ŷk,t
denotes the expected or anticipated dividend yield of portfolio k during year t, whereas
div
yk,t denotes the actual realized dividend yield of portfolio k during year t.
8
The total yield for dividends and capital gains usually is less than the mean return. This results

6

κ̂k,t denotes the ratio between the total anticipated taxes and the current portfolio
value. The effective tax rate τ̂k,t is the ratio between the tax yield κ̂k,t and the
expected return of the portfolio.
To illustrate the various definitions, I report a simple example. Suppose that
the marginal tax rates on dividends and long-term capital gains are τ div = 0.4 and
τ lcg = 0.2 and that the expected dividend and capital gains yields are ŷ div = 0.04 and
ŷ lcg = 0.02. In this case, the investor expects to pay taxes on dividends equal to 1.6
percent of the initial portfolio value (0.04 × 0.4) and taxes on long-term capital gains
equal to 0.4 percent of the initial portfolio value (0.02 × 0.2). Thus, the expected tax
yield κ̂ is 2 percent of the initial portfolio value and the expected effective tax rate τ̂
is 20 percent using a 10 percent expected return.

2.2

Dividend and Capital Gains Tax Rates

Marginal statutory tax rates on dividend and long-term capital gains income have
fluctuated considerably, as shown in Figure 1 and Table 1. The figure shows the
statutory federal marginal dividend and long-term capital gains tax rates for households in three different income brackets. Two income brackets correspond to real
income levels of $100,000 and $250,000 expressed in 2004 consumer prices. The third
bracket corresponds to the marginal tax rate for the top income bracket. Generally,
dividend taxes are considerably higher and more volatile than long-term capital gains
tax rates. The marginal short-term capital gains tax rates are not depicted separately
since they are very similar to the marginal dividend tax rates. The construction of
due to the possibility to defer capital gains indefinitely. The deferral of the realization of capital
gains is beneficial because the present value of the tax liabilities decreases if the tax payments are
postponed. In addition, the taxation of capital gains can be avoided completely due to the “stepup of the cost basis” at the time of death, which eliminates the taxation of all unrealized capital
gains. Constantinides (1983), Stiglitz (1983), and Constantinides (1984) describe several investment
strategies to minimize the taxes of financial returns. Poterba (1987a), Auerbach, Burman, and
Siegel (2000), Ivkovich, Poterba, and Weisbenner (2005), and Jin (2006) analyze the capital gains
realization behavior of individual and institutional investors.

7

the time series is explained in more detail in Appendix A.1.9
To compute the average tax rates on dividends and capital gains, I follow Poterba
(1987b) and construct dollar-weighted average tax rates for dividends τ div and shortand long-term capital gains τ scg and τ lcg . The Internal Revenue Service publishes
annually since 1917 the distribution of income sources of taxpayers in different income
brackets. The marginal tax rate can be determined for each of these income brackets.
The value-weighted mean of the marginal tax rates of investors in the different income
brackets is called the “average marginal tax rate.” This tax rate will represent the
average tax burden of investors in various tax brackets. Prior to 1965, I hand-collected
tax distribution data from different issues of the Statistics of Income of the IRS.
Since 1965, the NBER publishes the average marginal tax rates on an annual basis.
Additional details on the construction of the dividend and capital gains tax rates are
summarized in Appendix A.2.10
Using the marginal tax rate of the average investor as the effective tax rate is
consistent with the result of Fama and French (2005) that everyone’s portfolio choices
contribute to expected returns in equilibrium if there are deviations from the standard
CAPM assumptions. They provide a framework for studying how disagreement and
tastes for assets as consumption goods can affect asset prices. Although they do not
address the impact of taxes directly, tax distortions have a similar impact on asset
prices as other market imperfections.
Figure 2 depicts the average marginal tax rates of dividend income and long-term
capital gains between 1927 and 2004 based on IRS data for taxable investors. The
average marginal tax rate on realized long-term capital gains is generally less than
the average marginal dividend tax.
9

The basic data set on statutory federal tax rates and on average marginal tax rates is identical
to Sialm (2005). Sialm (2005) studies the time-series variation in effective tax burdens and aggregate
valuation levels between 1917-2004 and does not investigate the cross-sectional impact of taxes.
10
The data can be found at http://www.nber.org/ taxsim/dtdy/. Additional information on this
microsimulation model can be found in Feenberg and Coutts (1993).

8

2.3

Dividends and Capital Gains Realizations

The sources of investment income for equity securities varied considerably between
1927 and 2004. Dividend income was the dominant source of income for stock holders during most of the period. In the 1980s and 1990s, dividend yields decreased
substantially as companies retained a larger proportion of their earnings and as they
increased share repurchases. As a result of the dividend reductions, capital gains
became a relatively more important income source during the last two decades.11
div
is defined as the ratio between
The actual dividend yield of a stock portfolio yk,t

the actual dividends paid during a 12-month time period divided by the initial price.
Dividends are defined here as taxable dividends according to the CRSP distribution
codes. The detailed codes are listed in Appendix A.5:
div
yk,t
=

dk,t
.
pk,t−1

(2)

The annual Statistics of Income of the Internal Revenue Service report the aggregate short- and long-term capital gains and the dividends declared by individuals.
The average propensities to realize short- and long-term capital gains are assumed
to equal the average propensities obtained from the IRS between 1927 and 2004.12
Furthermore, I assume that investors anticipate to realize a fixed proportion of capital
gains out of the expected returns net of expected dividend payments.13 Appendix A.3
explains the construction of the expected capital gains yields in more detail.
11

See Fama and French (2001) for an investigation of the dividend paying behavior of U.S. companies.
12
Between 1927 and 2004, the average aggregate short- and long-term capital gains yield based
on IRS data are -0.11 percent and 2.05 percent, respectively.
13
The assumption that only a fraction of the total capital gains are realized results in a lower effective tax rate on capital gains, as discussed by Feldstein, Slemrod, and Yitzhaki (1980) and Poterba
(1987a).

9

2.4

Dividend Portfolios

To obtain some cross-sectional variation in the effective tax burdens, the common
domestic stocks in the CRSP database are divided into portfolios according to the
lagged dividend yield and the lagged market capitalization of the companies. The
portfolios are formed monthly for three sorting criteria. The first criterion forms 30
portfolios according to the dividend yield and the size of the underlying stocks. All the
common stocks in the CRSP database are first sorted monthly into six groups based on
their lagged one-year dividend yields (one group corresponds to non-dividend paying
stocks and the other five groups correspond to quintile dividend yield portfolios).
Subsequently, each of the six dividend yield groups is further divided into five quintile
portfolios according to the lagged market capitalization. As commonly done in the
asset pricing literature, the cutoff levels for the market capitalizations of the five
quintile portfolios are based only on the distribution of the market capitalization on
the NYSE. The second sorting criterion forms 11 portfolios based on the lagged oneyear dividend yield. One of the 11 portfolios includes non-dividend paying stocks,
and the other 10 portfolios are dividend yield decile portfolios. The third criterion
forms two portfolios based on whether companies paid taxable dividends in the prior
year. The portfolio returns are computed using value weights within each portfolio.
However, the results do not differ much if I use equal weights instead, as explained
in more detail in the empirical section.
Table 2 shows the current and the future value-weighted dividend yields of the 11
dividend-yield portfolios. Although dividend yields revert towards the mean, dividend
payments are relatively persistent. Thus, the tax properties of the 11 dividend yield
portfolios do not tend to change dramatically over short time periods.

10

2.5

Anticipated Dividend Yield

The computation of the effective tax rate as described in equation (1) requires the
anticipated dividend yield ŷ div , which is not observable. One possibility would be to
assume that the dividend yield follows a random walk. In this case, the anticipated
dividend yield would be identical to the lagged actual dividend yield. However, this
assumption would bias the results due to the mean reversion of the dividend yields
as shown in Table 2.
To avoid any biases in the anticipated dividend yields, I estimate a partial adjustment model, where the actual dividend yield at time t of the stocks which are
included in portfolio k at time t − 1 is regressed on the lagged dividend yield of the
same portfolio and on the lagged dividend yield of the market portfolio.
div
div
div
yk(t−1),t
= αk + βk yk(t−1),t−1
+ γk yM,t−1
+ ²k,t .

(3)

This partial adjustment model allows for persistence in the dividend yield and
for a reversion of the dividend yield toward the aggregate market yield. Since the
composition of each portfolio changes slightly every year because of changes in lagged
dividend yields and market capitalizations, it is important to follow the same set of
underlying stocks over time. Thus, equation (3) relates the dividend yield of stocks
included in portfolio k at time t − 1 with the dividend yield of the same portfolio of
stocks k(t − 1) at time t.
Because of auto-correlated error terms and because of a lagged dependent variable,
the coefficients of this linear model and the first-order auto-correlation are estimated
using maximum likelihood. This partial adjustment model is estimated for each
portfolio separately to allow the adjustment coefficients to differ depending on the
dividend yield and the size of the stocks included in the portfolio. Furthermore, the
estimation uses data at an annual frequency to avoid overlapping observations.
11

Table 3 summarizes the coefficient estimates for the partial adjustment model
using 11 dividend yield portfolios. The auto-correlation term is important for nodividend and low-dividend portfolios. The main determinant of the future dividend
yield is the lagged dividend yield. The coefficient on the lagged dividend yield is often
significantly smaller than one, indicating a relatively strong mean reversion effect. The
fit of the model is relatively strong, as shown in the last column. The corresponding
coefficients also are computed for the two alternative portfolio formation criteria
based on 30 and two portfolios, respectively. I use the fitted values from this partial
adjustment model to obtain an estimate of the anticipated dividend yield of portfolio
div
.
k during the next year ŷk,t

2.6

Cross-Sectional Distribution of Effective Tax Rates

Based on these assumptions, it is possible to derive effective tax yields for different portfolios according to equation (1). Table 4 summarizes the moments of four
different measures of the tax burden on equity portfolios using the three different
portfolio formation criteria over the whole sample between 1927 and 2004. The first
row in each panel summarizes the lagged value-weighted dividend yields. The second row summarizes the anticipated dividend yields based on the fitted value of the
partial adjustment model according to equation (3). The last two rows summarize
the moments of the expected tax yield κ̂ and the expected effective tax rate τ̂ . The
effective tax rate τ̂ is simply defined as the ratio between the expected tax yield κ̂
and the average return on all portfolios over the whole period. The moments of the
different portfolio criteria differ slightly since they give different weights to different
groups of stocks. For example, Panel C weights dividend and non-dividend paying
stocks equally, which results in lower average tax burdens than Panel B, which gives
relatively less weight to non-dividend paying stocks.

12

Figure 3 summarizes the variation of expected tax rates for the two value-weighted
portfolios. The first portfolio includes all stocks that do not pay any taxable dividends
and the second portfolio includes all other stocks. The effective tax rate of dividend
paying stocks is substantially larger and more volatile than the effective tax rate of
non-dividend paying stocks. The difference in tax burdens is particularly pronounced
in the 1940s and 1950s and in the late 1970s. On average, dividend paying stocks
face taxes that are almost three times higher than non-dividend paying stocks.

3

Taxes and Asset Returns

This section presents the main test of the capitalization of personal taxes taking
advantage of both the time-series and the cross-sectional variation in tax rates.

3.1

Empirical Specification

The empirical estimation of the tax effects on equity returns is done in the base case
in two stages. In a first stage, abnormal asset returns are computed based on conventional factor pricing models, such as the one-factor CAPM, the three-factor Fama
and French (1993) model, and the four-factor Carhart (1997) model.14 The empirical
specification of the Carhart model is as follows:
M
SM B
rk,t − rF,t = α + βk,t
(rM,t − rF,t ) + βk,t
(rS,t − rB,t )
HM L
UMD
+βk,t
(rH,t − rL,t ) + βk,t
(rU,t − rD,t ) + ²k,t .

(4)

The return of portfolio k during time period t is denoted by rk,t . The subscript
M corresponds to the market portfolio and the subscript F to the risk-free rate.
14

The results are not affected significantly if I introduce in addition to the Carhart factors the
liquidity factor according to Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). The liquidity factor cannot be used over
the whole sample period since it is only available between 1966-2004.

13

Portfolios of small and large stocks are denoted by S and B; portfolios of stocks with
high and low ratios between their book values and their market values are denoted by
H and L; and portfolios of stocks with relatively large and small returns during the
previous year are denoted by U and D. The Carhart model nests the CAPM model,
which includes only the market factor, and the Fama-French model, which includes
the size and the book-to-market factors in addition to the market factor.
The factor loadings β denote the sensitivities of the returns of a portfolio to the
various factors. The factor loadings are estimated during a rolling window using data
on the previous 60 months. This rolling factor regression reduces the length of the
sample of abnormal returns by five years.
To determine the abnormal return α̃k,t at time t of portfolio k, I subtract the
expected portfolio return based on the previously estimated factor loadings from the
expected excess portfolio return:
M
SM B
α̃k,t = rk,t − rF,t − βk,t−1
(rM,t − rF,t ) − βk,t−1
(rS,t − rB,t )
HM L
UMD
−βk,t−1
(rH,t − rL,t ) − βk,t−1
(rU,t − rD,t ).

(5)

In a second stage, the abnormal return is regressed on the tax yield κ̂:

α̃k,t = γ + δκ̂k,t + ²k,t .

(6)

The coefficient δ should be positive if investors are compensated for the personal
taxes by obtaining higher before-tax returns for assets facing higher tax burdens,
particularly in periods where taxes are relatively high. A coefficient of one implies
that the abnormal return increases exactly by the amount of the tax. However,
the coefficient can differ from one because the marginal investor might differ from
the average investor used to compute the effective tax yield and because of general

14

equilibrium effects.15
The two-stage estimation method ensures that the dividend yield coefficient does
not capture risk effects that are included in the Carhart factors. However, the twostage methodology might bias against finding an impact of taxes on asset returns,
because some factors in the first-stage regression might proxy for the tax burden of
the different portfolios. For example, the market or the size factors might be related
to the dividend yield since small and high-beta stocks are less likely to pay dividends.
As a robustness test, I also report in Section 4.5 a one-stage regression that estimates
the tax yield coefficient δ simultaneously with the factor loadings.
The estimation of the impact of taxes on asset returns is related to the specifications of Brennan (1970), Litzenberger and Ramaswamy (1979, 1980, 1982), and
Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998). The earlier papers use the CAPM model
as the relevant factor model while Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998) base
their inferences on the Fama-French model. My estimation differs from the previous papers by taking into account both the cross-sectional variation in tax burdens
(different dividend yields) and the time-series variation in tax burdens (changing tax
regimes). In addition, my estimation includes a momentum factor and covers a longer
time period than the previous papers. While Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert
(1998) cover the period between 1963 and 1994, my estimation covers the period
between 1927 and 2004, a time period that includes many large tax regime changes.
15

Sialm (2005) derives in a general equilibrium model the impact of taxes on asset prices and asset
returns if taxes are stochastic. In this model, asset returns increase more than the amount of taxes
if investors are more risk-averse than log-utility investors. This is caused by the fact that sufficiently
risk-averse investors need to be over-compensated for taxes, because they have a desire to smooth
consumption over time.

15

3.2

Dividend Portfolios

Figure 4 depicts the rolling coefficient estimates of the factor loadings based on the
Carhart model for the returns of value-weighted portfolios of dividend paying and nondividend paying stocks between 1932 and 2004. Since the dividend portfolio accounts
for a large fraction of the total market capitalization during most of the sample
period, it is not surprising that the market beta is very close to one and that the
other factors do not differ much from zero. However, there is an interesting variation
in the estimated factor loadings of the non-dividend portfolio. The results indicate
that non-dividend paying stocks tend to have a higher exposure to the aggregate
market and they tend to be smaller stocks. Furthermore, non-dividend paying stocks
tend to be value stocks before 1960 and they tend to be growth stocks after 1980.
Non-dividend paying stocks in the early part often were distressed companies with
relatively low market values, while non-dividend paying stocks in the latter part
were often young companies with favorable growth prospects. Due to this significant
variation in the factor loadings, it is crucial to estimate time-varying factor loadings.
Table 5 summarizes the raw and the abnormal returns of the portfolios formed
according to the lagged dividend yield. The table lists the averages of the time-series
of these monthly excess and abnormal returns using the rolling regression methodology as summarized in equation (4). The first column reports the raw returns between
1927-2004, and the other columns report the abnormal returns between 1932-2004.
Table 5 demonstrates that stocks paying high dividend yields tend to have significantly higher average abnormal returns than stocks paying no or low dividend yields
using the CAPM, the Fama-French, and the Carhart factor models. For example,
stocks in the highest dividend decile outperform non-dividend paying stocks by 38
basis points per month after adjusting for the four-factor Carhart model.16
16

The fact that asset returns of high-dividend stocks tend to be relatively high seems at first
glance to contradict the catering theory of dividends of Baker and Wurgler (2004), which argues

16

The return differences are slightly less pronounced if the portfolios are equally
weighted instead. The Carhart abnormal return difference between the top dividend
decile and non-dividend paying stocks amounts to 28 basis points per month, but
remains statistically significant at a one percent confidence level. These results are
consistent with the hypothesis that investors require higher expected returns for highdividend stocks because of their higher tax burden.

3.3

Average Abnormal Returns and Tax Yields

Figure 5 depicts the relationship between average annualized abnormal returns and
the average annualized tax yield for the 30 dividend/size portfolios over the sample
period between 1932 and 2004. For each of the 30 portfolios, I compute the average
excess return over the market. In addition, I compute the abnormal returns for
the one-, three-, and four-factor models using rolling regressions as summarized in
equation (5). The figures show a positive relationship between average tax yields and
average equity returns regardless of the risk-adjustment method. This result shows
that there is a robust relationship between tax yields and risk-adjusted asset returns
even after aggregating all observations over time and ignoring the time-series variation
in tax burdens. The relationship is weaker using excess market returns. This occurs
primarily because of the very high excess return for the portfolio that includes nondividend paying stocks that are in the smallest market-capitalization quintile. These
stocks have the lowest effective tax rates and the highest average excess returns. The
high abnormal performance of these stocks is reduced after adjusting the returns for
common factors in stock returns.
that managers pay dividends when investors put a stock price premium on payers. However, the
evidence of Baker and Wurgler (2004) is primarily based on the aggregate time-series variation of
corporate payout decisions. Furthermore, they focus on dividend initiations and omissions instead
of the total dividend payments. Thus, the results in this paper are not directly comparable with
their paper.

17

3.4

Base Case Tax Capitalization Regression

The following results take full advantage of the time-series variation in effective tax
rates and regress the excess and abnormal monthly returns of each portfolio on the
corresponding tax yields. Table 6 summarizes the regression estimates for equation (6)
for the three different portfolio formation criteria. Each column reports the regression
coefficients using different dependent variables: The first column reports the results
using the return of the portfolio in excess of the market return. The last three
columns report the results using the abnormal returns from the CAPM, the FamaFrench, and the Carhart factor models based on equation (5). The panel data set
exhibits significant cross-sectional correlation. As suggested by Petersen (2005), I use
clustered standard errors to adjust for the cross-sectional correlation.
Panel A of Table 6 reports the estimation results based on the 30 dividend/size
portfolios. The estimations in Panel A with the excess (abnormal) returns are based
on 28,080 (26,280) monthly portfolio observations between 1927-2004 (1932-2004).
As mentioned previously, the first five years of data must be excluded to compute
the factor loadings using the rolling regression methodology. The tax yield coefficient
δ in Panel A is significantly different from zero regardless of the factor model used
to adjust the returns. The coefficient estimates become larger and more statistically
significant after adjusting for the Fama-French and the Carhart common factors.
This further strengthens the conclusions that the results are not driven by risk or by
mispricing due to behavioral biases.
It is not surprising that the R-squares of the regressions are relatively small, since
taxes are not the major determinant of asset returns at relatively high frequencies.
However, Figure 5 shows that taxes have a substantial impact on asset returns over
the longer term.
Panels B and C summarize the tax yield coefficients based on 11 or two portfolios

18

formed according to the dividend yield. The coefficients on the tax yield variables δ
are all positive, and only one coefficient is not significantly different from zero. By
using only two portfolios, the cross-sectional distribution in tax burdens is reduced
dramatically and non-dividend paying stocks (which account for less than 10 percent of the market capitalization over the whole sample period) are given substantial
weight. Furthermore, this insignificant coefficient results only in the specification
where the returns are not adjusted for risk. All tax yield coefficients using the FamaFrench or the Carhart adjustments are significantly different from zero at the one
percent confidence level.
Adjusting the returns by introducing the liquidity factor of Pastor and Stambaugh
(2003) in addition to the four Carhart factors does not affect the qualitative results
of the paper. Unfortunately, the liquidity factor is not available for the early part of
the sample. Between 1971 and 2004, the coefficient on the tax yield using Carhartadjusted returns is 1.74 with a standard error of 0.48. The coefficient amounts to 1.56
with a standard error of 0.47 after also adjusting the returns for the liquidity factor.
All the reported results are based on value-weighted portfolios. The results are
qualitatively similar if portfolios are formed using equal-weighted portfolios. For
example, the tax yield coefficient δ equals 1.23 with a standard error of 0.31 using
equal-weighted portfolio returns and tax yields based on the four-factor model.
The cross-sectional results are consistent with the time-series evidence of Sialm
(2005), who finds a negative relationship between effective tax rates and the aggregate valuation level on equity securities after controlling for several macro-economic
variables. Higher asset valuation levels in low-tax regimes are consistent with lower
average before-tax returns in low-tax regimes. However, Sialm (2005) relies on the
time-series variation and does not take into account cross-sectional variations in tax
burdens. Adding a cross-sectional dimension to the data increases the power of the
econometric tests significantly.
19

4

Robustness Tests

This section investigates the robustness of the results using alternative tax measures
or alternative estimation methodologies.

4.1

Cross-Sectional and Time-Series Variation of Tax Premia

To investigate whether the results are driven by outliers, I plot in Figure 6 the yearly
abnormal return spread between high and low tax burden portfolios against the difference in their yearly tax burdens. The abnormal returns are computed using the
four-factor model of Carhart. The left figure compares the value-weighted portfolio of
all dividend paying stocks with the value-weighted portfolio of all non-dividend paying stocks. The right figure uses instead of all dividend paying stocks the 10 percent
of dividend paying stocks that have the highest dividend yield during the previous 12
months.
The tax capitalization hypothesis makes three predictions about the relationship
between return spreads and tax differentials: First, highly taxed stocks should have a
higher average return than less highly taxed stocks. Second, the return spread should
be higher in periods where the tax differential is larger. And third, the return spread
should be zero if there is no tax differential between the different portfolios.
Figure 6 confirms the three predictions of tax capitalization. First, highly taxed
securities tend to pay significantly higher returns than less highly taxed securities.
For example, the mean return spread between dividend and no dividend stocks equals
3.63 percent (indicated by the dashed horizontal line in Panel A) with a standard error
of 0.93 percent. On the other hand, the mean return spread between high-dividend
and no dividend stocks equals 4.55 percent (indicated by the dashed horizontal line
in Panel B) with a standard error of 1.35 percent. Thus, dividend paying stocks tend
to compensate taxable investors by paying higher abnormal returns. This result is
20

driven by the average cross-sectional difference in tax burdens.
Second, the slope of the solid regression line is positive in both figures and equals
2.44 (3.29) with standard errors of 1.62 (1.54) for Panel A (B). The slope of the
regression line is based on the time-series variation in tax differentials and ignores the
level effect due to the average cross-sectional variation in tax differentials.
Third, the intercepts in both figures are not significantly different from zero, indicating that the abnormal return spread would be zero if all equity securities were
taxed symmetrically.
Although there is a positive relationship between tax yield differentials and abnormal return spreads, there remains a significant amount of variation in the return
differentials. Thus, taxes can only explain a small fraction of the time-series variation
in return spreads using annual data. This result should be expected, otherwise it
would be puzzling why tax-neutral arbitrageurs would not immediately take advantage of this return differential by going long highly taxed stocks and shorting less
highly taxed stocks. The existence of such traders would likely eliminate the return
differential between the two groups of securities. However, such trading strategies
generate significant risk and emphasize the limits of arbitrage in this context, as
discussed by Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and Fama and French (2005).

4.2

Subperiod Evidence

Table 7 reports the tax capitalization coefficients δ for six different subperiods using the 30 dividend/size portfolios. The majority of the coefficient estimates are
significantly positive. Using Carhart-adjusted returns, all coefficient estimates are
significantly positive, except the coefficient for the period between 1990-2004. It
must be kept in mind that the tax yield coefficient measures the impact of a fixed
change in the tax yield. However, the standard deviation in the tax yield has de-

21

creased substantially over time. For example, the cross-sectional standard deviation
in the tax yield has decreased from 0.091 percent prior to the 1950s to 0.038 after the
1990s. Thus, the total impact of taxes on asset returns has decreased substantially
over time.
The coefficients tend to be relatively large in the 1960s and the 1980s, time periods
where the aggregate tax burden on equity securities decreased substantially. An
unexpected reduction in the dividend tax rate results in larger returns of stocks
paying high dividends compared to stocks paying low dividends generating relatively
high tax yield coefficients.

4.3

Different Tax Measures

To construct the effective tax rate, it is necessary to make some simplifying assumptions. This section shows that the results are robust to alternative definitions of the
effective tax rate. Table 8 lists the tax capitalization coefficient δ for alternative measures of the tax burden on equity securities. The first row (Base Case) simply repeats
the results from Table 6 for comparison.
The base case assumes that the average returns of the different portfolios are
identical, as explained in Appendix A.3. However, stocks with higher mean returns
tend to have higher capital gains realizations and higher effective tax yields. In row
(2), I use the actual average return for each portfolio to compute the capital gains
yield according to equation (1). As expected, the coefficients increase slightly and
become more statistically significant.
During the last several decades there has been a significant increase in equities
held in tax-sheltered accounts. In particular, the proportion of corporate equity held
by taxable investors decreased from more than 90 percent in the 1950s to 55 percent
in 2004. Income on stocks held in tax-sheltered accounts generally faces zero dividend

22

and capital gains taxes. The substantial increase in tax-exempt environments results
in a significant decrease in the aggregate tax rate on equity securities.17 Row (3)
includes assets held in tax-sheltered accounts and computes the tax yield coefficient
for all investors, where stocks in retirement accounts are assumed to face zero taxes.
This change in the tax yield has only a minor impact on the results.
Sophisticated investors might avoid a significant portion of capital gains taxes
by deferring the realization of capital gains and by accelerating the realization of
capital losses. The fourth row assumes that the short- and long-term capital gains
realizations are zero. In this case, the coefficient estimates are only marginally smaller
than in the base case. This test indicates that the results are driven primarily by
dividend taxes and not by capital gains taxes.
The base case specification computes the effective tax yield in a specific year by
using the anticipated dividend yield based on the fitted value of the partial adjustment
model (3). Alternatively, I assume that the anticipated dividend yield is identical
div
to the lagged dividend yield. The fifth row replaces the fitted value ŷk,t
with the
div
actual lagged dividend yield in the previous period yk,t−1
. The results become more

statistically significant for all four performance measures relative to the base case in
the first row.
Investors might not have access to all the available information on current tax
rates and income distributions at the beginning of the year. Furthermore, tax rates
are endogenous and might depend on the stock market performance. The sixth row
uses the lagged tax yield during the previous 12 months as the explanatory variable.
The positive relationship between tax yields and risk-adjusted returns remains intact.
The base case assumes that the marginal investor faces a tax rate on dividends
and capital gains equal to the tax rate of the average investor. Rows (7) to (9) use
17

The proportion of equity held in taxable accounts is estimated using the Flow of Funds published
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank, as explained in more detail in Appendix A.4.

23

instead the federal statutory tax rates on dividend income and short- and long-term
capital gains to compute the effective tax yield. The tax yield coefficients under
these three alternative tax yields are all significantly positive using the Fama-French
or the Carhart risk adjustments. Whereas the tax capitalization coefficients tend to
be larger than one for the $100,000 tax bracket, they tend to be smaller than one for
the top tax bracket. This result is consistent with the marginal investor having an
intermediate tax bracket.
The last row regresses the excess and abnormal returns on the anticipated dividend
yield and shows a positive relationship between dividend yields and abnormal returns.
The dividend yield has an important impact on the risk-adjusted returns. Companies
paying high dividend yields tend to have higher average returns, as shown by Naranjo,
Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998). The results indicate that the tax effect remains
robust even if the time-series variation in tax rates is ignored.

4.4

Dividend Yields Versus Effective Taxes

The variable that measures the expected tax yield depends primarily on the interaction effect between the dividend tax rate and the dividend yield, as shown in equation
(1). The following specification tests whether this interaction effect remains important after introducing the impact of the two components separately.18 In particular,
I estimate the following regression:
div
div
α̃k,t = β0 + β1 τtdiv + β2 yk,t−1
+ β3 τtdiv yk,t−1
+ ²k,t .

(7)

A tax capitalization effect should generate a positive coefficient on the interaction
term between the dividend tax rate and the dividend yield. On the other hand, the
18

The results are not affected significantly depending on whether I use the lagged dividend yield
div
or the expected dividend yield ŷk,t
.

div
yk,t−1

24

coefficient on the dividend yield should be significant if the dividend yield proxies
for additional risk factors or for behavioral biases. This specification also allows the
performance of a “horse race” between the dividend yield and the interaction effect.
If the results in the previous section are completely driven by the dividend yield and
not by tax effects, then the coefficient on the dividend yield should be significant and
the coefficient on the interaction effect should be insignificant.
Table 9 summarizes the results of this specification. The coefficients on the interaction term are always positive, indicating that the dividend-yield effect is particularly
pronounced in periods where taxes are relatively high. The coefficient on the interaction term is statistically significant using three- or four-factor adjusted returns. The
insignificant results for the excess and the CAPM-adjusted returns might be due to
multicollinearity, since the correlation between the dividend yield and the interaction
term between the dividend yield and the dividend tax rate is 0.86. On the other hand,
the coefficient on the dividend yield is negative and not statistically significant under any of the four specifications, indicating that the effect described in the previous
section is likely a tax effect and not just a dividend yield effect. The coefficient on
the dividend tax rate is significantly negative using the Fama-French or the Carhart
abnormal returns, since the abnormal returns are computed in the first stage on a
before-tax basis and therefore already adjust for the average tax burden. This can
generate a negative abnormal return if the dividend yield is zero.
Naranjo, Nimalendran, and Ryngaert (1998) also find a positive relationship between the abnormal returns and the dividend yield between 1963 and 1994. However,
they do not find a significant tax effect if they include both the dividend yield and
the interaction effect between the dividend yield and a proxy of the tax rate. Their
results differ for two reasons: First, they use a significantly shorter time period to
estimate the tax effects. It is difficult to obtain significant results due to the high
correlation between the dividend yield and the interaction effect between the tax rate
25

and the dividend yield. Second, they use the yield difference between Treasury and
municipal securities (i.e., the implied tax rate on municipal bonds) as a proxy of the
effective tax rate of dividends. The implied tax rate on municipal bonds is a noisy
measure of the tax rate on equity securities because investor clienteles differ and because the yield difference also captures default and liquidity differences, which are
very significant determinants of municipal bond yields according to Wang, Wu, and
Zhang (2005).
Companies can distribute cash to shareholders by either paying dividends or by
repurchasing stocks. Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson, and Roberts (2006) and Lei
(2005) show that adding share repurchases to dividends increases the power of predictive regressions. One major difference between the two ways to distribute cash is that
dividends tend to be taxed more heavily than the resulting capital gains due to share
repurchases. Thus, it should be expected that the tax effect of share repurchases is
less pronounced than the tax effect of dividend payments. In unreported results, I
form 30 portfolios based on the repurchase yield and the market capitalization of the
underlying stocks. Consistent with the tax capitalization hypothesis, the tax yield
effect is less pronounced for share repurchases than for taxable dividend payments.

4.5

Different Empirical Specifications

Table 10 reports the tax yield coefficients using alternative test methodologies. The
results in the first row repeat the coefficient estimates δ in the base case using clustered standard errors.19 The regression results in the second row include an indicator
variable for each month. This fixed time effect controls for macroeconomic variables
19

Clustering for cross-sectional correlation is important. For example, the standard error of the tax
yield coefficient for excess returns in the base case is 0.69 in the specification with clustered standard
errors by time. The corresponding standard error would be just 0.29 using regular standard errors
without clustering. On the other hand, clustering by portfolio would result in a slightly lower
standard error of 0.57. See Petersen (2005) for a comparison of different methods to compute
standard errors in panel data.

26

that affect all asset portfolios symmetrically and vary over time. The tax yield coefficient increases in three specifications and decreases in one specification relative to
the base case.
The Prais and Winsten (1954) regressions summarized in the third and fourth rows
estimate a linear regression that is corrected for first-order serially correlated residuals. Serial correlation might be an issue because the factor loadings are computed
using a rolling window of 60 months. The estimated auto-correlation is relatively
small and none of the coefficient estimates are affected significantly by adjusting for
auto-correlation. The third row adjusts for cross-sectional correlation using clustered
standard errors by time, whereas the fourth row uses panel corrected standard errors
following Beck and Katz (1995). The different methods to adjust for cross-sectional
correlation have almost identical standard errors.
Similar results occur if I estimate equation (6) using the Fama and MacBeth (1973)
approach. The standard errors for the Fama-MacBeth regressions follow the Newey
and West (1987) adjustment using a lag length of 60 months. The lag length corresponds to the estimation window for the factor loadings.
The sixth row investigates whether the results are subject to seasonality, which
might occur because the factor portfolios are only adjusted once annually or because
investors update their portfolios only infrequently, as discussed by Jagannathan and
Wang (2005). To address this issue, I run panel regressions separately for each of
the 12 months. The table reports the means and the standard errors of the coefficient estimates for these 12 regressions. The mean coefficient estimates and the
standard errors are almost identical to the base case. Furthermore, the vast majority
of individual coefficients on the monthly data are positive and no seasonal patterns
are discernible. For example, all 12 coefficients using both the Fama-French and the
Carhart abnormal returns are positive.
The last specification in Table 10 reports the coefficient estimates using a one-stage
27

method, where the factor loadings are estimated simultaneously with the tax-yield
coefficient δ. To allow for time-varying risks, I estimate separate factor loadings
for each of the 30 portfolios during each 60-month period. This estimation method
does not require prior returns to compute factor loadings since they are estimated
simultaneously with the tax effect. The standard errors in this specification are again
clustered to adjust for cross-sectional correlation. The estimates for the abnormal
returns also do not differ substantially from the base case specification.

5

Conclusions

The paper sheds new light on the controversy of whether taxes are capitalized into
asset prices taking advantage of both the cross-sectional and the time-series variation
in tax burdens. The effective personal taxation of equity securities fluctuated considerably between 1927-2004. Stocks paying a large proportion of their total returns
as dividends face significantly higher tax burdens than stocks paying no dividends.
The results indicate that there is an economically and statistically significant relationship between before-tax asset returns and effective tax rates. Stocks that tend
to have higher tax burdens tend to compensate taxable investors by offering higher
before-tax returns.

28

References
Allen, F., A. E. Bernardo, and I. Welch (2000). A theory of divdends based on tax
clienteles. Journal of Finance 55 (6), 2498–2536.
Allen, F. and R. Michaely (2003). Payout policy. In G. M. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance Volume 1A
Corporate Finance, pp. 337–429. Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.
Amromin, G., P. Harrison, and S. Sharpe (2005). How did the 2003 dividend tax
cut affect stock prices? Federal Reserve Discussion Paper 2005-61.
Auerbach, A. J. (2002). Taxation and corporate financial policy. In A. J. Auerbach
and M. S. Feldstein (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Vol. 3, pp. 1251–
1292. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Auerbach, A. J., L. E. Burman, and J. M. Siegel (2000). Capital gains taxation
and tax avoidance: New evidence from panel data. In J. Slemrod (Ed.), Does
Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Auerbach, A. J. and K. A. Hassett (2005). The 2003 dividend tax cuts and the
value of the firm: An event study. NBER Working Paper 11449.
Ayers, B. C., C. B. Cloyd, and J. R. Robinson (2002). The effect of shareholderlevel dividend taxes on stock prices: Evidence from the revenue reconciliation
act of 1993. Accounting Review 77 (4), 933–947.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2004). A catering theory of dividends. Journal of Finance 59 (3), 1125–1165.
Bali, R. and G. L. Hite (1998). Ex dividend day stock price behavior: Discreteness
or tax-induced clienteles? Journal of Financial Economics 47 (2), 127–159.
Barclay, M. J. (1987). Dividends, taxes, and common stock prices: The ex-dividend
day behavior of common stock prices before the income tax. Journal of Financial
Economics 19 (1), 31–44.
Beck, N. and J. N. Katz (1995). What to do (and not to do) with time-series
cross-section data. American Political Science Review 89 (3), 634–647.
Black, F. and M. Scholes (1974). The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy
on common stock prices and returns. Journal of Financial Economics 1 (1),
1–22.
Blume, M. E. (1980). Stock return and dividend yield: Some more evidence. Review
of Economics and Statistics 62 (1), 1–22.
Boudoukh, J., R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. R. Roberts (2006). On the
importance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing.
Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Brennan, M. J. (1970). Taxes, market valuation, and financial policy. National Tax
Journal 23, 417–429.
29

Burman, L. E. (1999). The Labyrinth of Capital Gains Tax Policy. A Guide for the
Perplexed. Washington: Brookings.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of
Finance 52 (1), 57–82.
Chen, N.-F., B. Grundy, and R. F. Stambaugh (1990). Changing risk, changing
risk premiums, and the dividend yield effects. Journal of Business 63 (1/2),
S51–S70.
Chetty, R., J. Rosenberg, and E. Saez (2005). The effects of taxes on market
responses to dividend announcements and payments: What can we learn from
the 2003 tax cut. NBER Working Paper 11452.
Constantinides, G. (1983). Capital market equilibrium with personal tax. Econometrica 51 (3), 611–636.
Constantinides, G. (1984). Optimal stock trading with personal taxes. Journal of
Financial Economics 13, 65–89.
Dhaliwal, D., O. Z. Li, and R. Trezevant (2003). Is a dividend tax penalty incorporated into the return on a firm’s common stock? Journal of Accounting and
Economics 35, 155–178.
Eades, K. M., P. J. Hess, and E. H. Kim (1984). On interpreting security returns
during the ex-dividend period. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 3–34.
Eades, K. M., P. J. Hess, and E. H. Kim (1994). Time-series variation in dividend
pricing. Journal of Finance 49, 1617–1638.
Elton, E. J. and M. J. Gruber (1970). Marginal stockholder tax rates and the
clientele effect. Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (1), 68–74.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2005). Marginal stockholder tax
effects and ex-dividend day behavior: Evidence from taxable versus non-taxable
closed-end funds. Forthcoming: Review of Economics and Statistics.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns.
Journal of Finance 46 (2), 427–466.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the return on bonds
and stocks. Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3–53.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1998). Taxes, financing decisions, and firm value.
Journal of Finance 53 (3), 819–843.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2001). Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics or lower propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60 (1),
3–43.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2005). Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices.
University of Chicago.
Fama, E. F. and J. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
30

Feenberg, D. and E. Coutts (1993). An introduction to the TAXSIM model. Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 12 (1), 189–194.
Feldstein, M., J. Slemrod, and S. Yitzhaki (1980). The effects of taxation on the
selling of corporate stock and the realization of capital gains. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 94 (4), 777–791.
Frank, M. and R. Jagannathan (1998). Why do stock prices drop by less than
the value of the dividend? Evidence from a country without taxes. Journal of
Financial Economics 47 (2), 161–188.
Gordon, R. H. and D. F. Bradford (1980). Taxation and the stock market value
of capital gains and dividends: Theory and empirical results. Journal of Public
Economics 14 (2), 109–136.
Graham, J. R. and A. Kumar (2006). Do dividend clienteles exist? Evidence on
dividend preferences of retail investors. Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Graham, J. R., R. Michaely, and M. R. Roberts (2003). Do price discreteness and
transactions costs affect stock returns? Comparing ex-dividend pricing before
and after decimalization. Journal of Finance 58 (6), 2611–2636.
Green, R. C. and K. Rydqvist (1999). Ex-day behavior with dividend preference
and limitations to short-term arbitrage: The case of Swedish lottery bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 53 (2), 145–187.
Grinstein, Y. and R. Michaely (2006). Institutional holdings and payout policy.
Forthcoming: Journal of Finance.
Guenther, D. A. (1994). The relation between tax rates and pre-tax returns: Direct
evidence from the 1981 and 1986 tax rate reductions. Journal of Accounting and
Finance 18, 379–393.
Internal Revenue Service (Ed.) (1954). Statistics of Income. Washington D.C.: U.S.
Treasury Department.
Ivkovich, Z., J. Poterba, and S. Weisbenner (2005). Tax-motivated trading by individual investors. American Economic Review 95 (5), 1605–1630.
Jagannathan, R. and Y. Wang (2005). Lazy investors, discretionary consumption,
and the cross section of stock returns. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University.
Jin, L. (2006). Capital gain tax overhang and price pressure. Forthcoming: Journal
of Finance.
Joint Committee on Taxation (1988-1998). General Explanation of Tax Legislation.
Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Kalay, A. (1982). The ex-dividend day behavior of stock prices: A re-examination
of the clientele effect. Journal of Finance 37 (4), 1059–1070.
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1994). Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and risk. Journal of Finance 49 (5), 1541–1578.
31

Lang, M. H. and D. A. Shackelford (2000). Capitalization of capital gains taxes:
Evidence from stock price reactions to the 1997 rate reduction. Journal of Public
Economics 76 (1), 69–85.
Lei, Q. (2005). Cash distributions and returns. University of Michigan.
Litzenberger, R. H. and K. Ramaswamy (1979). The effects of personal taxes and
dividends on capital asset prices: Theory and empirical evidence. Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 163–195.
Litzenberger, R. H. and K. Ramaswamy (1980). Dividends, short selling restrictions, tax-induces investor clienteles and market equilibrium. Journal of Finance 35, 469–482.
Litzenberger, R. H. and K. Ramaswamy (1982). The effects of dividends on common
stock prices: Tax effects or information effects? Journal of Finance 37, 429–443.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2005). Taxes, regulations, and the value of
U.S. and U.K. corporations. Review of Economic Studies 72 (3), 767–796.
Michaely, R. (1991). Ex-dividend day stock price behavior: The case of the 1986
tax reform act. Journal of Finance 46 (3), 845–859.
Miller, M. H. and M. S. Scholes (1978). Dividends and taxes. Journal of Financial
Economics 6 (4), 333–364.
Miller, M. H. and M. S. Scholes (1982). Dividends and taxes: Some empirical
evidence. Journal of Political Economy 90 (6), 1118–1141.
Naranjo, A., M. Nimalendran, and M. Ryngaert (1998). Stock returns, dividend
yields, and taxes. Journal of Finance 53 (6), 2029–2057.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987). A simple, positive, semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 1987 (55), 703–
708.
Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns.
Journal of Political Economy 111 (3), 642–685.
Pechman, J. A. (1987). Federal Tax Policy (5th ed.). Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Petersen, M. A. (2005). Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches. Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University.
Poterba, J. M. (1987a). How burdensome are capital gains taxes? Evidence from
the United States. Journal of Public Economics 33 (2), 157–172.
Poterba, J. M. (1987b). Tax policy and corporate saving. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1987 (2), 455–503.
Poterba, J. M. (2002). Taxation, risk-taking, and household portfolio behavior. In
A. J. Auerbach and M. S. Feldstein (Eds.), Handbook of Public Economics Vol.
3, pp. 1109–1171. Amsterdam: North Holland.

32

Poterba, J. M. and L. H. Summers (1984). New evidence that taxes affect the
valuation of dividends. Journal of Finance 39 (5), 1397–1415.
Prais, S. J. and C. B. Winsten (1954). Trend esimators and serial correlation.
Cowles Commission Discussion Paper No. 383.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997). The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 35–55.
Sialm, C. (2005). Tax changes and asset pricing: Time-series evidence. NBER
Working Paper 11756.
Sinai, T. and J. Gyourko (2004). The asset price incidence of capital gains taxes:
Evidence from the taxpayer relief act of 1997 and publicly-traded real estate
firms. Journal of Public Economics 88, 1543–1565.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1983). Some aspects of the taxation of capital gains. Journal of
Public Economics 21 (2), 257–294.
Wang, J., C. Wu, and F. Zhang (2005). Liquidity, default, taxes and yields on
municipal bonds. Federal Reserve Discussion Paper 2005-35.

33

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Statutory Tax Rates

Taxable income is derived for three real income levels after deducting exemptions for
a married couple filing jointly with two dependent children from the fixed income
levels. The proportion of total deductions relative to the adjusted gross income is
assumed to equal the proportion of total deductions in the whole population for each
year as reported by the Internal Revenue Service. The marginal income tax brackets
and exemptions are determined using the Statistics of Income of the Internal Revenue
Service (1954) for the years 1913-1943, Pechman (1987) for the years 1944-1987, and
different issues of the Instructions to Form 1040 from the IRS for the remaining
years between 1988-2004. The values of the Consumer Price Index from 1913-1957
are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.20 Total deductions as a proportion
of adjusted gross income (AGI) are derived from different issues of the Statistics of
Income of the IRS. Marginal income tax rates for individuals in two different tax
brackets corresponding to Adjusted Gross Income levels of 100 and 250 thousand
U.S. dollars (with 2004 consumer prices), as well as the highest marginal income tax
rate are derived.
The long-term capital gains tax rate applies to realized gains with a holding period
of more than five years. The data source for the capital gains tax rates for 1927-1950
is the Synopsis of Federal Tax Laws from the Statistics of Income for 1950. The
remaining tax rates are taken from different issues of the General Explanations of
Tax Legislation by the Joint Committee on Taxation (1998) and Table 2-4 from
Burman (1999).

A.2

Average Marginal Tax Rates

The time series for the average marginal tax rates of dividends and short- and longterm capital gains are computed using different annual issues of the Statistics of
Income between 1917 and 1964 and the average marginal tax rates from the National
Bureau of Economic Research between 1965-2004. Post-2001 data is derived from
the 2000 Tax Model, since these years are not yet available from the Statistics of
Income of the IRS. However, the data includes the impact of EGGTRA and JGTRRA
and reflects therefore the tax changes through January 2005. The NBER publishes
average marginal tax rates for selected income sources since 1960 using their Taxsim
software.21
The NBER publishes average marginal tax rates that include state and local taxes.
For the early data, I use the National Income and Product Accounts published by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis to determine the state and local tax rates. The BEA
summarizes the current personal income tax receipts of state and local governments
20
21

Data can be found at http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm.
The time series can be downloaded from http://www.nber.org/∼taxsim.

34

(Table 3.3) and the federal government (Table 3.2).22 I assume that the state and
local government tax rate is a fixed proportion of the federal tax rate according to
the annual revenues.

A.3

Aggregate Capital Gains Yields

The annual Statistics of Income of the Internal Revenue Service report for most years
between 1917 and 2004 the total short- and long-term capital gains and the dividends
declared by individuals. The capital gains given by the Statistics of Income include
capital gains from many sources and not just from stock transactions. The IRS does
unfortunately not report every year the proportion of capital gains that result from
transactions of corporate equities. However, for eight years between 1959 and 2004,
the IRS reports the sources of capital gains in more detail. On average, about 35
percent of the capital gains result from transactions of corporate equity. I interpolate
the fraction of stock capital gains using these eight years.
The IRS reports the dollar amount of dividends Dt and short- and long-term
capital gains SCGt and LCGt . However, the IRS does not report the value of the
total taxable assets. Thus, I compute the aggregate short- and long-term capital
gains yields ytscg and ytlcg , by multiplying the aggregate value-weighted dividend yield
ytdiv with the ratio between the short- and long-term realized capital gains SCGt and
LCGt divided by the total dividend payments Dt :
SCGt
,
Dt
LCGt
.
= ytdiv
Dt

ytscg = ytdiv

(8)

ytlcg

(9)

I assume that investors anticipate to realize a fixed proportion of capital gains
out of the total expected returns net of expected dividend payments. Thus, investors
expect to realize larger capital gains for stock portfolios that are anticipated to pay
smaller dividend yields. The expected return on portfolio k is given by r̂k,t and the
expected market return is given by rˆt . The time-series of capital gains yields for
equity portfolio k are assumed to be as follows:
div
r̂k,t − ŷk,t
,
rˆt − ŷ div
div
r̂ − ŷk,t
scg k,t
= ŷ
,
rˆt − ŷ div

lcg
ŷk,t
= ŷ lcg

(10)

scg
ŷk,t

(11)

This specification results in average expected capital gains realizations that fit
the average realization behavior over the whole sample period according to the IRS.
Furthermore, the expected capital gains realizations are set as a fixed fraction of the
expected return net of expected dividend payments. Thus, stock portfolios paying
22

The data can be downloaded from http://www.bea.gov.

35

higher dividend yields will tend to generate lower capital gains realizations keeping
expected returns constant.
The expected tax yield κ̂ depends positively on the expected return of the portfolio
k, because portfolios with higher expected returns are assumed to generate higher
capital gains according to equations (10) and (11). In the empirical section, I relate
abnormal portfolio returns to the tax yield coefficient κ̂. To avoid any spurious
correlation between the tax yield and the portfolio return, I adjust the tax yield
coefficient by using the same expected return for all portfolios over the whole sample
period r̂k,t = r̂t = r̂. As demonstrated in a robustness test in Section 4.3, this
assumption results in more conservative estimates of the tax capitalization coefficient
compared to the case where the expected returns of each portfolio are set equal to
the sample averages of the portfolio returns.

A.4

Tax-Exempt Assets

The proportion of equity held in taxable accounts is estimated using the Flow of
Funds published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank.23 The
proportion is only computed for equities held by domestic investors, since it would be
impossible to determine the marginal tax rates faced by international stock investors.
The detailed derivation of the time series is available upon request. The flow of funds
publishes this distribution of equity holdings only between 1945 and 2001. The values
prior to 1945 and after 2001 are taken from the most recent available year.

A.5

Taxable Dividends

Dividends are defined here as taxable dividends according to the CRSP distribution
codes. The following distribution codes correspond to taxable dividends: 1200, 1202,
1212, 1218, 1222, 1228, 1232, 1231, 1238, 1239, 1242, 1248, 1252, 1258, 1262, 1268,
1272, 1278, 1279, 1282, 1292, 1312, 1318, 1332, 1338, 1342, 1348, 1352, 1362, 1368,
1372, 1378, 1412, 1418, 1438, 1712, 1718, 1772, 1812, 1818, 1872, and 1999.

23

The data can be downloaded from http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/.

36

Figure 1: Statutory Federal Marginal Dividend and Capital Gains Tax Rates
The marginal dividend and long-term capital gains tax rates are depicted over the
period from 1927 to 2004 for three different real income levels. Two curves correspond
to the marginal income tax rates for households with real income levels of 100 and 250
thousand U.S. dollars expressed in 2004 consumer prices. The third curve corresponds
to the marginal income tax rate for the top income tax bracket.
Panel A: Dividend Tax

Panel B: Long-Term Capital Gains Tax

1

1
Maximum
0.9
Marginal Long−Term Capital Gains Tax Rate

0.9

Marginal Income Tax Rate

0.8
0.7
0.6
250K

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

100K

0.1
0

1930

1940

1950

1960
1970
Year

1980

1990

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.2

250K

0.1

100K

0

2000

37

Maximum

0.3

1930

1940

1950

1960
1970
Year

1980

1990

2000

Figure 2: Average Marginal Investment Income Tax Rates
The dollar-weighted average marginal tax rates on dividend income and long-term
capital gains are depicted between 1927 and 2004. The tax rates include taxes imposed
by state and local governments.

Average Marginal Tax Rate

0.5

Dividends

0.4

0.3

0.2
Long−Term
Capital Gains
0.1

0

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970
Year

38

1980

1990

2000

Figure 3: Distribution of Effective Tax Rates
The effective tax rates are depicted for two stock portfolios sorted according to the
previous dividend yield. The effective tax rate τ̂ is defined as the ratio between the
effective tax yield κ̂ and the average return over the whole sample period. The lower
curve corresponds to the portfolio that includes all the stocks that did not pay any
dividends in the previous year, and the upper curve corresponds to the portfolio that
includes all stocks that did pay dividends in the previous period.

0.25
Dividend
Paying Stocks
Effective Tax Rate

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05
Non−Dividend
Paying Stocks
0

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970
Year

39

1980

1990

2000

Figure 4: Factor Loadings for Dividend and Non-Dividend Portfolios
The factor loadings for the dividend and the non-dividend portfolios are summarized.
The factor loadings of the Carhart (1997) model are computed on a rolling basis using
60 months of prior return data. The portfolios are value-weighted.
1.6

1.5
No Div.

1.4

Size Factor

Market Factor

No Div.

1.2
1

1
0.5
0

Div.
0.8

1940

1960

Div.
1980

−0.5

2000

1940

1960

1980

2000

Value Factor

No Div.

0.5
Div.
0
−0.5

Momentum Factor

0.5
1

Div.
0

No Div.
1940

1960

1980

−0.5

2000

40

1940

1960

1980

2000

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

CAPM

Excess Return

Figure 5: Relationship Between Abnormal Returns and Effective Tax Rates
The figure relates average tax yields to the performance of 30 value-weighted portfolios formed according to six dividend yield groups and five market capitalization
groups between 1927-2004. The excess return is defined as the difference between
the portfolio return and the value-weighted market return. The abnormal returns are
computed based on the CAPM, the Fama-French, or the Carhart models.

0
−0.05

−0.05
0.01
0.02
Tax Yield

−0.1
0

0.03

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1
Carhart

Fama−French

−0.1
0

0

0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
0

0.01
0.02
Tax Yield

0.03

0.01
0.02
Tax Yield

0.03

0.05
0
−0.05

0.01
0.02
Tax Yield

0.03

41

−0.1
0

Figure 6: Relationship Between Return Differentials and Tax Differentials
The figure relates the annual tax yield differentials to the abnormal performance differentials between dividend and non-dividend paying stocks using the Carhart model
between 1932-2004. The horizontal axis depicts the difference between the tax yields
of dividend and non-dividend paying stocks, and the vertical axis depicts the difference
between the abnormal Carhart returns of dividend and non-dividend paying stocks.
Panel A compares all non-dividend paying stocks with all dividend paying stocks, and
Panel B compares all non-dividend paying stocks with the decile of dividend paying
stocks with the highest lagged dividend yield.
Panel A:
Dividend Paying Stocks vs.
Non-Dividend Paying Stocks

Panel B:
Top Dividend Paying Decile vs.
Non-Dividend Paying Stocks

0.25
0.2

0.3
Difference in Carhart Alpha

Difference in Carhart Alpha

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05

0.2

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.15
−0.2
0

0.005

0.01
0.015
Difference in Tax Yield

0.02

0

0.025

42

0.005

0.01

0.015 0.02 0.025 0.03
Difference in Tax Yield

0.035

0.04

0.045

Table 1: Dividend and Capital Gains Tax Rates
This table summarizes the moments of the main variables used in this study. The
variables are expressed in percent.
Panel A: Moments
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Statutory Dividend Tax (100K)
Statutory Dividend Tax (250K)
Statutory Dividend Tax (Max)
Statutory LT Capital Gains Tax (100K)
Statutory LT Capital Gains Tax (250K)
Statutory LT Capital Gains Tax (Max)
Average Dividend Tax
Average ST Capital Gains Tax
Average LT Capital Gains Tax

Panel B: Correlations
(1)
(2)
(1) 1
(2) 0.90
1
(3) 0.18
0.53
(4) 0.73
0.44
(5) 0.88
0.80
(6) 0.52
0.58
(7) 0.47
0.77
(8) 0.52
0.80
(9) 0.35
0.52

Std.
Dev.
10.18
15.45
23.63
7.47
7.15
6.01
11.10
11.37
3.05

23.16
37.31
63.71
13.72
19.95
24.03
29.02
28.62
14.90

Min
0.50
5.00
15.00
0.50
4.40
12.50
8.37
6.77
8.30

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

1
−0.29
0.17
0.34
0.91
0.86
0.43

1
0.84
0.42
−0.04
0.01
0.27

1
0.64
0.45
0.50
0.60

1
0.49
0.54
0.73

1
0.99
0.58

1
0.61

43

Max
39.00
58.26
94.00
28.00
28.00
35.00
48.82
48.82
21.17

(9)

1

Table 2: Persistence of Dividend Yields
This table summarizes the dividend yields for the value-weighted portfolios formed
according to the lagged one-year dividend yields in the formation period, after one,
three, and five years. The dividend yields are at an annual frequency corresponding
to December values. The values are expressed in percent.

No Dividend Portfolio
Lowest Dividend Decile
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 6
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Highest Dividend Decile

Lagged and Future Average
Dividend Yields in Percent
Year 0 Year 1 Year 3 Year 5
0
0.72
1.59
2.04
1.46
1.91
2.15
2.41
2.49
2.85
3.02
3.19
3.14
3.30
3.53
3.64
3.69
3.87
3.92
4.00
4.23
4.26
4.24
4.19
4.76
4.66
4.64
4.50
5.31
5.16
4.89
4.74
6.00
5.66
5.26
5.14
6.94
6.13
5.70
5.53
9.32
7.35
6.54
6.15

44

Table 3: Partial Adjustment Model
This table summarizes first-order autoregressive estimates using maximum likelihood
div
estimation of the partial adjustment model for dividend payments: yk(t−1),t
= β0 +
div
div
div
β1 yk(t−1),t−1 + β2 yM,t−1 + ²k,t , where yk(t−1),t is the average dividend yield at time t
div
is the average dividend
for the stocks included in portfolio k at time t − 1, yk(t−1),t−1
div
yield at time t − 1 for the stocks included in portfolio k at time t − 1, and yM,t−1
is the average dividend yield of the aggregate market portfolio at time t − 1. The
fourth column reports the estimated AR(1) coefficients. The significance levels are
abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
Intercept
No Dividend Portfolio
Lowest Dividend Decile
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 6
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Highest Dividend Decile

−0.007∗
(0.004)
0.002
(0.004)
0.005
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
0.005∗
(0.003)
0.005∗
(0.003)
0.007∗∗
(0.003)
0.011∗∗
(0.004)
0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.017∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.028∗∗∗
(0.005)

Lagged Dividend Yield
Portfolio
Market
0.346∗∗∗
(0.096)
∗∗∗
1.048
0.047
(0.192)
(0.130)
0.958∗∗∗
−0.016
(0.147)
(0.148)
∗∗∗
0.871
0.082
(0.108)
(0.110)
0.794∗∗∗
0.109
(0.128)
(0.136)
0.651∗∗∗
0.231
(0.144)
(0.161)
0.694∗∗∗
0.160
(0.141)
(0.161)
0.772∗∗∗
−0.005
(0.185)
(0.224)
0.747∗∗∗
0.062
(0.134)
(0.173)
0.506∗∗∗
0.214
(0.186)
(0.268)
0.346∗∗∗
0.320
(0.099)
(0.199)

45

AR(1)
0.518∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.457∗∗∗
(0.119)
0.299∗
(0.159)
0.008
(0.126)
0.049
(0.124)
0.122
(0.128)
0.016
(0.127)
0.224
(0.135)
0.127
(0.122)
0.210
(0.131)
−0.036
(0.126)

R2
0.562
0.824
0.842
0.846
0.809
0.801
0.811
0.752
0.743
0.656
0.571

Table 4: Measures of Tax Burden
This table summarizes the moments of three variables capturing the tax burden on
a cross-section of equity securities. The lagged dividend yield y div is based on the
dividends of portfolio k during the last 12 months. The anticipated dividend yield
ŷ div is based on the partial adjustment model according to equation (3). The effective
tax yield κ̂ is defined according to equation (1) and the effective tax rate τ̂ is defined
as the ratio between the effective tax yield κ̂ and the average return over the whole
sample period. Three different portfolio formation criteria are used: (1) 30 portfolios
based on six dividend yield groups and five size groups; (2) 11 portfolios based on
one portfolio including all non-dividend paying stocks and decile portfolios including
dividend paying stocks; and (3) two portfolios based on one portfolio including nondividend paying stocks and one portfolio including dividend paying stocks. The values
are at an annual frequency and correspond to December values.
Panel A: 30 Dividend Yield and Size Portfolios
Mean Std.
Dev.
(1) Lagged Dividend Yield
3.97 3.14
(2) Anticipated Dividend Yield
3.89 2.37
(3) Effective Tax Yield
1.75 0.93
(4) Effective Tax Rate
15.14 8.06
Panel B: 11 Dividend Yield Portfolios
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Lagged Dividend Yield
Anticipated Dividend Yield
Effective Tax Yield
Effective Tax Rate

4.30
4.15
1.85
15.96

Panel C: 2 Dividend Yield Portfolios
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Lagged Dividend Yield
Anticipated Dividend Yield
Effective Tax Yield
Effective Tax Rate

2.20
2.51
1.26
10.91

46

Min.

Max.

0.00
0.00
0.36
3.12

21.48
11.27
5.34
46.04

Std.
Dev.
3.05
2.26
0.92
7.91

Min.

Max.

0.00
0.00
0.45
3.84

18.05
11.39
5.57
48.07

Std.
Dev.
2.44
2.01
0.80
6.66

Min.

Max.

0.00
0.00
0.36
3.16

8.42
7.71
3.41
29.44

Correlation
(1)
(2)
(3)
1
0.97 1
0.78 0.81 1
0.78 0.81 1

Correlation
(1)
(2)
(3)
1
0.98 1
0.77 0.78 1
0.77 0.78 1

Correlation
(1)
(2)
(3)
1
0.98 1
0.83 0.86 1
0.83 0.86 1

Table 5: Raw and Abnormal Returns for Portfolios Sorted by Dividend Yield
This table summarizes the raw and the abnormal returns for portfolios formed according to the initial dividend yields in the month after the portfolio formation. The
factor loadings are computed on a rolling basis using 60 months of return data. The
returns are expressed in percent per month and standard errors are summarized in
parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and
three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.

No Dividend Portfolio
Lowest Dividend Decile
Decile 2
Decile 3
Decile 4
Decile 5
Decile 6
Decile 7
Decile 8
Decile 9
Highest Dividend Decile
Difference Highest Dividend
Minus No Dividend
Difference Highest Dividend
Minus Lowest Dividend

Monthly
Raw Return
1.04∗∗∗
(0.29)
0.86∗∗∗
(0.23)
0.92∗∗∗
(0.21)
0.94∗∗∗
(0.19)
0.96∗∗∗
(0.18)
0.95∗∗∗
(0.17)
0.99∗∗∗
(0.17)
1.10∗∗∗
(0.17)
1.17∗∗∗
(0.18)
1.16∗∗∗
(0.17)
1.35∗∗∗
(0.17)
0.32∗
(0.19)
0.50∗∗∗
(0.16)

47

Value-Weighted Returns in Percent
CAPM
Fama-French
Carhart
∗
∗∗∗
−0.20
−0.26
−0.26∗∗∗
(0.11)
(0.07)
(0.07)
−0.18∗∗
−0.09
−0.06
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
∗
−0.13
−0.02
0.05
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
−0.06
0.05
0.09
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.06)
0.01
0.10∗
0.13∗∗
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.06)
0.09
0.08
0.13∗∗
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.06)
0.09
0.03
0.05
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
0.20∗∗∗
0.08
0.14∗∗
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
∗∗∗
∗
0.26
0.11
0.11∗
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
∗∗∗
∗
0.30
0.12
0.10
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.07)
0.43∗∗∗
0.17∗∗
0.12
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.08)
0.64∗∗∗
(0.15)
0.62∗∗∗
(0.14)

0.43∗∗∗
(0.10)
0.26∗∗
(0.13)

0.38∗∗∗
(0.10)
0.18
(0.12)

Table 6: Tax Capitalization Regressions
This table summarizes the tax capitalization coefficient δ of the following regression:
α̃k,t = γ + δκ̂k,t + ²k,t , where α̃k,t is the abnormal return of portfolio k at time
t and κ̂k,t is the tax yield of portfolio k at time t. Excess returns are computed
by subtracting the value-weighted market return from the portfolio return. Factoradjusted returns are computed by subtracting the expected returns from the CAPM,
the Fama-French, and the Carhart models from the portfolio return. The factor
loadings are computed on a rolling basis using 60 months of return data. Three
different portfolio formation criteria are used: (1) 30 portfolios based on six dividend
yield groups and five size groups; (2) 11 portfolios based on one portfolio including
all non-dividend paying stocks and decile portfolios including dividend paying stocks;
and (3) two portfolios based on one portfolio including non-dividend paying stocks and
one portfolio including dividend paying stocks. The standard errors take into account
clustering by time period and are summarized in parentheses. The significance levels
are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
Panel A: 30 Dividend Yield and Size Portfolios
Excess Return
CAPM
Tax Yield
1.18∗
1.20∗∗
(0.69)
(0.60)
Constant
0.07
0.03
(0.14)
(0.13)
R-Squared (in Percent)
0.06
0.08

Fama-French
1.97∗∗∗
(0.36)
−0.27∗∗∗
(0.07)
0.44

Carhart
1.54∗∗∗
(0.31)
−0.14∗∗
(0.06)
0.27

Panel B: 11 Dividend Yield Portfolios
Excess Return
Tax Yield
1.25∗∗∗
(0.41)
Constant
−0.10
(0.07)
R-Squared (in Percent)
0.14

CAPM
1.86∗∗∗
(0.41)
−0.22∗∗∗
(0.08)
0.36

Fama-French
1.45∗∗∗
(0.35)
−0.20∗∗∗
(0.06)
0.29

Carhart
1.10∗∗∗
(0.32)
−0.12∗∗
(0.06)
0.17

Panel C: 2 Dividend Yield Portfolios
Excess Return
Tax Yield
0.29
(0.94)
Constant
0.02
(0.16)
R-Squared (in Percent)
0.00

CAPM
1.64∗∗
(0.72)
−0.26∗∗
(0.13)
0.20

Fama-French
1.88∗∗∗
(0.47)
−0.32∗∗∗
(0.08)
0.66

Carhart
1.95∗∗∗
(0.47)
−0.32∗∗∗
(0.08)
0.70

48

Table 7: Tax Capitalization Regressions: Subperiod Evidence
This table summarizes the tax capitalization coefficient δ of the following regression:
α̃k,t = γ + δκ̂k,t + ²k,t , where α̃k,t is the abnormal return of portfolio k at time
t and κ̂k,t is the tax yield of portfolio k at time t. Excess returns are computed
by subtracting the value-weighted market return from the portfolio return. Factoradjusted returns are computed by subtracting the expected returns from the CAPM,
the Fama-French, and the Carhart models from the portfolio return. The factor
loadings are computed on a rolling basis using 60 months of return data. The 30
stock portfolios are formed based on six dividend yield groups and five size groups.
The standard errors take into account clustering by time period and are summarized
in parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and
three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
1932-1949
1950-1959
1960-1969
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-2004

Excess Return
0.96
(1.35)
0.50
(0.90)
0.43
(2.04)
4.30∗∗
(2.13)
5.24∗∗
(2.13)
0.91
(2.95)

CAPM
−0.42
(1.45)
1.93∗∗
(0.87)
1.83
(1.56)
4.09∗∗
(1.63)
6.83∗∗∗
(1.78)
1.27
(2.38)

49

Fama-French
2.20∗∗
(0.86)
2.62∗∗∗
(0.57)
3.83∗∗∗
(0.92)
0.98
(0.78)
2.94∗∗∗
(0.98)
2.22∗
(1.34)

Carhart
1.29∗
(0.73)
1.96∗∗∗
(0.55)
3.44∗∗∗
(0.87)
1.56∗∗
(0.76)
3.72∗∗∗
(0.88)
1.52
(1.27)

Table 8: Tax Capitalization Regressions Using Different Measures of the Equity Tax
Burden
This table summarizes the tax capitalization coefficient δ of the following regression:
α̃k,t = γ+δ θ̂k,t +²k,t , where α̃k,t is the abnormal return of portfolio k at time t and θ̂k,t is
one of ten different measures of the tax burden of portfolio k at time t. Excess returns
are computed by subtracting the value-weighted market return from the portfolio
return. Factor-adjusted returns are computed by subtracting the expected returns
of the CAPM, the Fama-French, and the Carhart models from the portfolio return.
The factor loadings used to compute the abnormal returns are computed on a rolling
basis using 60 months of return data. The 30 stock portfolios are formed based on
six dividend yield groups and five size groups. The standard errors take into account
clustering by time period and are summarized in parentheses. The significance levels
are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at
the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
(1) Tax Yield
(Base Case)
(2) Tax Yield with Varying
Average Portfolio Returns
(3) Tax Yield Including Stocks
in Tax-Sheltered Accounts
(4) Tax Yield with Zero
Capital Gains Tax
(5) Tax Yield with Actual
Lagged Dividend Yield
(6) Lagged Tax Yield
(7) Statutory Tax Yield for
$100,000 Real Income
(8) Statutory Tax Yield for
$250,000 Real Income
(9) Statutory Tax Yield for
Maximum Real Income
(10) Dividend Yield

Excess
Return
1.18∗
(0.69)
1.40∗∗
(0.65)
1.06∗
(0.66)
1.10∗
(0.59)
1.11∗∗
(0.51)
0.98
(0.72)
1.52
(1.05)
0.96
(0.61)
0.46
(0.30)
0.33
(0.26)

50

CAPM
1.20∗∗
(0.60)
1.47∗∗∗
(0.56)
0.91
(0.59)
1.19∗∗
(0.51)
1.29∗∗∗
(0.44)
1.18∗
(0.62)
0.88
(0.56)
0.84
(0.55)
0.40
(0.27)
0.71∗∗∗
(0.21)

Fama
French
1.97∗∗∗
(0.36)
2.00∗∗∗
(0.35)
1.85∗∗∗
(0.36)
1.77∗∗∗
(0.31)
1.75∗∗∗
(0.29)
1.96∗∗∗
(0.37)
1.57∗∗∗
(0.34)
1.57∗∗∗
(0.34)
0.82∗∗∗
(0.16)
0.76∗∗∗
(0.14)

Carhart
1.54∗∗∗
(0.31)
1.63∗∗∗
(0.30)
1.36∗∗∗
(0.32)
1.38∗∗∗
(0.27)
1.36∗∗∗
(0.25)
1.53∗∗∗
(0.32)
1.22∗∗∗
(0.30)
1.21∗∗∗
(0.30)
0.61∗∗∗
(0.15)
0.62∗∗∗
(0.13)

Table 9: Tax Capitalization Regressions: Alternative Specification
This table summarizes the coefficients of the following regression: α̃k,t = β0 + β1 τtdiv +
div
+²k,t , where α̃k,t is the abnormal return of portfolio k at time
β2div yk,t−1 +β3 τtdiv ×yk,t−1
div
div
is the dividend
t, τt is the average marginal tax rate on dividends at time t, and yk,t−1
yield of portfolio k at time t − 1. Excess returns are computed by subtracting the
value-weighted market return from the portfolio return. Factor-adjusted returns are
computed by subtracting the expected returns from the CAPM, the Fama-French, and
the Carhart models from the portfolio return. The factor loadings used to compute
the abnormal returns are computed on a rolling basis using 60 months of return data.
The 30 stock portfolios are formed based on six dividend yield groups and five size
groups. The standard errors for the regression take into account clustering by time
period and are summarized in parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated
with asterisks: One, two, and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1
percent level, respectively.
Dividend Tax Rate
Dividend Yield
Dividend Tax Rate
× Dividend Yield
Constant
R-Squared (in Percent)

Excess Return
0.19
(1.27)
−0.05
(0.79)
1.05
(2.00)
0.07
(0.49)

CAPM
−2.05∗
(1.20)
−0.09
(0.73)
2.08
(1.82)
0.75
(0.47)

Fama-French
−1.39∗∗
(0.54)
−0.64
(0.52)
3.43∗∗∗
(1.28)
0.33
(0.21)

0.09

0.37

0.65

51

Carhart
−1.23∗∗∗
(0.48)
−0.48
(0.50)
2.67∗∗
(1.21)
0.38∗∗
(0.18)
0.43

Table 10: Tax Capitalization Regressions With Alternative Econometric Methods
This table summarizes the tax capitalization coefficients δ using different estimation
methodologies. The first row repeats the tax yield coefficient in the base case using a
two-stage estimation process and clustered standard errors. The second row includes
monthly time-fixed effects and uses clustered standard errors. The third row estimates
the coefficients using a Prais-Winsten regression correcting for first-order serially correlated residuals and uses clustered standard errors. The fourth row estimates the
coefficients using a Prais-Winsten regression and uses panel corrected standard errors.
The fifth row performs a two-stage Fama-MacBeth regression. The standard errors
for the Fama-MacBeth regressions are Newey-West standard errors with a lag length
of 60 months corresponding to the estimation window for the factor loadings. The
sixth row reports the results where the panel regression is performed separately for
each of the 12 calendar months. The reported coefficients are the averages of the tax
yield coefficients over the 12 months. The seventh row reports the tax yield coefficients for a one-stage estimation, where the factor loadings for each dividend yield
portfolio and for each 60-month time period are estimated simultaneously with the
tax-yield coefficient. The standard errors in this specification are again clustered by
time period. The 30 stock portfolios are formed based on six dividend yield groups
and five market capitalization groups. Excess returns are computed by subtracting
the value-weighted market return from the portfolio return. Factor-adjusted returns
are computed by subtracting the expected returns from the CAPM, the Fama-French,
and the Carhart models from the portfolio return. The standard errors are summarized in parentheses. The significance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: One, two,
and three asterisks denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level, respectively.
(1) Two-Stage Panel Regression with
Clustering (Base Case)
(2) Two-Stage Panel Regression with
Time-Fixed Effects and Clustering
(3) Two-Stage Prais-Winsten Regression with
Clustering
(4) Two-Stage Prais-Winsten Regression with
Panel-Corrected Standard Errors
(5) Two-Stage Fama-MacBeth with
Newey-West Standard Errors
(6) Two-Stage Fama-MacBeth by Month
Averaged over the 12 Months
(7) Simultaneous Panel Regression with
Clustering

52

Excess
Return
1.18∗
(0.69)
0.10
(0.95)
1.20
(0.75)
1.20
(0.75)
−0.30
(1.88)
1.16∗
(0.64)
1.18∗
(0.69)

CAPM
1.20∗∗
(0.60)
2.43∗∗∗
(0.73)
1.20∗
(0.62)
1.20∗
(0.63)
2.67∗
(1.47)
1.18∗∗
(0.55)
1.60∗∗∗
(0.57)

Fama
Carhart
French
1.97∗∗∗
1.54∗∗∗
(0.36)
(0.31)
∗∗∗
2.77
2.26∗∗∗
(0.42)
(0.40)
1.97∗∗∗
1.54∗∗∗
(0.37)
(0.32)
∗∗∗
1.97
1.54∗∗∗
(0.35)
(0.33)
∗∗∗
2.25
1.78∗∗∗
(0.68)
(0.68)
1.97∗∗∗
1.53∗∗∗
(0.26)
(0.26)
∗∗∗
1.21
1.06∗∗∗
(0.29)
(0.27)

