                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL INFLATION TARGETING UNDER ALTERNATIVE FISCAL REGIMES

                                          Pierpaolo Benigno
                                          Michael Woodford

                                        Working Paper 12158
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12158


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2006




We thank Romulo Chumacero, Norman Loayza, Eduardo Loyo, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel for useful
comments on an earlier draft, Vasco Curdia and Mauro Roca for research assistance, and the National
Science Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Pierpaolo Benigno and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Inflation Targeting under Alternative Fiscal Regimes
Pierpaolo Benigno and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 12158
April 2006
JEL No. E52, E63

                                             ABSTRACT

Standard discussions of flexible inflation targeting as an optimal monetary policy abstract
completely from the consequences of monetary policy for the government budget. But at least some
of the countries now adopting inflation targeting have substantial difficulty in controlling fiscal
imbalances, so that the additional strains resulting from strict control of inflation are of substantial
concern, and some (notably Sims 2005) have argued that inflation targeting can even be
counterproductive under some fiscal regimes. Here, therefore, we analyze welfare-maximizing
monetary policy taking explicit account of the consequences of monetary policy for the government
budget, and under a variety of assumptions about the nature of the fiscal regime.
The paper contrasts the optimal monetary policies under three alternative assumptions about fiscal
policy: (i) the case in which little distortion is required to raise additional government revenue, and
the fiscal authority can be relied upon to ensure intertemporal government solvency [the implicit
assumption in standard analyses]; (ii) the case in which only distorting sources of revenue exist, but
distorting taxes are adjusted optimally; and (iii) the case in which tax rates cannot be expected to
change in response to a change in monetary policy [the problematic case emphasized by Sims]. In
both of cases (ii) and (iii), it is optimal for monetary policy to allow the inflation rate to respond to
fiscal developments (and the optimal responses to other shocks are somewhat different than in the
classic analysis, which assumes case (I)). Nonetheless, optimal monetary policy can still be
implemented through a form of flexible inflation targeting, and it remains critical, even in the most
pessimistic case (case (iii)), that inflation expectations (beyond some very short horizon) not be
allowed to vary in response to shocks.

Pierpaolo Benigno
NYU Department of Economics
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
pierpaolo.benigno@nyu.edu

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
michael.woodford@columbia.edu
    Since its adoption in Chile and elsewhere early in the 1990s, inflation targeting
has become an increasingly popular approach to the the conduct of monetary policy
worldwide. Most of the countries that have adopted inflation targeting judge the
experiment favorably, at least thus far. In many countries the adoption of inflation
targeting has been associated with reductions in both the average level and volatility
of inflation. Inflation targeting has been especially successful in stabilizing inflation
expectations,1 as one might expect, given the emphasis that is typically given to a
clear medium-term commitment regarding inflation (while temporary departures from
the inflation target are allowed), and the typical increase in the degree of commu-
nication by inflation-targeting central banks with regard to the outlook for inflation
over the next few years.
    But is inflation targeting an approach to monetary policy that is equally suitable
for all countries, regardless of the institutions that may exist in a given country, the
disturbances to which a particular economy is subject, and the other policies that
are pursued by that country’s government? A question that would seem particulary
worthy of discussion is how a country’s fiscal policies might affect the suitability of
inflation targeting as an approach to the conduct of monetary policy.
    The fiscal consequences of commitment to an inflation target have largely been
neglected in the theoretical literature that develops the case for inflation targeting.2
Typically, the models used to analyze monetary stabilization policy abstract from the
government’s budget and dynamics of the public debt altogether, so that any fiscal
effects of monetary policy decisions are tacitly assumed to be irrelevant. And it may
be an acceptable simplification to proceed in this way, if one is choosing a policy for an
economy with sound government finances, by which we mean one for which relatively
non-distorting sources of revenue exist and the political will to maintain government
solvency need never be doubted. But countries differ in the degree to which such an
idealization of the circumstances of fiscal policy is realistic; and especially as inflation
targeting becomes popular in developing countries which have recently had serious
problems with inflation exactly because of their precarious government finances, one
may wonder how safe it is to ignore the interrelation between monetary and fiscal
policy choices.
   1
     See, for example, the comparison of inflation expectations in IT and non-IT countries by Levin
et al. (2004).
   2
     See, for example, King (1997), Svensson (1997, 1999, 2003), Woodford (2003, chaps. 7-8), Walsh
(2003, chap. 11), or Svensson and Woodford (2005) for canonical examples of the theoretical case
for some version of inflation targeting as an optimal policy.


                                               1
    Indeed, a number of authors have suggested that the appropriateness of inflation
targeting as a policy recommendation may depend critically on the nature of fiscal
policy. For example, Fraga et al. (2003), in the context of a discussion of inflation
targeting for developing countries, remark that “the success of inflation targeting
... requires the absence of fiscal dominance” (p. 383), and go on to stress that it
is not only necessary that fiscal policy be sound in this respect, but also necessary
that it be credible that it will continue to be. Their intent is not to suggest that
inflation targeting not be adopted by developing countries, but rather to emphasize
the importance of enacting credible fiscal reforms as well; but their insistence on
the need for fiscal commitments that are not obviously present in many developing
countries raises the question whether inflation targeting is not ill-advised in such
countries.
    Sims (2005) enunciates exactly this view. He argues that some countries’ fiscal
policies may make achievement of a target rate of inflation by the central bank im-
possible, in the sense that there exists no possible rational-expectations equilibrium
in which the target is fulfilled, regardless of the conduct of monetary policy. He fur-
thermore asserts that in such a case, attempting to target inflation may be not only
doomed to frustration, but harmful, in that it leads to less stability (even less stabil-
ity of the inflation rate) than could have been achieved through other policies. His
essential argument is that if the fiscal regime ensures that primary budget surpluses
are not (sufficiently) increased in response to a monetary tightening, then a policy
intended to contain inflation — raising nominal interest rates sharply when inflation
rises above the inflation target — may cause an explosion of the public debt, which
ultimately requires even larger price increases than would have been necessary had
the debt not grown. Examples of models in which “orthodox” monetary policies of
this kind lead to explosive debt dynamics have been presented by Loyo (1999) and
Blanchard (2005).
    Our goal here is to analyze the character of an optimal monetary policy com-
mitment under alternative assumptions about the character of fiscal policy, in order
to determine to what extent an optimal policy will be similar to inflation targeting,
and in particular to see to what extent the form of an optimal monetary policy rule
depends on the nature of fiscal policy. In order to address these issues, we extend
the framework used to analyze optimal monetary stabilization policy in Benigno and
Woodford (2005a), to explicitly model debt dynamics and the conditions required


                                          2
for intertemporal government solvency, and also to treat the effects of tax distor-
tions. We consider a variety of assumptions regarding the character of fiscal policy,
including the kind of fiscal regime — under which there is no adjustment of the real
primary budget surplus in order to prevent explosion of the public debt as a result
of an increase in interest rates — that is at the heart of the Loyo and Blanchard
examples of possible perverse effects of tight-money policies.


1       A Model with Non-Trivial Monetary and Fiscal
        Policy Choices
The model that we shall use for our analysis is a standard “New Keynesian” model
of the tradeoffs involved in monetary stabilization policy, augmented to take account
of tax distortions.3


1.1     The Model
The goal of policy is assumed to be the maximization of the level of expected utility
of a representative household. In our model, each household seeks to maximize
                                 ∞
                                 X                 ·                     Z       1                    ¸
                                            t−t0
                     Ut0 ≡ Et0          β              ũ(Ct ; ξ t ) −               ṽ(Ht (j); ξ t )dj ,   (1.1)
                                 t=t0                                        0


where Ct is a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregate of consumption of each of a continuum of
differentiated goods,
                                  ·Z 1              ¸ θ−1
                                                       θ
                                               θ
                             Ct ≡      ct (i) θ−1 di      ,                (1.2)
                                                       0

with an elasticity of substitution equal to θ > 1, and Ht (j) is the quantity supplied
of labor of type j. Each differentiated good is supplied by a single monopolistically
competitive producer. There are assumed to be many goods in each of an infinite
number of “industries”; the goods in each industry j are produced using a type of
labor that is specific to that industry, and also change their prices at the same time.
The representative household supplies all types of labor as well as consuming all types
    3
    Further details of the derivation of the structural equations of our model of nominal price rigidity
can be found in Woodford (2003, chapter 3).



                                                           3
of goods. To simplify the algebraic form of our results, we restrict attention in this
paper to the case of isoelastic functional forms,
                                                           −1    −1
                                                    C 1−σ̃ C̄tσ̃
                                     ũ(Ct ; ξ t ) ≡ t           ,
                                                      1 − σ̃ −1
                                                      λ
                                   ṽ(Ht ; ξ t ) ≡       Ht1+ν H̄t−ν ,
                                                     1+ν
where σ̃, ν > 0, and {C̄t , H̄t } are bounded exogenous disturbance processes. (We use
the notation ξ t to refer to the complete vector of exogenous disturbances, including
C̄t and H̄t .)
    We assume a common technology for the production of all goods, in which (industry-
specific) labor is the only variable input,

                               yt (i) = At f (ht (i)) = At ht (i)1/φ ,

where At is an exogenously varying technology factor, and φ > 1. Inverting the
production function to write the demand for each type of labor as a function of the
quantities produced of the various differentiated goods, and using the identity

                                             Yt = Ct + Gt

to substitute for Ct , where Gt is exogenous government demand for the composite
good, we can write the utility of the representative household as a function of the
expected production plan {yt (i)}.4
    The producers in each industry fix the prices of their goods in monetary units for
a random interval of time, as in the model of staggered pricing introduced by Calvo
(1983). We let 0 ≤ α < 1 be the fraction of prices that remain unchanged in any
period. A supplier that changes its price in period t chooses its new price pt (i) to
maximize               (∞                                                   )
                         X
                   Et       αT −t Qt,T Π(pt (i), pjT , PT ; YT , τ T , ξ T ) ,   (1.3)
                            T =t

   4
     The government is assumed to need to obtain an exogenously given quantity of the Dixit-Stiglitz
aggregate each period, and to obtain this in a cost-minimizing fashion. Hence the government
allocates its purchases across the suppliers of differentiated goods in the same proportion as do
households, and the index of aggregate demand Yt is the same function of the individual quantities
{yt (i)} as Ct is of the individual quantities consumed {ct (i)}, defined in (1.2).


                                                     4
where Qt,T is the stochastic discount factor by which financial markets discount ran-
dom nominal income in period T to determine the nominal value of a claim to such
income in period t, and αT −t is the probability that a price chosen in period t will
not have been revised by period T . In equilibrium, this discount factor is given by
                                                    ũc (CT ; ξ T ) Pt
                                    Qt,T = β T −t                       .                        (1.4)
                                                     ũc (Ct ; ξ t ) PT
       The function

         Π(p, pj , P ; Y, τ , ξ) ≡ (1 − τ )pY (p/P )−θ
                                      ṽh (f −1 (Y (pI /P )−θ /A); ξ)
                                 − µw
                                    t                                 P · f −1 (Y (p/P )−θ /A)
                                               ũc (Y − G; ξ)
indicates the after-tax nominal profits of a supplier with price p, in an industry with
common price pj , when the aggregate price index is equal to P , aggregate demand
is equal to Y , and sales revenues are taxed at rate τ . Profits are equal to after-tax
sales revenues net of the wage bill. The real wage demanded for labor of type j is
assumed to be given by an exogenous markup factor µw      t (allowed to vary over time,
but assumed common to all labor markets) times the marginal rate of substitution
between work of type j and consumption, and firms are assumed to be wage-takers.
We allow for wage markup variations in order to include the possibility of a “pure
cost-push shock” that affects equilibrium pricing behavior while implying no change
in the efficient allocation of resources. Note that variation in the tax rate τ t has
a similar effect on this pricing problem (and hence on supply behavior); so in the
case that the evolution of the tax rate is treated as an exogenous political constraint,
variations in the tax rate are also examples of pure cost-push shocks.
    We abstract here from any monetary frictions that would account for a demand for
central-bank liabilities that earn a substandard rate of return; we nonetheless assume
that the central bank can control the riskless short-term nominal interest rate it ,5
which is in turn related to other financial asset prices through the arbitrage relation

                                       1 + it = [Et Qt,t+1 ]−1 .                                 (1.5)

We assume that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates never binds under
the optimal policies considered below, so that we need not introduce any additional
   5
    For discussion of how this is possible even in a “cashless” economy of the kind assumed here,
see Woodford (2003, chapter 2).

                                                 5
constraint on the possible paths of output and prices associated with a need for the
chosen evolution of prices to be consistent with a non-negative nominal interest rate.
    Our abstraction from monetary frictions, and hence from the existence of seignor-
age revenues, does not mean that monetary policy has no fiscal consequences, for
interest-rate policy and the equilibrium inflation that results from it have implica-
tions for the real burden of government debt. In our baseline analysis, we assume that
all public debt consists of riskless nominal one-period bonds.6 The nominal value Bt
of end-of-period public debt then evolves according to a law of motion

                                   Bt = (1 + it−1 )Bt−1 + Pt st ,                           (1.6)

where the real primary budget surplus is given by

                                       st ≡ τ t Yt − Gt − ζ t ,                             (1.7)

where ζ t represents the real value of (lump-sum) government transfers. Rational-
expectations equilibrium requires that the expected path of government surpluses
must satisfy an intertemporal solvency condition
                                                   X∞
                                         Pt−1
                                    bt−1      = Et      Rt,T sT                             (1.8)
                                          Pt       T =t

in each state of the world that may be realized at date t, where Rt,T ≡ Qt,T PT /Pt is
the stochastic discount factor for a real income stream.
    We shall consider alternative assumptions about the degree of endogeneity of the
various contributions to the government budget in (1.7). In the case corresponding to
the conventional literature on optimal monetary stabilization policy, both Gt and τ t
are exogenous processes (among the real disturbances to which monetary policy may
respond), but ζ t can be adjusted endogenously to ensure intertemporal solvency in a
way that creates no deadweight loss, so that the fiscal consequences of monetary policy
are of no significance for welfare. In a more realistic case that we consider next, Gt
and ζ t are exogenous disturbances, and additional government revenue has a positive
shadow value, but τ t can be varied endogenously so as to minimize deadweight loss.
In the most constrained case, where the concerns stressed by Sims (2005) arise, Gt , τ t ,
and ζ t are all exogenous processes determined by political constraints.
  6
      The consequences of longer-maturity public debt are discussed in section 3.3 below.


                                                6
1.2     An Associated Linear-Quadratic Policy Problem
We approximate the solution to our optimal policy problem by the solution to an
associated linear-quadratic (LQ) problem, as in Benigno and Woodford (2003), where
the derivation of the approximations is presented in detail. We show that we can
define an LQ problem with the property that the solution to the LQ problem is a
linear approximation to optimal policy in the exact model, for the case in which the
exogenous disturbances are small enough.
    First, we show that maximization of expected utility is (locally) equivalent to
minimization of a discounted loss function of the form
                          X∞         ½                            ¾
                                t−t0   1              ∗ 2 1     2
                      Et0     β          qy (Ŷt − Ŷt ) + qπ π t ,            (1.9)
                          t=t
                                       2                  2
                                  0


where the target output level Yt∗ is a function of exogenous disturbances. If steady-
state tax distortions are not too extreme, we show that qy , qπ > 0, and the loss
function is convex, as assumed in conventional accounts of the goals of monetary
stabilization policy.
    The constraints on possible equilibrium outcomes are given by log-linear approx-
imations to the structural equations of the model described above. Here we omit
derivations and proceed directly to the log-linear forms. First, there is an aggregate-
supply relation between current inflation and real activity,

                              π t = κ[Ŷt + ψτ̂ t + c0ξ ξ t ] + βEt π t+1 ,                    (1.10)

where κ, ψ > 0. This is the familiar “New Keynesian Phillips curve,” augmented to
take note of the cost-push effects of variations in the sales tax. It is useful to write
the constraint in terms of the welfare-relevant output gap yt ≡ Ŷt − Ŷt∗ , in which case
(1.10) becomes
                           π t = κ[yt + ψτ̂ t + ut ] + βEt π t+1 ,
where ut is a composite “cost-push” term (associated with exogenous disturbances
other than variations in the tax rate7 ), or

                              π t = κ[yt + ψ(τ̂ t − τ̂ ∗t )] + βEt π t+1 ,                     (1.11)
   7
    An obvious source of such disturbances would be variations in the wage markup µw      t , and when
the steady state involves no distortions, this is the only source of variations in ut . However, in the
case of a distorted steady state, most other kinds of real disturbances also have cost-push effects, as
shown in Benigno and Woodford (2003), as they do not move the flexible-price equilibrium level of

                                                 7
where τ̂ ∗t is a function of exogenous disturbances that indicates the tax change needed
to offset the other “cost-push” terms.
    There is also another constraint on the possible equilibrium paths of inflation,
output and tax rates, and that is the condition for intertemporal government solvency
(1.8).8 A log-linear approximation to (1.8) takes the form
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                       −1
        b̂t−1 − π t − σ yt = −ft + (1 − β)Et               β T −t [by yT + bτ (τ̂ T − τ̂ ∗T )]   (1.12)
                                                    T =t

where ft is a composite of the various exogenous disturbances that we refer to as “fiscal
stress.” Because we have written the constraint in terms of the output gap and the
“tax gap” τ t − τ ∗t (indicating departures of the tax rate from the level consistent with
complete stabilization of both inflation and the output gap), the term ft (or, more
precisely, the sum b̂t−1 + ft ) measures the extent to which intertemporal solvency
prevents complete achievement of the stabilization goals represented in (1.9).
     Here we have substituted (1.4) for the stochastic discount factor (and replaced Ct
by Yt − Gt ), in order to obtain a relation that involves only the initial public debt and
the paths of inflation, output, taxes and the various exogenous variables. Note that
we have taken account of the effects of interest-rate policy on debt dynamics (the key
to the scenarios of Loyo (1999) and Blanchard (2005) under which tight money can
be inflationary) through the presence of the stochastic discount factor in (1.8), which
is linked to the interest rate controlled by the central bank through (1.5). Interest
rates do not appear in (1.12) because we have already substituted for them using the
connection between interest rates and the paths of output and inflation that must
hold in equilibrium, but the effect of tight money on the burden of the public debt is
nonetheless taken account of in this equation.
     In writing (1.12) in the form given, we have treated ζ t (real net transfers) as one
of the exogenous disturbances that affects the fiscal stress term. In the case that net
output to precisely the same extent (in percentage terms) as they move the efficient level of output.
The latter sources of cost-push terms become more important the greater the magnitude of the
steady-state distortions.
    8
      This does not amount to requiring that fiscal policy be “Ricardian”; we do consider below the
consequences of non-Ricardian fiscal policies of the kind assumed in the warnings of Sims (2005).
Instead, (1.8) is a condition that must hold in equilibrium under any policy, and in considering what
is the best equilibrium that can be achieved under certain constraints on possible policies, (1.8)
constrains the possible outcomes that can be achieved.


                                                8
transfers are endogenous, and can be varied to ensure solvency, we need to separate
out the ζ t term from the other (exogenous) determinants of ft . However, in this case,
the solvency constraint ceases to bind, given that the level of transfers affects neither
the aggregate-supply tradeoff (1.11) nor the loss function (1.9), so that policymakers
are free to vary ζ t as necessary in order to satisfy (1.12). Thus we do not need to
write the solvency constraint, except for the case in which ζ t is exogenous.


2       Optimal Inflation Targeting: The Conventional
        Analysis
We begin by using the framework sketched in the previous section to recapitulate well-
known arguments for a form of “flexible inflation targeting” as a way of implementing
an optimal state-contingent monetary policy, highlighting the role of (often tacit)
assumptions about fiscal policy in deriving these familiar results.9
    The conventional analysis of optimal monetary stabilization policy in a “New
Keynesian” model corresponds to the case of the above model in which the processes
{Gt , τ t } are both exogenously given as political constraints on what policy can achieve,
while the level of net lump-sum transfers ζ t is instead an endogenous policy variable
(along with the short-term nominal interest rate). When lump-sum transfers can be
chosen to facilitate stabilization policy, the intertemporal solvency constraint ceases
to bind, and can be omitted from our description of the policy problem, and we can
similarly omit any reference to the path of the public debt. Moreover, when the level
of distorting taxes is given exogenously, we can treat the τ̂ t term in (1.10) in the same
way as the other cost-push terms.
    The problem of optimal stabilization policy is then simply to find paths {π t , yt }
to minimize (1.9) subject to the single constraint

                                   π t = κ[yt + ut ] + βEt π t+1 ,                             (2.1)

where the definition of ut is now modified to include the cost-push effects of variations
in τ t (if these are present). This is the optimal policy problem treated, for example, in
    9
    See, e.g., Clarida et al. (1999), Svensson (2003), Woodford (2003, chaps. 7-8; 2004), or Svensson
and Woodford (2005) for more detailed presentations of the arguments summarized here.




                                                9
Clarida et al. (1999). Here we emphasize the respects in which this conception of the
goals of monetary stabilization policy provides an argument for inflation targeting.
    A first, simple conclusion about optimal policy under these assumptions is that, in
the absence of cost-push disturbances, optimal policy would involve adjusting interest
rates as necessary in order to maintain zero inflation at all times. This is easily seen
from the fact that if ut = 0 at all times, equation (2.1) is consistent with maintaining
both a zero inflation rate and a zero output gap at all times, and such an outcome
obviously minimizes the loss function (1.9).
    This provides one argument for inflation targeting: if cost-push shocks are unim-
portant (because distortions due to market power and/or taxes are both small on
average and fairly stable over time), then a low, stable inflation rate is optimal, re-
gardless of the degree of variability in real activity that this may entail (owing to
the effects of disturbances to preferences and technology on Yt∗ ). But it also implies
something of more general validity: even when random cost-push shocks of substantial
magnitude do occur, optimal policy should involve zero inflation on average. (This
follows from the previous result using the certainty-equivalence property of linear-
quadratic optimization problems.10 ) Thus the optimal long-run inflation target is
quite low (zero, in our simple model), regardless of the degree of distortions in the
economy, and thus of the degree to which the optimal level of output may exceed the
level associated with stable prices. And given that the departures from this constant
long-run average inflation rate due to cost-push shocks should be transitory, expected
inflation “in the medium term” should always be near zero. Thus our result justifies
a policy that seeks to maintain low and stable medium-term inflation expectations,
as at least one criterion that an optimal policy should satisfy.
    The conception of optimal stabilization policy just proposed also provides an
important reason for a central bank to commit itself to an explicit target for inflation,
rather than for other variables (such as real activity), even in the case where cost-
push shocks are expected to be non-trivial. In the optimal control of a forward-looking
system — the kind of problem just posed above — there are generally advantages
from advance commitment of policy, for the sake of influencing expectations at earlier
dates in a way that improves the available stabilization outcomes at those dates. But
what aspect of expectations about the future matter? When the only constraint on
  10
    See Svensson and Woodford (2003) for discussion of certainty equivalence in the context of policy
problems with forward-looking constraints, like the one considered here.


                                               10
what policy can achieve is the aggregate-supply relation (2.1), the only aspect of
future expectations that affect the inflation and output gap that can be achieved in
some period t are the expectations regarding future inflation, Et π t+1 . Hence this is
the type of commitment that is directly relevant: committing to achieve a particular
rate of inflation in the future, that might be different from what would otherwise be
chosen later to best achieve one’s stabilization goals at that time. Given that the
role of a policy commitment should be to anchor the public’s inflation expectations,
a commitment regarding future inflation, and communication by the central bank
regarding the outlook for inflation, are straightforward ways of trying to achieve the
benefits associated with an optimal policy commitment.
    Beyond these general considerations, one can easily characterize the optimal state-
contingent evolution of prices and quantities under a particular assumption about
the character of the disturbances affecting the economy (though this aspect of our
conclusions will obviously be much more dependent upon the precise details of our
assumed model of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy). Associated with
the policy problem stated above are the first-order conditions

                                qπ π t = κ−1 (ϕt − ϕt−1 ),                          (2.2)

                                       qy yt = ϕt ,                                 (2.3)
each of which must hold for each t ≥ 0. Here ϕt is the Lagrange multiplier associated
with the aggregate-supply constraint (2.1). We can solve conditions (2.2)–(2.3), to-
gether with the aggregate-supply relation (2.1), for the optimal evolution of {π t , yt }
given the disturbances {ut }.
    The optimal state-contingent responses can be implemented through commitment
to a constant target for the output-gap-adjusted price level
                                                  qy
                                    p̃t ≡ pt +       yt ,                           (2.4)
                                                 κqπ

where pt denotes log Pt , as discussed in Woodford (2003, chap. 7). A targeting rule of
this form determines the optimal tradeoff between price increase and output decline
that should be selected when the shock occurs; the stance of policy should be neither
so tight as to cause p̃t to decline (as would be required in order for there to be no
increase in prices) nor so loose as to allow p̃t to increase (as would be required in
order for there to be no reduction in output relative to target output). At the same,

                                          11
                                               inflation

         4

         2

         0

        −2
              0        2            4             6           8            10                  12
                                                output
         5


         0


        −5

              0        2            4              6          8            10                  12
                                              price level
         2
                                                                                = discretion
        1.5                                                                     = optimal

         1

        0.5

         0
              0        2            4              6          8            10                  12


Figure 1: Impulse responses to a transitory cost-push shock, under discretionary
policy and under an optimal commitment.

commitment to adhere to such a rule in the future as well automatically implies
invariance of the expected long-run price level and output gap, and determines the
optimal rate of return of both variables to those long-run levels. One should neither
try to return the output gap to zero too quickly (this would allow prices to remain
high and so involve an increase in the gap-adjusted price level), nor too slowly (in
which case the gap-adjusted price level would fall once the cost-push disturbance has
dissipated). As an example, Figure 1 shows the optimal impulse responses of inflation
and the output gap to a purely transitory positive cost-push shock (i.e., the solution
to the first-order conditions listed above in the case of such a disturbance).11 12 One
  11
      This calculation is further explained in Woodford (2003, chap. 7), from which the figure is
taken (see Figure 7.3 of the book). The parameter values assumed are β = 0.99, κ = 0.024, and
qy /qπ = 0.048.
   12
      The figure also shows, for purposes of comparison, the equilibrium responses that would occur



                                              12
notes that the dynamic paths of the log price level and of the output gap are perfect
mirror images of one another, up to scale, so that p̃t is not allowed to vary.
    This is an example of a robustly optimal policy rule in the sense of Giannoni and
Woodford (2002): commitment to the same target criterion is optimal, regardless of
the statistical properties of the disturbance process. (The optimal dynamic responses
shown in Figure 1 will be different in the case of a shock that is not completely
transitory and or not wholly unexpected when it occurs; but it is always the case
that the optimal responses of pt and yt mirror one another in the way shown in the
figure.) This is because the first-order conditions (2.2)–(2.3) can be directly used to
show that p̃t must not change over time under an optimal policy, without making any
assumptions about the nature of the disturbance.
    Such a policy prescription can be viewed as a form of “flexible inflation targeting,”
since the requirement that ∆p̃t = 0 can equivalently be written as
                                                qy
                                        πt +       ∆yt = 0.
                                               κqπ
In this form, the rule states that the acceptable rate of inflation at any point in
time should vary depending on the rate of change of the output gap. Svensson
and Woodford (2005) discuss a more realistic version of this prescription, in which
delays in the effects of monetary policy on spending and prices are taken account of.
Here, instead, we are interested in the ways in which this familiar analysis must be
complicated under alternative assumptions about fiscal policy.


3     Optimal Policy when Only Distorting Taxes Are
      Available: The Case of Optimal Tax Smoothing
It is more realistic, of course, to assume that lump-sum taxes are not available to offset
the fiscal consequences of monetary policy decisions. In the case that we assume the
process {ζ t } to be exogenously given, the intertemporal solvency condition represents
an additional binding constraint on the set of possible equilibrium paths for inflation
under discretionary optimization. In this case, the gap-adjusted price level does not change in
the period of the shock, but it is expected that it will be allowed to rise subsequently, and this
expectation results in a less favorable inflation-output tradeoff for the central bank in the period of
the shock.


                                                13
and output. In Benigno and Woodford (2003), we consider optimal monetary policy
in such an environment, under the assumption that the path of the distorting tax
rate {τ t } is chosen optimally in response to the various types of real disturbances
considered in the model. Here we recapitulate the main conclusions of that analysis,
before turning to cases in which fiscal policy is assumed to be less flexible and/or not
optimally determined.
    In this case, we can view monetary and fiscal policy decisions as being jointly
determined in a coordinated fashion so as to solve a single social welfare problem.
The planning problem is to find state-contingent paths {π t , yt , τ̂ t } to minimize (1.9)
subject to the two constraints (1.11) and (1.12). An especially simple case of this
problem is the limiting case in which prices are perfectly flexible. This case is worth
mentioning since it is easy to see why the absence of lump-sum taxes can make it
optimal for the inflation rate to be highly responsive to fiscal developments, contrary
to what inflation targeting is generally assumed to imply; and analyses of this kind
have sometimes been argued to be relevant to the choice of monetary institutions in
Latin America (Sims, 2002).


3.1    Optimal Policy if Prices are Flexible
In the flexible-price limit of the above model, the coefficient qπ in (1.9) is equal to
zero, and κ−1 in (1.11) is also zero (i.e., the aggregate-supply relation is completely
vertical). The policy problem reduces to the minimization of
                                             X∞
                                    1
                                      qy Et0     β t−t0 yt2                          (3.1)
                                    2        t=t     0


subject to the constraints
                                   yt + ψ(τ̂ t − τ̂ ∗t ) = 0                         (3.2)
and (1.12). Using (3.2) to substitute for yt in (3.1) allows us to equivalently write
the stabilization objective as
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                 Et0          β t−t0 (τ̂ t − τ̂ ∗t )2 ,
                                       t=t0

in which case the objective of policy can be thought of as tax smoothing, as in the
classic analysis of Barro (1979).13


                                                14
    The solution will obviously involve yt = 0 at all times, since it is feasible to achieve
this, if the monetary and fiscal authorities cooperate to do so. The fiscal authority
must choose τ̂ t = τ̂ ∗t at all times in order to ensure this, while the monetary authority
must vary the inflation rate π t as necessary to ensure government solvency. It is easily
seen that (1.12) requires that in such an equilibrium,

                                           π t = b̂t−1 + ft .

Thus unexpected changes in the fiscal stress term must be accommodated entirely
by surprise variations in the rate of inflation, as in the analysis of Chari and Kehoe
(1999). The tax rate should fluctuate only to extent that there are fluctuations in τ̂ ∗t ;
i.e., only to the extent that variations in the tax rate are useful as supply-side policy,
to offset inefficient supply disturbances.14
     This conclusion implies that an optimal policy will involve highly volatile inflation,
and extreme sensitivity of inflation to fiscal shocks in particular. This is the basis of
Sims’ (2002) critique of dollarization as a policy prescription for Mexico; at least a
strict form of inflation targeting would presumably be rejected on the same grounds.
But the analysis just sketched neglects the welfare costs of volatile inflation, which
are stressed in the literature on inflation targeting. Here we wish to consider how
important the Chari-Kehoe argument should be expected to be, in the presence of a
realistic degree of price stickiness.


3.2     Optimal Policy if Prices are Sticky
In the more general case of our model (with some degree of stickiness of prices), the
first-order conditions for the optimal policy problem stated above are

                           qπ π t = κ−1 (ϕ1t − ϕ1,t−1 ) − (ϕ2t − ϕ2,t−1 )                          (3.3)


                        qy yt = ϕ1t − [(1 − β)by + σ −1 ]ϕ2t + σ −1 ϕ2,t−1                         (3.4)
  13
     Thus our stabilization objective (1.9) has not omitted the concerns of the literature on optimal
tax smoothing; the welfare losses associated with a failure to optimally time the collection of taxes
are already implicit in the output-gap stabilization objective.
  14
     As shown in Benigno and Woodford (2003), there are a wide variety of types of inefficient supply
disturbances that may require such an offset, in the case that the steady state is sufficiently distorted
as a result of either market power or a high level of public debt.

                                                 15
                                               Fiscal Shock
         1
                                                                                       ρ= 0
                                                                                       ρ=.1
        0.9                                                                            ρ=.3
                                                                                       ρ=.7
        0.8


        0.7


        0.6


        0.5


        0.4


        0.3


        0.2


        0.1


         0
         −2      −1        0       1       2           3      4    5       6       7          8


                               Figure 2: Alternative fiscal shocks.



                                          ϕ2t = Et ϕ2,t+1                                         (3.5)


                                       ψϕ1t = (1 − β)bτ ϕ2t                                       (3.6)
where now ϕ1t is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the aggregate supply rela-
tion and ϕ2t is the multiplier associated with the intertemporal solvency condition.
Conditions (3.3)–(3.6) together with the two structural equations (1.11) and (1.12)
are to be solved for the paths of the endogenous variables {π t , yt , τ̂ t , b̂t , ϕ1t , ϕ2t }, given
an exogenous process for {ft }.

   The type of response to shocks implied by these equations can be illustrated using
a numerical example. As in Benigno and Woodford (2003), we adopt the parameter
values β = 0.99, ω = 0.473, σ −1 = 0.157, κ = 0.0236, θ = 10, τ̄ = 0.2, b̄/Ȳ = 2.4, and


                                                  16
                                                Debt
        1.4
                                                                                      ρ= 0
                                                                                      ρ=.1
                                                                                      ρ=.3
        1.2                                                                           ρ=.7



         1




        0.8




        0.6




        0.4




        0.2




         0
         −2      −1       0       1       2         3     4       5       6       7          8


Figure 3: Impulse response of the public debt to a pure fiscal shock, for alternative
degrees of persistence.

Φ = 1/3.15 As in that paper, we consider for purposes of illustration the effects of
an exogenous increase in transfer programs ζ̂ t equal to one percent of steady-state
GDP. Here, however, we consider the consequences of alternative possible degrees of
persistence of such a disturbance; we assume that the value of ζ̂ t following the shock
is expected to decay as ρt , where the coefficient of serial correlation ρ is allowed to
take values between zero (the case shown in the earlier paper) and 0.7.
  15
     Thus we assume a calibration in which steady-state tax revenues are 20 percent of GDP and
the steady-state public debt is 60 percent of annual GDP [which corresponds to 2.4 times quarterly
GDP]. Steady-state distortions are such that the social marginal cost of additional production would
be 1/3 less than the price charged for goods; this requires that we assume a steady-state wage markup
of 8 percent. The degree of price stickiness is calibrated on the basis of the estimates of Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997) for the U.S., which correspond to an average time between price changes of
29 weeks.



                                               17
                                        Tax Rate
        1.6
                                                                          ρ= 0
                                                                          ρ=.1
        1.4                                                               ρ=.3
                                                                          ρ=.7

        1.2


         1


        0.8


        0.6


        0.4


        0.2


         0


       −0.2
          −2   −1      0      1     2        3     4    5      6      7          8


Figure 4: Impulse response of the tax rate to a pure fiscal shock, for alternative
degrees of persistence.

     Figure 2 shows the impulse response of the shock ζ̂ t for the different values of
ρ considered. Figure 3 then shows the impulse response of the public debt b̂t in
response to a pure fiscal shock of this kind under the optimal policy, for each of the
alternative values of ρ. Figure 4 shows the corresponding responses of the tax rate
τ̂ t under the optimal policy, and Figure 5 the associated responses of the inflation
rate. Contrary to the optimal policy in the case of flexible prices (discussed further
in Benigno and Woodford, 2003), it is optimal to respond to a “pure fiscal shock”
of this kind by permanently increasing the level of real public debt, and by planning
on a corresponding permanent increase in the tax rate. (The increase in the level of
the real public debt under the optimal policy is more gradual the greater the degree
of persistence of the fiscal shock, whereas it was immediate in the case of the purely
transitory shock considered in our previous paper.) Optimal policy does involve some
unanticipated inflation at the time of the shock, as in the Chari-Kehoe analysis, but


                                        18
                                                  Inflation
                                                                                          ρ= 0
          0.07
                                                                                          ρ=.1
                                                                                          ρ=.3
                                                                                          ρ=.7
          0.06



          0.05



          0.04



          0.03



          0.02



          0.01



            0


            −2      −1       0        1       2        3      4       5       6       7          8


Figure 5: Impulse response of the inflation rate to a pure fiscal shock, for alternative
degrees of persistence.

it is not nearly large enough to offset the fiscal stress completely, which is why future
taxes are also increased.
     In fact, as shown in Figure 5, the inflationary impact of a fiscal shock under the
optimal policy regime is quite small. In the case of a purely transitory (one-quarter)
increase in the size of transfer programs by an amount equal to one percent of GDP,
optimal policy allows an increase in the inflation rate that quarter of only two basis
points (at an annualized rate,16 and the increase in inflation is limited to the quarter
of the shock. This compares with an increase in the inflation rate of nearly two
percentage points under the optimal policy in the case of flexible prices. Nor is the
conclusion that the optimal inflation response is small dependent upon an extreme
calibration of the degree of price stickiness. Benigno and Woodford (2003) shows that
the optimal response (to a purely transitory fiscal shock) is similarly small even if
 16
      Thus the log price level is allowed to increase that quarter by only half a basis point.


                                                  19
prices are assumed to be much less sticky than under the calibration used here; there
is a dramatic difference between optimal policy in the case of full flexibility of prices
and what is optimal if prices are even slightly sticky (i.e., the short-run aggregate-
supply tradeoff is not completely vertical). The optimal inflation response is larger
if the shock is more persistent, since in this case the cumulative cost of the increased
transfers, and hence the total increase in fiscal stress, is several times as large. But
even in the case that ρ = 0.7, the optimal increase in the inflation rate is only about
7 basis points. And the effect on inflation is purely transitory under optimal policy,
regardless of the degree of persistence of the fiscal shock itself.
    This last conclusion — that variations in inflation should be purely transitory
under the optimal policy, so that there are never any variations at all in the expected
rate of inflation — is quite robust to the type of shock considered. The conclusion
follows directly from the first-order conditions that characterize optimal policy. Con-
dition (3.3) implies that forecastable variations in the inflation rate should be allowed
only to the extent that there are forecastable variations in one or the other of the La-
grange multipliers. Condition (3.5) implies that there are no forecastable variations
in the multiplier associated with the solvency constraint, while (3.6) implies that the
two multipliers should covary perfectly with one another, so that there are no fore-
castable variations in the multiplier associated with the aggregate-supply constraint
either, under an optimal policy.
    So it is true that if only distorting sources of government revenue exist, the fiscal
consequences of monetary policy matter; and this creates additional reasons for de-
partures from strict price stability to be optimal. It is now optimal for the inflation
rate to vary, at least to some extent, in response to disturbances (such as a change in
the size of government transfer programs) that are irrelevant in the classic analysis
reviewed in the previous section. But optimal policy continues to possess important
features of an inflation targeting regime. The rate of inflation that is forecastable
for the future should never vary, regardless of the kind of disturbances hitting the
economy; and the unforecastable variations in inflation that should be allowed are
quite small.
    It is true that it is no longer optimal to target a constant value for the output-
gap-adjusted price level p̃t ; in fact, the optimal policy is now one that will involve
some degree of “base drift” in the price level, since the transitory inflation shown in
Figure 5 permanently shifts the price level. Nonetheless, it is possible to characterize


                                         20
optimal monetary policy by commitment to a target criterion that is only a slight
generalization of the one presented above for the case where lump-sum taxes exist.
We return to this topic in section 6 below.


3.3      Consequences of Additional Fiscal Instruments
The analysis of Benigno and Woodford (2003) assumes that a small and quite specific
set of policy instruments are available to the fiscal authority: the only source of
government revenue is a proportional sales tax, and the only kind of government
debt that may be issued is a very short-term (one-period) riskless nominal bond.
Here we briefly discuss the consequences of allowing for additional instruments, and
hence a broader range of possible fiscal policies.
      Not surprisingly, additional fiscal instruments, if used skilfully enough, can allow a
better equilibrium to be achieved; and this can make it simpler to characterize optimal
monetary policy, as the need for a limited set of instruments to simultaneously serve
multiple stabilization objectives ceases to be a problem. Suppose, for example, that
it is possible to independently vary the level of several different types of distorting
taxes. With two distinct tax rates, the cost-push term ψτ̂ t in (2.1) becomes instead
ψ 1 τ̂ 1t + ψ 2 τ̂ 2t , while the term bτ τ̂ t in (1.12) becomes instead b1 τ̂ 1t + b2 τ̂ 2t . In general,
not only will there be different elasticities in the case of different taxes, but the ratios
of the elasticities will not be the same in the two equations; the fact that a given
percentage increase in one tax results in a 20 percent larger increase in revenues in the
case of one tax than another does not imply that it also results in a 20 percent larger
“cost-push” effect. Thus the existence of multiple taxes that can be independently
varied (and are not at some boundary value under an optimal policy) will generally
imply that the fiscal authority can independently shift the aggregate-supply relation
and affect the government’s budget.
      If this is possible, then a lump-sum tax is essentially possible, as some combination
of tax increases and decreases will be able to increase tax revenues without any net
effect on the aggregate-supply relation.17 But this does not return us to the classic
situation analyzed in section 2. In fact, matters are even simpler, for tax policy can
  17
    Here we assume that the various taxes in question affect all sectors of the economy identically,
as in the case that both a sales tax and a wage income tax exist. Under this assumption, taxes
create no distortions other than the effect indicated by the cost-push term in the aggregate-supply
relation.


                                                 21
in this case also be used to offset the cost-push effects of other disturbances, without
any consequences for government solvency. So constraint (1.12) ceases to bind, as
in section 2, but tax policy can be used to shift the aggregate-supply relation, as
in sections 3.1 and 3.2. Optimal policy then involves using taxes to offset the cost-
push term ut entirely, and then using monetary policy to completely stabilize both
inflation and the output gap. (Taxes are also used to ensure that this equilibrium
is consistent with intertemporal government solvency.) In such a case, the optimal
monetary policy will be a strict inflation target, that maintains π t = 0 at all times,
regardless of the shocks to which the economy may be subject.18
    This indicates that when tax policy can be varied in any of a range of directions,
and the fiscal authority can be expected to exercise its power skilfully, the case for
inflation targeting is quite strong indeed. But it is not obvious that this is the case
of greatest practical interest. For instance, if the tax rates are each required to be
non-negative, then it may be optimal to raise all revenue using only one tax, the
one with the lowest ratio of ψ j to bj (hence the least distortion created per dollar of
revenue raised); in such case, the optimal policy problem would end up being similar
to the one treated above, where there is assumed to be only a single type of distorting
tax.
    Allowing for the possibility of issuing other forms of government debt would also
increase the flexibility of fiscal policy, and reduce the constraints on what can be
achieved by monetary policy. For example, if it were possible to issue arbitrary kinds
of state-contingent debt, then in principle it would be possible to arrange for b̂t−1 to
vary with the state that is realized at date t in such a way that b̂t−1 + ft never varies,
regardless of the exogenous disturbances. In such case, complete stabilization of both
inflation and the output gap would again be possible; hence the optimal monetary
policy would be a strict inflation target of zero. However, the supposition that state-
contingent payoffs on government debt can be arranged in such a sophisticated way
is hardly realistic.
    One way in which it surely is possible for countries to vary the kind of debt that
they issue is with respect to maturity. If government debt does not all mature in
one period, then b̂t−1 is no longer a predetermined state variable; instead, it will
  18
     Our ability to achieve the first-best outcome with a sufficient number of taxes is reminiscent
of the conclusion of Correia et al. (2003) in the context of a model with a different kind of price
stickiness.


                                              22
depend on the market valuation of bonds in period t, which will generally depend on
the shocks that occur at that date. Since the prices of bonds of different maturities
will be sensitive to shocks occurring at date t in different ways, different maturity
structures of the public debt will make b̂t−1 state-contingent in different ways. With
a sufficient number of maturities available, it may well be possible once again to bring
about the kind of state-contingency that makes b̂t−1 + ft independent of shocks, so
that there is no need for state-contingent debt, as proposed by Angeletos (2001). In
this case, it would again be possible to fully stabilize both inflation and the output
gap, and so once again a strict inflation target would be the optimal monetary policy.
    It may be worth developing these points in more detail. Our analysis above can
easily be extended to allow for the existence of longer-maturity nominal government
debt. In the most general case, the intertemporal budget constraint (1.8) takes the
form                   (∞            )       (∞                      )
                         X                     X                Pt−1
                    Et        Rt,T sT = Et          Rt,T bt−1,T        ,
                         T =t                  T =t
                                                                 PT

where for any T ≥ t, bt−1,T denotes the real value at time t − 1 of the debt that
matures at time T . A log-linear approximation can be computed as before, yielding
           ∞
                    "          T
                                     #                  ∞
           X                  X                         X
b̂t−1 − Et            −1
             dT −t+1 σ yT +       π s = −ft + (1 − β)Et   β T −t [by yT + bτ (τ̂ T − τ̂ ∗T )].
          T =t                     s=t                                          T =t
                                                                                                                    (3.7)
Here we have defined                    ∞
                                        X               (bt−1,T − b̄T +1−t )
                              b̂t−1 =          β T −t                        ,
                                        T =t
                                                                b̄

where b̄i is the steady-state real value of i-period debt, and b̄ is the steady-state real
value of all outstanding government liabilities, given by
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                           b̄ =          β i−1 b̄i .
                                                   i=1


The weights di are defined as di = β i−1 b̄i /b̄ for each i ≥ 1. Finally, the composite
“fiscal stress” term ft is now defined by
              ∞
              X           h                    i                       ∞
                                                                       X
    ft = Et                   −1
                     dT −t+1 σ (gT −     ŶT∗ )    − (1 − β)Et                β T −t [by ŶT∗ + bτ τ̂ ∗T + b0ξ ξ T ],
              T =t                                                     T =t




                                                    23
which can be written in a more compact way as
                              ∞
                              X                                             ∞
                                                                            X
                  ft = Et             dT −t+1 h0ξ ξ T     + (1 − β)Et              β T −t fξ0 ξ T ,   (3.8)
                               T =t                                         T =t

again using the notation defined in Benigno and Woodford (2003).
    The planning problem is to find state-contingent paths {π t , yt , τ̂ t } to minimize
(1.9) subject to constraints (1.11) and (3.7). As before the composite disturbance ft
completely summarizes the information at date t about the exogenous disturbances
that interfere with complete stabilization of inflation and of the output gap. However,
unlike what we found above for the case of only one-period debt, it can now be
possible to completely stabilize output and inflation to their optimal level even when
prices are sticky by appropriately choosing the steady-state structure of maturity.
This is because the stochastic properties of the “fiscal stress” term now depend on
the maturity structure; and with an appropriate choice of the maturity structure,
one can even ensure that ft is identically equal to zero at all times, in which case
complete achievement of both stabilization objectives will be possible.
    Let government debt have a maximum maturity of N periods and let J be the
number of stochastic disturbances of the model. Let us suppose furthermore (purely
for illustrative purposes, for our argument could easily be generalized) that the dis-
turbances are all AR(1) processes,

                                               ξ jt = ρj ξ jt−1 + εjt

where εjt is a white-noise process and |ρj | < 1 for each disturbance j. In this case
equation (3.8) takes the form
                        N
                        X          J
                                   X                                J
                                                                    X
                 ft =         di         ρij hξj ξ jt   + (1 − β)         (1 − ρj β)−1 fξj ξ jt ,
                        i=1        j=1                              j=1

where hξj and fξj are the jth components of the vectors hξ and fξ , respectively.
    It now follows (generically) that for ft to be zero at all times, it is necessary and
sufficient that
                                     XN
                                         ρj i di = zj                                (3.9)
                                                  i=1

where zj is defined by
                                   zj = (1 − β)(1 − ρj β)−1 h−1
                                                             ξ j fξ j


                                                         24
for each j. Recalling that
                                        N
                                        X
                                               di = 1,                               (3.10)
                                        i=1

then equation (3.11) together
   Then the set of J equations (3.9) together with the identity
                                        N
                                        X
                                               di = 1                                (3.11)
                                         i=1

forms a set of J + 1 equations in the N unknowns {di }. We can write this system of
linear equations using matrix notation. To this end, we define the matrix
                                                     
                                    1 ρ1 ... ρ1 N −1
                                                     
                                  1 ρ2 ... ρ2 N −1 
                                  . . .         ..   
                            A≡  
                                    .. .. ..      .   ,
                                                      
                                                N −1 
                                  1 ρJ ... ρJ        
                                    1 1 ...      1

and let z be the vector whose first J elements are the zj , and whose final element is
1. We can then write the system of linear equations in the compact form

                                         Ad = z,                                     (3.12)

where d is the vector of coefficients di . Standard results ensure that there is a solution
of (3.12) as long as A is of full rank. In this case, there is at least one vector d — i.e.,
at least one steady-state maturity structure — such that ft = 0, so that complete
stabilization of both inflation and the output gap can be achieved.
    In particular, if N = J + 1, there is exactly one solution for any given z, when A
is of full rank. For example, in the case of a single stochastic disturbance (J = 1), the
matrix A is always of full rank, and it is possible to achieve the first-best outcome just
by issuing nominal debt with one and two-period maturities. The optimal maturity
structure in this case depends on the persistence of the shock, as well as on its
contribution to movements in the fiscal stress measure ft . If J > 1, A is of full rank
if and only if ρi 6= ρj for each i and j. (Otherwise there is in general no solution.)
    Angeletos (2001) has shown in a flexible-price model that to complete the markets
it is necessary and sufficient to issue nominal debt which has at least N −period

                                           25
maturity, where N is the number of states of nature in the model. Here we establish
that in a log-linear model, as Angeletos conjectured on the basis of his numerical
results, what matters is not the number of distinct states of nature but only the
number of stochastic disturbances. Thus as long as debt can be issued in moderately
long maturities, it will quite generally be possible, at least in principle, to choose a
maturity structure that achieves the first-best outcome. In any such case, the optimal
monetary policy will simply aim at complete price stability, while the distorting tax
rate will be used to offset cost-push disturbances, so that zero inflation is compatible
with a zero output gap.
    However, as noted by Buera and Nicolini (2004) in a related context, the kind of
maturity structure required for such an outcome may be quite implausible, involving
very large long and short positions in different maturities. They also show that the
optimal maturity structure may be extremely sensitive to small changes in model
parameters, such as small changes in the serial correlation of disturbance processes.
(This can be seen from our analysis above, since a small change in these parameters
can cause the rank condition to fail.) Thus once again, while in principle the op-
portunity to increase the flexibility of fiscal policy in this way can greatly facilitate
monetary stabilization policy, the practical relevance of this case is open to ques-
tion. We shall accordingly restrict the remainder of our analysis in this paper to
the case of a single maturity of government debt, specifically, one very short-term
(single-period) debt. In fact, most countries with serious problems with fiscal imbal-
ances are observed to issue almost exclusively short-maturity debt; so our assumption
seems likely to represent the case of greatest relevance for the countries for which the
concerns addressed in this paper are most likely to be relevant. We also note that
this emphasis is consistent with our desire to consider the cases in which possible
constraints on fiscal policy are most likely to create problems for inflation targeting.
The presence of a larger number of fiscal instruments, or fewer constraints on the
way in which they are used, will generally strengthen the case for inflation targeting;
but our interest is in the extent to which a form of inflation targeting continues to be
desirable even when fiscal policy is much less helpful.




                                         26
4     Optimal Monetary Policy when Fiscal Policy is
      Exogenous
We next consider a still more constrained case, in which {Gt , ζ t , τ t } are all assumed to
be exogenous processes, determined by political factors that the central bank cannot
influence. This is the type of fiscal policy assumed by Loyo (1999) in the analysis
to which Sims (2005) refers in his critique of inflation targeting; in a flexible-price
model of the kind assumed by Loyo, it implies a purely exogenous evolution of the
real primary government budget surplus {st }. In such a case, the central bank must
beware that a tight-money policy does not cause explosive growth of the public debt,
for it is assumed that neither taxes nor government spending will be adjusted to
prevent such dynamics.
    In this case, the intertemporal solvency condition (1.12) constrains the possible
paths for inflation and output that can be achieved by any monetary policy, and there
are no endogenous fiscal instruments with which to adjust this constraint. At the same
time, the possible paths for inflation and output are constrained by the aggregate-
supply tradeoff (1.11), and — contrary to the assumption in the previous section
— there is no endogenous fiscal instrument that can shift this relation either. The
central bank’s ability to achieve its inflation and output-gap stabilization objectives
is accordingly more tightly constrained.
    Indeed, as Sims (2005) notes, full price stability (or even complete stabilization
of the inflation rate at some non-zero value) will typically be infeasible under these
assumptions — unlike the situation considered in the previous section, where this
is a possible monetary policy, though not quite the optimal one. Condition (1.11)
allows one to easily derive the unique output-gap process consistent with complete
stabilization of the inflation rate; but the process {yt } obtained in this way (together
with the assumed constant inflation rate and the exogenously given tax process) will
almost surely not also satisfy the intertemporal solvency condition (1.12), for all pos-
sible realizations of the disturbances that affect the fiscal stress term ft . This does
not, however, mean that monetary policy is powerless to stabilize either nominal or
real variables. While one cannot commit to completely stable inflation both imme-
diately and for the indefinite future, there remains a choice among alternative paths
for inflation, some of which involve inflationary spirals of the sort modeled by Loyo,
and others of which involve a return to price stability fairly quickly. Here we con-

                                           27
                                           Debt
        1.2

                     endog. tax
         1           exog. tax


        0.8


        0.6


        0.4


        0.2


         0


       −0.2


       −0.4


       −0.6


       −0.8
          −2    −1          0     1   2        3    4      5      6       7      8


Figure 6: Impulse response of the public debt to a pure fiscal shock under optimal
monetary policy, under two alternative assumptions about tax policy.

sider the central bank’s optimal choice among the set of possible equilibria, given the
constraints implied by exogenous fiscal policy.
    The optimization problem in this case is to find paths {π t , yt } that minimize (1.9)
subject to the constraints (1.11) and (1.12), in which we now treat {τ̂ t } as another ex-
ogenous disturbance process. The first-order conditions for this optimization problem
are again the same conditions (3.3) – (3.5) as before. The only difference is that (3.6)
need no longer hold (as the tax rate need not be chosen optimally); this condition is
replaced by the exogenously given process {τ̂ t }.
    Optimal state-contingent responses to exogenous disturbances of various types
can easily be derived in this case, using the same methods as in the previous section.
For purposes of illustration, we again consider the case of a “pure fiscal shock,” by
which we mean an exogenous increase in the size of government transfer programs,
and to simplify our figures we present results only for the case ρ = 0.7. Figure 6 shows

                                          28
                                          Inflation
       0.6
                                                                         endog. tax
                                                                         exog. tax

       0.5




       0.4




       0.3




       0.2




       0.1




        0


        −2      −1      0      1      2        3      4     5       6      7          8


Figure 7: Impulse response of the inflation rate, under the same two assumptions
about policy.

the impulse response of the real public debt to such a shock under optimal monetary
policy, both under the assumption that tax policy also responds optimally (as in the
previous section) and under the assumption that the path of the tax rate does not
respond at all. (The former case is shown by the solid line, which is the same as in
Figure 3; the latter case is shown by the dashed line.) Figure 7 shows the impulse
response of the inflation rate under optimal monetary policy, under the same two
possible assumptions about fiscal policy.
    As Figure 7 indicates, the degree to which it is optimal to allow a fiscal shock to
affect the inflation rate is much greater in the case that tax policy cannot be expected
to adjust in response to the shock. The optimal immediate effect on the inflation rate
is about 8 times as large, in our calibrated example, in the case of the exogenously
given path for the tax rate; and it is also slightly more persistent, so that the inflation
rate expected over the next few quarters should be allowed to rise slightly in response
to such a shock. The larger immediate increase in inflation means that reduction of

                                          29
the real burden of the public debt through unexpected inflation plays a bigger role in
offsetting the fiscal stress in this case. This is necessary because under the assumption
of an exogenous path of taxes, the long-run level of the real public debt cannot be
increased (as would occur under the optimal fiscal policy); instead, it must continue
to equal the unique level consistent with intertemporal solvency given the expected
long-run tax rate. As shown in Figure 6, the level of the real public debt must fall in
response to the fiscal shock, rather than rising, so that it can approach its unchanged
long-run level from below. (The real public debt must be expected to grow over the
quarters in which the size of transfer programs is still temporarily high, but this is no
longer a surprise.) This can occur only through a sufficiently large surprise increase
in inflation in the quarter in which the shock occurs, just as under the optimal policy
for the flexible-price economy analyzed by Chari and Kehoe (1999).
    Nonetheless, even under this extreme assumption about the non-responsiveness
of tax policy, an optimal monetary policy does not involve too great an increase in
inflation in response to a disturbance that increases fiscal stress. In the case of the
shock considered in Figure 7, the cumulative increase in the price level is still only
about a quarter of a percentage point, whereas the price increase under optimal pol-
icy for the flexible-price economy would be about six times as large. Even when tax
increases do not contribute to relieving fiscal stress at all, less inflation is required
to maintain intertemporal solvency in the case of a sticky-price economy, because
inflationary policy stimulates real activity, and the resulting higher real incomes im-
ply higher tax revenues, that contribute substantially to government solvency in the
equilibrium shown by the dashed lines in Figures 6-7.
    This illustrates an important benefit of an appropriate managed inflation targeting
regime, even in an economy in which fiscal policy is purely exogenous, as assumed
in the pessimistic case considered by Sims. The central bank is able to maintain
intertemporal solvency without too much inflation in our example exactly because
inflationary expectations are contained even while a transitory inflation is allowed
to erode the real value of existing nominal claims on the government. If expected
inflation does not increase much at the time of the fiscal shock, the aggregate-supply
tradeoff (1.11) implies a relatively large increase in real output for a given size increase
in the current inflation rate, and so a substantial improvement in government solvency
can be obtained without too much inflation. If, instead, the expected future inflation
rate were to rise as much as the current inflation rate (or even more), the increase


                                           30
in real activity resulting from inflationary monetary policy would be tiny, or non-
existent, or even of the opposite sign. In that case tax revenues would increase little
if at all, and all of the fiscal stress would have to be offset through a reduction in
the real value of the public debt due to unexpected inflation; the required immediate
increase in inflation would then be many times larger.
    We can illustrate this tradeoff quantitatively by considering alternative possible
responses to a disturbance to the fiscal stress.19 Suppose that in response to such a
shock in period t, monetary policy allows the path of inflation to change in such a
way that
                                Et π t+j − Et−1 π t+j = π̃ t λj
for all j ≥ 0, for some initial inflation response π̃ t and some persistence factor 0 ≤
λ ≤ 1. In addition, suppose for simplicity that the disturbance does not change the
expected path of the tax gap {Et [τ̂ t+j − τ ∗t+j ]}.20 For any choice of λ, there exists a
unique value of π̃ t (given the size of the shock at date t) such that this represents a
possible equilibrium response under a suitable monetary policy. We can then consider
how π̃ t , and hence the entire path of the inflation response, varies with the choice of
λ.
    Solving (1.11) for the implied response of the output gap, we find that

                                                         1 − βλ
                                Et yt+j − Et−1 yt+j =           π̃ t λj
                                                            κ
for each j ≥ 0. Substituting this and the conjectured inflation response into the
intertemporal solvency condition (1.12), we find that the condition is satisfied if and
only if
                                             f˜t
                       π̃ t =                                  .                   (4.1)
                              1 + σ −1 (1 − βλ) + (1 − β)by /κ
This indicates how the initial effect on inflation relates to the expected degree of
persistence of the effect of the shock on the inflation rate. A higher value of λ makes
the denominator of (4.1) a smaller positive quantity, meaning that π̃ t must be larger.
  19
      This might be the pure fiscal shock considered in the numerical examples presented thus, but
it might also be any other kind of exogenous disturbance that affects the term ft .
   20
      In the case that the path of the tax gap also changes, a derivation like the one sketched below is
again possible, except that in the numerator of (4.1), instead of f˜t one has f˜t plus a multiple of the
present value of changes in the expected tax gap. The conclusions obtained below about the way in
which π̃ t depends on the value of λ continue to apply.


                                                31
Thus a policy that makes the effect of the shock on inflation more persistent will
involve a larger initial effect on inflation, as well as (a fortiori) a larger effect on
inflation at all later dates.
    It is thus important, even under the constraints assumed in this section, for the
central bank to credibly commit itself to restore low inflation relatively soon following
a disturbance that creates fiscal stress. This requires both that monetary policy be
clearly focused on inflation control, and that the central bank’s commitment to an
essentially constant medium-term inflation target be unwavering, even when fiscal
stress requires a short-run departure from the medium-term target. The credibility
of such a commitment will be greater, of course, to the extent that the central bank
is able to explain why the size of departure that is currently occurring is consistent
with the principles to which it is committed, rather than representing an abrogation
of those principles or a concession that they are frequently inapplicable. We next
consider the formulation of a more flexible form of target criterion that would be
suitable for this purpose.


5    An Optimal Targeting Rule for Monetary Policy
We have argued that even in the case of severe constraints of the degree to which an
optimal adjustment of tax policy can be expected, an optimal monetary policy will
involve a commitment not to allow temporary increases in inflation to persist, so that
medium-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored. However, it may be asked
what kind of commitment regarding the future conduct of monetary policy would
serve this purpose, without appearing to promise different conduct in the future than
the kind that is exhibited in the present — a type of promise that would not easily
be made credible.
    The answer, in our view, is that monetary policy should be conducted in such a
way as to seek at all times to conform to an appropriately formulated target criterion.
The target criterion should both explain how much inflation can be allowed in the
short run, in response to a given type and size of disturbance, and guarantee (if it
is expected to be followed in the future as well) that there will be no significant
fluctuations in the inflation rate that should be forecasted more than a few quarters
into the future.
    Can one find a criterion that will serve this purpose, under each of the variety

                                         32
of assumptions about the fiscal regime that we have considered above, and for all
of the different types of disturbances that might affect the economy? In fact we
can, using the same method as was illustrated in section 2, namely, the use of the
first-order conditions that characterize optimal policy to derive a target criterion that
must be satisfied in an optimal equilibrium.21 Because conditions (3.3) – (3.5) must
hold if monetary policy is optimal, under all of the fiscal regimes considered thus
far,22 a target criterion that follows from (and in turn guarantees) these conditions
will be a criterion for the optimality of monetary policy that will be generally useful.
Since the first-order conditions also apply regardless of the nature of the (additive)
exogenous disturbances that may perturb the model structural relations, the resulting
criterion is also robust to alternative assumptions about the statistical properties of
the disturbances, as stressed by Giannoni and Woodford (2002).
     A robustly optimal target criterion that is equivalent to demanding that there exist
Lagrange multiplier processes {ϕ1t , ϕ2t } that satisfy (3.3) – (3.5) can be formulated as
follows. As in the simpler case treated in section 2, optimal policy can be described in
terms of commitment to a target for the output-gap-adjusted price level p̃t defined in
(2.4). The central bank should use its policy instrument to ensure that each period,
p̃t satisfies
                             p̃t = p∗t−1 + (1 + η)(pt∗ − p∗t−1 ),                    (5.1)
where
                                          σ −1
                                    η≡              > 0,
                                     (1 − β)by + κ
and p∗t is the central bank’s estimate (conditional on information at t) of the long-run
(output-gap-adjusted) price level consistent with intertemporal government solvency.
    Implementation of policy in accordance with this criterion would require the cen-
tral bank to estimate the current value of the long-run price-level target p∗t as part
of each decision cycle. This would be determined, in principle, in the following way.
One observes that (5.1) implies that
                                            Et p̃T = p∗t
  21
      Further details of the derivation are given in Benigno and Woodford (2005b), where we also
discuss the form of targeting rule that is appropriate under a broader class of possible assumptions
about fiscal policy.
   22
      Note that these same conditions also hold in the case that lump-sum taxes exist, as assumed in
section 2. But in that case we also have the condition that ϕ2t = 0 at all times, which allows the
first-order conditions to be reduced to the system (2.2) – (2.3).

                                               33
                                              ∼
                                            p
       0.7
                                                                 endog. tax
                                                                 exog. tax

       0.6




       0.5




       0.4




       0.3




       0.2




       0.1




        0
        −2     −1      0      1      2        3    4      5       6       7     8


Figure 8: Optimal response of the output-gap-adjusted price level p̃t under the two
polar assumptions about fiscal policy.

for all T ≥ t + 1. Thus a value for p∗t implies not just a value for p̃t , but a complete
expected path {Et p̃T } for all T ≥ t. The central bank’s model of the economy —
including its model of the behavior of the fiscal authority — can then be used to
derive the implied forecast paths for the other endogenous variables corresponding to
a given current estimate of p∗t . The right estimate of p∗t is then the one that leads to
a set of forecast paths consistent with intertemporal government solvency.
    The degree to which p∗t will be found to increase in response to a given disturbance
will depend on the nature of the fiscal regime. For example, Figure 8 shows the
optimal responses of the path of the output-gap adjusted price level in the case of
both an endogenous (optimal) and an exogenous path for the tax rate, for the same
kind of real disturbance as in Figures 6 and 7. One notes that in both cases, the
shape of the optimal response of this variable is the same; the response in each case


                                         34
is simply scaled in proportion to the different size jump in the long-run price level.23
The same would be equally true if we were to plot optimal responses to other types
of exogenous disturbances, or if we assumed a different degree of persistence of the
disturbance; this is the feature of optimal policy that allows such a simple target
criterion to provide a robust guide for policy. The same kind of criterion applies
as well in the case that lump-sum taxes exist, as assumed in section 2; but in this
case, there is never any need to vary the long-run price-level target in order to ensure
solvency, and so (5.1) applies with p∗t equal to a constant p∗ .
    Implementation of this kind of targeting procedure requires the central bank to
make projections, not only of the future evolution of prices and real activity, but also
of the evolution of the government finances and the public debt, so as to evaluate the
consistency of alternative monetary policies with intertemporal government solvency.
Some may fear that this sounds like a prescription for exactly the sort of “fiscal
dominance” of monetary policy against which Fraga et al. (2003) warn. It is true
that we have described a regime under which monetary policy could be conducted in a
constrained-optimal way, even if the fiscal authority were understood to be completely
unwilling ever to adjust fiscal instruments in order to maintain intertemporal solvency.
However, the knowledge that the central bank reasons in this way should not provide
an incentive for the fiscal authority to be profligate, relying upon the central bank to
adjust monetary policy as necessary in order to accommodate any degree of spending.
Under the regime proposed here, the central bank would make its own judgment
regarding the degree of fiscal adjustment that could properly be expected, given the
constraints under which fiscal policy is expected to be determined, and then target
a path for the output-gap adjusted price level accordingly. It would be appropriate
for the central bank to publicize the projections on the basis of which this decision is
made. Among other things, this would make clear to the fiscal authority what degree
of eventual revenue increases are being counted upon by the central bank, and will
be necessary in order for intertemporal solvency to be maintained, given the central
bank’s target path for the gap-adjusted price level.

  23
    Benigno and Woodford (2005b) show that the same is true in the case that the tax rate is
predetermined for a certain period of time, after which it adjusts optimally. In such a case, the size
of the response is intermediate between the two cases shown in Figure 13.




                                               35
6    Conclusions
The nature of fiscal policy has important consequences for the optimal conduct of
monetary policy, for two reasons. On the one hand, monetary policy has consequences
for the intertemporal solvency of the government under a given fiscal policy, and so
a change in monetary policy can require corresponding changes in fiscal policy, that
will have welfare consequences if only distorting sources of government revenue exist.
And on the other hand, fiscal policy decisions generally have supply-side consequences
that affect the available tradeoff between inflation stabilization and the central bank’s
ability to stabilize the welfare-relevant output gap. Hence alternative assumptions
about the set of instruments available to the fiscal authority and the flexibility and
accuracy with which they will be adjusted can greatly change the complexity of the
challenges involved in monetary stabilization policy.
    Nonetheless, we have argued that it is possible to prescribe an optimal approach
to the conduct of monetary policy that is applicable to a range of different assump-
tions regarding fiscal institutions and the character of fiscal policy. And while the
problem of monetary stabilization policy is likely to be more complex, under realistic
assumptions about fiscal policy, than in familiar analyses that abstract altogether
from interactions between monetary and fiscal policy decisions, we found that even
under considerably more general assumptions, an optimal monetary policy has im-
portant aspects of a flexible inflation targeting regime.
    Under all of the regimes considered, optimal monetary policy can be implemented
through a commitment to use policy to guarantee fulfillment of a target criterion,
which specifies the acceptable level of an output-gap-adjusted price level given the
central bank’s current projections regarding the economy’s possible future evolution.
A credible commitment to such a rule should serve to anchor inflation expectations.
As we have seen, commitment to the target criterion implies that there should be
no forecastable variation in the rate of growth of the output-gap adjusted price level
over any horizons beginning a quarter or further in the future; this means that any
variations in the inflation forecast that occur must be fully justifiable in terms of
the projected change in the output gap over the same horizon. Moreover, since fore-
castable changes in the output gap over periods in time more than a few quarters in
the future will always be negligible, this implies that medium-term inflation forecasts
must be essentially constant.


                                         36
    Thus an important feature of an optimal policy commitment will be a credible
commitment by the central bank to return inflation to its long-run target level fairly
promptly after any unforeseen disturbance that justifies a temporary departure from
that target. We have seen that, when the set of available fiscal instruments is fairly
constrained, it is important to allow for temporary variations in the inflation rate
in response to exogenous disturbances; and disturbances that affect the economy
mainly through their impact on the government budget will be among the types of
disturbances that ought to be allowed to have a transitory effect on the inflation rate.
But even while the central bank allows such disturbances to affect the current rate
of inflation (and even, its current target for the gap-adjusted price level), it should
stress the fact that the size of the one-time effect on prices that is allowed is one that
is calculated to be consistent with a prompt stabilization of prices again. Thus the
development of an explicit calculus that can be used to justify temporary departures
from the inflation target that would have been maintained in the absence of the shock
is an important project, in order to adapt the practice of inflation targeting to the
circumstances of countries with frequent and urgent fiscal imbalances.




                                          37
References
 [1] Angeletos, George-Marios, “Fiscal Policy with Noncontingent Debt and the Opti-
     mal Maturity Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1105-1131 (2001).

 [2] Barro, Robert J., “On the Determination of Public Debt,” Journal of Political
     Economy 87: 940-971 (1979).

 [3] Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford, “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Pol-
     icy: A Linear-Quadratic Approach,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18: 271-333
     (2003).

 [4] —- —- and —- —-, “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare: The Case of a Distorted
     Steady State,” Journal of the European Economics Association, forthcoming
     2005a.

 [5] —- —- and —- —-, “Optimal Targeting Rules for Monetary and Fiscal Policy,”
     in progress, November 2005b.

 [6] Blanchard, Olivier, “Fiscal Dominance and Inflation Targeting: Lessons from
     Brazil,” in F. Giavazzi, I. Goldfajn, and S. Herrera, eds., Inflation Targeting,
     Debt, and the Brazilian Experience, 1999 to 2003, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005.

 [7] Buera, Francisco, and Juan Pablo Nicolini, “Optimal Maturity of Government
     Debt Without State-Contingent Bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51:
     531-554 (2004).

 [8] Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Jour-
     nal of Monetary Economics 12: 383-98 (1983).

 [9] Chari, V.V., and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,”
     in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1C,
     North-Holland, 1999.

[10] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Pol-
     icy: a New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37: 1661-
     1707 (1999).



                                       38
[11] Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Optimal Fiscal and Mon-
     etary Policy: Equivalence Results,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 3730, February
     2003.

[12] Fraga, Arminio, Ilan Goldfajn, and André Minella, “Inflation Targeting in
     Emerging Market Economies,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18: 365-400
     (2003).

[13] Giannoni, Marc, and Michael Woodford, “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. Gen-
     eral Theory,” NBER working paper no. 9419, December 2002.

[14] King, Mervyn A., “Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in
     Practice,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39: 81-97 (1997).

[15] Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger, “Explicit Inflation
     Objectives and Macroeconomic Outcomes,” ECB Working Paper no. 383, August
     2004.

[16] Loyo, Eduardo H.M., “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyper-
     inflation,” unpublished, Kennedy School of Government, June 1999.

[17] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, “An Optimization-Based Econo-
     metric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual 12: 297-346 (1997).

[18] Sims, Christopher A., “Fiscal Consequences for Mexico of Adopting the Dollar,”
     unpublished, Princeton University, May 2002.

[19] —- —-, “Limits to Inflation Targeting,” in B.S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds.,
     The Inflation Targeting Debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.

[20] Svensson, Lars E.O., “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitor-
     ing Inflation Targets,” European Economic Review 41: 1111-1146 (1997).

[21] —- —-, “Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics 43: 607-654 (1999).

[22] —- —-, “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy
     through Targeting Rules,” Journal of Economic Literature 41: 426-477 (2003).

                                       39
[23] —- —-, and Michael Woodford, “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,” Journal
     of Monetary Economics 50: 691-720 (2003).

[24] —- —- and —- —-, “Implementing Optimal Monetary Policy through Inflation-
     Forecast Targeting,” in in B.S. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds., The Inflation
     Targeting Debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.

[25] Walsh, Carl E., Monetary Theory and Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2d edition,
     2003.

[26] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                       40
