                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             WHAT DOES CERTIFICATION TELL US
                             ABOUT TEACHER EFFECTIVENESS?
                              EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY

                                            Thomas J. Kane
                                           Jonah E. Rockoff
                                           Douglas O. Staiger

                                         Working Paper 12155
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12155


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




We are grateful to a number of persons whose efforts made this project possible. Vicki Bernstein, Bruce
Groneveldt, Dominic Mancello, Lori Mei, Cathi Schoenberger, Henry Solomon, and Harvey Weinstein at
the New York City Department of Education were generous with their time in putting together data on our
behalf. Timothy Daly, Michelle Rhee, and Andrew Sokatch of The New Teacher Project and Abigail Smith
and Cynthia Skinner of Teach for America were extremely helpful in answering our questions regarding
these programs. We thank Caroline Hoxby and Andrew Leigh for providing us with data on college median
SAT scores. Dan Obus provided excellent research assistance. We would also like to thank seminar
participants at the New York City Department of Education, Columbia University and the NBER summer
institute for helpful comments and suggestions. E-mail: jonah.rockoff@columbia.edu,
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu, douglas.o.staiger@dartmouth.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Thomas J. Kane, Jonah E. Rockoff and Douglas O. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Does Certification Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City
Thomas J. Kane, Jonah E. Rockoff and Douglas O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 12155
April 2006, Revised July 2006
JEL No. I2, J0

                                            ABSTRACT

We use six years of data on student test performance to evaluate the effectiveness of certified,
uncertified, and alternatively certified teachers in the New York City public schools. On average, the
certification status of a teacher has at most small impacts on student test performance. However,
among those with the same certification status, there are large and persistent differences in teacher
effectiveness. This evidence suggests that classroom performance during the first two years, rather
than certification status, is a more reliable indicator of a teacher's future effectiveness. We also
evaluate turnover among teachers with different certification status, and the impact on student
achievement of hiring teachers with predictably high turnover. Given relatively modest estimates of
experience differentials, even high turnover groups (such as Teach for America participants) would
have to be only slightly more effective in their first year to offset the negative effects of their high
exit rates.

Thomas J. Kane
Harvard University
Graduate School of Education
Gutman Hall 455
Appain Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu

Jonah E. Rockoff
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 603
New York, NY 10027
jr2331@columbia.edu

Douglas O. Staiger
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
HB6106, 301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
douglas.o.staiger@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

        Federal and state governments have traditionally regulated teacher quality with ex ante

certification requirements. To gain legal permission to teach, individuals are generally required

to study full-time for one or two years in an approved education program. However, recruiting

difficulties have forced many districts to hire large numbers of uncertified or alternatively

certified teachers. Despite the ubiquity of alternative teacher certification (AC) programs across

the country, there is little research on the relative quality of certified, uncertified, and AC

teachers. This is particularly regrettable given that AC teachers are more likely to work in urban

areas with low-income and low-achieving students. In this paper, we aim to fill this gap in the

literature by providing new evidence on how the certification of teachers in a large, urban school

district relates to teachers’ impacts on student achievement.

        Forty-seven (47) states and the District of Columbia currently have AC programs, the first

of which were created in the early 1980s.1 An estimated 35,000 AC teachers are hired each year,

about one third of all new teachers nationwide. Although AC programs often differ in other

ways, participants are generally required to possess a bachelor’s degree, pass state licensing

exams, participate in a special training or mentoring program, and enroll in a teacher education

program as they begin teaching.

        There exist only a few high-quality studies of AC teachers, most notably Decker et al.

(2004), who evaluate the Teach for America (TFA) program, a non-profit entity that recruits and

sends AC teachers to districts throughout the nation. They find that teachers recruited through




                                                   1
TFA (TFA corps members) are significantly more effective than both uncertified and certified

teachers at math instruction and statistically indistinguishable in reading instruction. This study

is particularly notable because the schools they examine agreed to randomly allocate students and

teachers across classrooms.

         Still, one must be cautious in using the results from this and other studies of TFA to draw

conclusions regarding AC teachers and programs more generally. Although TFA is a highly

visible program, it is also unique in many respects. It is highly selective, has a national scope, and

recruits individuals who commit to teach for only two years. Indeed, the stated mission of TFA is

“to build the movement to eliminate educational inequity” by recruiting individuals who will

“become lifelong leaders in the effort to expand educational opportunity” (see

www.teachforamerica.org). In addition, existing studies of TFA focus on a very small number of

schools and teachers.2 Though generalizations are limited in all studies—ours included—we use

a much larger sample of schools and teachers in a district that employs teachers with many

different types of certification, including TFA corps members.

         We examine the relationship between teacher impacts on student achievement and

certification status among teachers in New York City. Besides being the largest and one of the


1
 The National Center for Educational Information has assembled a detailed accounting of AC programs in the United
States (Feistritzer (2005)). The term emergency certification is often used synonymously with alternative
certification, and both refer to special programs to facilitate the employment of individuals who would otherwise be
uncertified. However, Feistritzer suggests that they generally differ in educational requirements and support given to
teachers. For example, most alternative certification programs provide training or mentoring to their teachers,
whereas emergency certification programs generally do not.




                                                          2
most diverse school districts in the country, New York is a major employer of certified,

uncertified, and alternatively certified teachers. More than 50,000 new teachers were hired in

New York schools during the school years 1999-2000 to 2004-2005. Certified, uncertified and

AC teachers accounted for, respectively, 46 percent, 34 percent, and 20 percent of these new

hires. AC teachers in New York are recruited through multiple sources, but the vast majority

comes from the New York City Teaching Fellows program. Teaching fellows formed about 28

percent of all new teachers in New York during the school years 2002-2003 through 2004-2005.

A small but significant number of teachers come from other special programs, such as Teach for

America. The city also hires certified teachers through a series of international recruitment

initiatives. Together, Teach for America and international recruitment supplied New York with

roughly 10 percent of its new teachers over this same period.

         We measure the relative effectiveness of teachers using panel data on students’ reading

and math test scores that also identifies students’ reading and math teachers. Specifically, we use

students’ test scores in grades four through eight to estimate the value-added of their teachers,

controlling for students’ prior-year test scores and a number of student, classroom, grade, and

school related factors, and controlling for teachers’ experience levels.

         Boyd et al. (2005a) use similar data to evaluate differences in teacher effectiveness by

initial certification status. They focus on between-group differences in student performance and


2
 Additional evidence on the effectiveness of TFA teachers also comes from studies by Raymond et al. (2001) and
Darling-Hammond et al. (2004). The Decker et al. study includes 44 TFA teachers. The Raymond et al. study
includes 117, and, though they do not report the number of TFA teachers, the number studied by Darling-Hammond
et al. is likely to be considerably lower. They examine teachers in the same city over roughly the same time period,
but they restrict their analysis to grades four and five, whereas Raymond et al. examine grades four to eight. These
additional studies both use data from Houston, Texas, yet Raymond et al. conclude that TFA teachers are as good as
or better than other teachers, while Darling-Hammond et al. find they are less effective than certified teachers, and
perform about as well as other uncertified teachers. It is difficult to reconcile the two sets of results because of major
distinctions between their empirical specifications and the dependent variables they examine.



                                                            3
differential effects of experience for Teaching Fellows and other groups of teachers. Our work

differs from theirs in several important ways: First, we use an additional year of data from the

school year 2004-05. Because of recent expansions in the Teaching Fellows and Teach for

America programs, this additional year of data provides us with greater precision.3 Second, we

use application data from the Teaching Fellow program to study the role of various applicant

traits on the likelihood of being interviewed, offered a job and accepting a position in the NYC

public schools. Third, we estimate variation in teacher effectiveness within each certification

group and interpret between-group differences in effectiveness in light of these within-group

differences. Although there are statistically significant differences between groups, such

differences are generally dwarfed by the differences in effectiveness within groups of teachers.4

Fourth, since exiting teachers are generally replaced by novice teachers who still have a lot to

learn on the job, we explore the implications of differing turnover rates by certification status for

steady state differences in effectiveness between groups of teachers.

           We find no difference between teaching fellows and certified teachers or between

uncertified and certified teachers in their impact on math achievement. Classrooms of students

assigned to internationally recruited teachers scored .02 standard deviations lower in math than

similar classrooms assigned to certified teachers, while classrooms of students assigned to Teach

for America corps members scored .02 standard deviations higher relative to certified teachers.

(We measure teacher effectiveness in terms of test scores among New York City students, where

test scores have been normalized by year and grade level to have a mean of zero and standard

deviation of one.) In reading, students assigned to teaching fellows underperformed students

3
    In an earlier version of this paper Kane et al. (2005), we report a similar analysis using data through 2003-04.




                                                             4
assigned to certified teachers by .01 standard deviations. These are the only instances in which

we find that a teacher’s initial certification status has statistically significant implications for

student achievement.

         Consistent with other studies, we find that teachers’ effectiveness improves with the first

few years of experience. We estimate that achievement level of students assigned to teachers in

their first year of teaching is .06 and .03 standard deviations lower in math and reading,

respectively, as students assigned to those same teachers after they have gained two years of

experience. Our results suggest that the returns to experience may be somewhat higher for

teaching fellows than for certified teachers, at least in promoting reading achievement scores.

Although teaching fellows underperform relative to regularly certified teachers in reading in their

first year of teaching, they seem to close the gap by their third year.

         Because they have not made the same pre-career investment in teacher training that

traditionally certified teachers have made, one might fear that AC teachers would have a higher

turnover rate. This could be costly in terms of student achievement (high turnover rates imply

more novice teachers in steady state) as well as the increased direct costs of hiring. However,

teaching fellows and traditionally certified teachers had very similar retention rates. Only Teach

for America corps members had discernibly higher exit rates. Many TFA corps members leave

after their two-year commitment is up. We estimate that the higher turnover among TFA corps

members implies that roughly 45 percent of them will be in their first or second year of teaching

in the steady state, relative to about 20 percent of traditionally certified teachers and teaching

fellows. The high exit rate of Teach for America participants has been a primary target of the


4
 In a revised draft of their paper, Boyd et al. (2005b) come to a similar conclusion. However, they reach such a
conclusion without ever estimating within-group variation in teacher effectiveness.



                                                         5
program’s critics. However, the impact on student achievement of this higher turnover rate,

while negative, is rather modest. We estimate that TFA corps members would have to produce

about .02 standard deviations additional achievement in math and reading per year to offset the

impact of their higher turnover rates in steady state. This is roughly the size of the differential we

estimate for Teach for America participants (and considerably smaller than the positive impact

estimated by Decker et. al.

       Although the differences in teacher effectiveness between groups of teachers with

different certification are small, there are large differences in teacher effectiveness within all of

these groups. This latter finding is consistent with other research.5 We estimate that the average

value-added among the top quarter of elementary school math teachers is .33 standard deviations

greater than the value-added among the bottom 25 percent—almost ten times the magnitude of

any between-group difference! Thus, although shifting the mix of teachers with different types

of certification does not appear to be a useful tool for improving student achievement, there is

great potential for school districts to improve student achievement by selectively retaining only

those who were estimated to be most effective during their first years of teaching.


2. Alternative Teacher Certification in New York City

       Recruiting a sufficient number of certified teachers has been a long-standing problem for

the New York City Department of Education (the DOE). In the school year 1999-2000,

approximately 60 percent of all new teachers hired were uncertified. Recruiting difficulties were




                                                   6
more severe in schools with low average achievement levels. Grouping schools by the fraction

of students who passed end-of-year math examinations in 1999-2000, we find that 73 percent of

new hires were uncertified in both elementary and high schools in the lowest deciles of pass-rates

(Figure 1). Since that time, the DOE has taken a number of steps to decrease its use of

uncertified personnel, one of which has been to expand its recruitment of alternatively certified

teachers. Over the school years 1999-2000 to 2004-2005, the fraction of uncertified hires fell

from 60 percent to 7 percent, while the fraction of AC hires rose from 2 percent to 36 percent. It

is unlikely that this shift was just a re-labeling of individuals who would have otherwise become

uncertified teachers. The populations of uncertified teachers and AC teachers differ on a number

of characteristics (see Table 1).

         The major source of growth of AC teachers has been the New York City Teaching

Fellows Program (NYCTF), which was created in the summer of the year 2000.6 The NYCTF

program was created as a response to pressure from the state government to hire only certified

teachers in the city’s lowest performing schools. After the DOE failed to hire only certified

teachers for these schools in the school year 1999-2000, it was sued by State Education

Commissioner Richard Mills (Mills v. Levy, et al., Superior Court, Kings County, Index No.

26196/00). As a result, the number of teaching fellows hired grew from 350 in the school year

2000-2001 (less than 5 percent of new hires) to 2,500 in the school year 2003-2004 (more than


5
  Recent research has yielded remarkably consistent estimates of the heterogeneity in teacher impacts. For example,
using data from two school districts in New Jersey, Rockoff (2004) reports that one standard deviation in teacher
effects is associated with a .1 student-level standard deviation in achievement. Using data from Texas, Rivkin et al.
(2005) report very similar estimates—suggesting that a standard deviation in teacher effectiveness is associated with
.11 student-level standard deviations in math and .095 standard deviations in reading. Using data on high school
students in Chicago Public Schools, Aaronson et al. (2003) find that a standard deviation in teacher effectiveness is
associated with a .09 to .16 student-level standard deviation difference in performance.




                                                          7
30 percent of new hires) and 2,000 in the school year 2004-2005 (more than 25 percent of new

hires). The expansion of the program was motivated by changes in New York State law in the

year 2000 that required all teachers in the state to be certified in their subject of instruction by the

school year 2003-04.7

         New York recruits AC teachers through several other sources: Teach for America, the

Peace Core Fellows Program, and the Teaching Opportunity Program Scholars. Teach for

America, as mentioned above, is a national program, founded in 1990, that recruits individuals

for AC teacher positions in numerous districts across the country. The Peace Corps Fellows

program, created in 1985, is a partnership between the NYC Department of Education and

Columbia Teachers College, and recruits individuals who have returned from Peace Corps

volunteer service overseas. The Teaching Opportunity Program (TOP) is operated in partnership

between the DOE and the City University of New York to recruit teachers of math, science, and

Spanish. Finally, DOE also recruits teachers from other countries. International teachers have

been certified in their home country and are not AC teachers. However, given their non-

traditional recruitment, we consider them separately from certified teachers in our analysis.

         Teaching fellows represent the vast majority of all AC teachers hired since 1999-2000,

and we focus much of our attention on them. The number of TFA corps members and

international teachers is substantial enough that we present results for them in our basic analysis.

In contrast, there are only a handful of Peace Corps Fellows and TOP Scholars in our data, and

we therefore do not discuss them further. We classify teachers based on their certification in the


6
  NYCTF is a partnership between the New York City Department of Education and The New Teacher Project
(TNTP). TNTP is a national non-profit organization, founded in 1997, that helps school districts recruit AC
teachers. TNTP has also worked with school districts in Miami, New Orleans, Oakland, Philadelphia, Washington,
DC, and a number of other urban and rural communities.
7
  More information on certification regulations can be found at www.highered.nysed.gov/tcert/certificate/index.html.



                                                         8
year that they are hired. Thus, uncertified teachers who gain certification are still considered

uncertified. This classification allows us to answer the question: what is the expected difference

in teacher effectiveness between certified, uncertified, and AC teachers at the time they are

hired?

         Certified, uncertified, international, and AC teachers are observably different (Table 1).

The fraction of teachers who are black or Hispanic is lower among regularly certified teachers

and TFA corps members (about 20 percent) than among teaching fellows (30 percent),

uncertified teachers (49 percent), or international teachers (48 percent). Certified teachers are

also slightly more likely to be female than other groups (80 percent vs. about 70 percent). The

median age of certified teachers, uncertified teachers and teaching fellows is roughly the same

(about 28), but TFA corps members are considerably younger (median age 23) and international

recruits considerably older (median age 36). Not surprisingly, certified teachers and international

recruits are much more likely to have graduate education. Lastly, there are differences across

groups in the selectivity of undergraduate institution. As measured by median SAT scores,

certified and uncertified teachers attended significantly less selective colleges than teaching

fellows or TFA corps members.8

         There are also substantial differences in the characteristics of students taught by different

groups of teachers (Table 2).9 Uncertified teachers, teaching fellows, TFA corps members, and


8
  We have data from the DOE on the undergraduate institution attended for about 25 percent of teachers hired during
our sample who are not teaching fellows or international recruits. We have this data for 95 percent of teaching
fellows (98 percent of teaching fellows who attended a U.S. institution) because we have data from applications. We
have this data for less than 1 percent of international recruits because so few attended U.S. institutions. The
distribution of median SAT scores of teaching fellows with and without data from the DOE is very similar, leading
us to believe that the availability of this data is not strongly related to the selectivity of undergraduate institution.
9
  We use school level averages to construct this figure. It therefore does not take into account any sorting of students
within schools. In addition, we do not have school level data for the school year 2004-2005, and these teachers are
assigned the characteristics of the students in their school from the prior year.



                                                           9
international teachers all tend to teach in schools that—relative to those employing certified

teachers—have a higher fraction minority students, higher fraction eligible for free lunch (our

best measure of household poverty), bilingual education, special education, lower fraction

passing elementary and high school tests in reading and math, and lower high school graduation

rates. In the results we present below, controlling for these differences among the students

assigned to different groups of teachers will be important in drawing conclusions regarding their

relative effectiveness.



2.1 Teaching Fellow Selection

       In addition to our data on teaching fellows, we have data on the teaching fellow selection

process for the school years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. Though we cannot be certain that

selectivity was constant across years, NYCTF officials estimate that the fraction of applicants

who became teaching fellows was about 14 percent in the school year 2000-2001. This is about

the same as the fraction who became teaching fellows in 2003-04 and 2004-05, even though the

program was more than five times as large.

       Teaching fellows are selected in a three-step process. First, applicants submit

information on their demographic characteristics, their previous work experience, their academic

history, a personal essay, and their qualifications for teaching particular subject areas.

Approximately 60 percent of applicants are then invited for an interview. The interview process

lasts approximately 4-5 hours and has multiple parts: applicants give a five minute lesson on a

subject of their choosing, participate in a guided discussion, write an essay on a topic not given

out in advance, and sit through a one-on-one interview. Approximately 50 percent of those

interviewed have their applications forwarded to the final stage. These applications are reviewed


                                                  10
by a committee, and about 85 percent are offered positions. Roughly 75 percent of offers are

accepted, and 85 percent of those accepting offers complete the necessary training to gain

alternative certification. Overall, less than 15 percent of all applicants become teaching fellows.

       Teaching fellows’ academic credentials are related to the probability of selection. Figure

2 shows how the selectivity of applicants'undergraduate institution (measured by median SAT

scores) and applicants'grade point average relate to how they fare in the selection process. These

figures are created using data from applications for the school year 2003-2004. Each panel

shows the distribution of academic credentials for three groups: applicants who were screened

out before the interview, applicants who were interviewed but rejected, and applicants who were

offered a position. The average academic credentials of applicants increases noticeably as they

pass through the selection process. Among those applicants who are screened out before the

interview, the median quantitative SAT score of their undergraduate institution was at the median

of the national distribution of colleges and universities. For the average applicant rejected after

the interview or offered a position, the median quantitative SAT score of their undergraduate

institution was at the 57th and 69th percentile respectively. The respective numbers for verbal

SAT are 55th, 62nd, and 73rd percentiles. The same pattern occurs with applicants'reported

undergraduate grade point average (GPA). The average among screened-out applicants is 2.7,

while among those rejected at interview it is 3.0 and among those offered a position it is 3.2.

       Among those offered a position, we find no relationship between academic credentials

and initial acceptance or academic credentials and employment in the district. Thus, it does not

appear that the selectivity of the teaching fellows program is being undone after offers have been

given out.

       Teaching fellows are required to attend a seven-week summer training course and to


                                                 11
observe and assist in a summer school classroom. The focus of the summer course is on practical

teaching methods, not subject material. Before they begin work, teaching fellows must have a

bachelor’s degree and pass teacher certification examinations.10 During the summer training,

they begin coursework in an approved graduate school of education and must progress towards

gaining traditional, permanent certification within three years. Teaching fellows receive a tuition

grant to help pay for their courses.11

         Teaching fellows are assigned a subject area and one of ten geographic regions in which

they must look for a teaching position. In practice, a few fellows each year find jobs outside of

their assigned subject or region, and the DOE does not prohibit them from taking these positions.

The DOE gives teaching fellows help in finding employment through multiple job fairs and,

recently, online postings. Teaching fellows are no different than their colleagues with respect to

union membership, salary, and general rights and privileges afforded to teachers in New York.




3. Data on Students and their Teachers in New York City

         Our data on students consists of information on demographic background, attendance,

suspensions from school, test performance, eligibility for free lunch, special education and




10
   For example, to teach mathematics under an alternative certification license, an individual must pass two exams:
the New York State Teacher Certification Exam - Liberal Arts & Science Test (LAST) and a Content Specialty Test
(CST) in Mathematics. To teach mathematics under a traditional certification license, an individual must pass an
additional exam: the New York State Teacher Certification Exam - Secondary Assessment of Teaching Skills (ATS-
W).
11
   In the program's initial years, all tuition was paid for by the DOE. In order to defray tuition costs, fellows now
have $4,000 deducted from their salary over two years.



                                                         12
bilingual education, and a student identification number.12 It also contains teacher identification

numbers for students'math and reading teachers, which were often the same teacher for

elementary school students. All student data is limited to grades three through eight, the grades

in which students in New York City take standardized math and reading examinations. This data

spans the school years 1998-1999 through 2004-2005.13

         We match students to teachers using information from the DOE payroll system.

Specifically, we have a snapshot of all teachers working in the DOE at the end of September,

November, and May of each school year from September 1999 through September of 2005. This

gives us information on teachers'certification, recruitment through various programs, and their

position on a salary schedule.14 We use the salary schedule variables to construct measures of

teachers'education and experience. In addition, we have application information for all teaching

fellows (including all applicants, not just those subsequently hired) for the school years 2003-

2004 and 2004-2005. This provides us with information on applicants'undergraduate institution


12
   One minor flaw in the student data is that the number of students with missing free lunch status grows considerably
at the end of our sample, from about 2 percent to 20 percent. This is due to schools with very high percentages of
free lunch students enrolling in a Universal School Meals program. These schools, though predominantly populated
by students on free lunch, often fail to report student data to the district because their funding for meals is unaffected
by these reports. The growth in the number of students with missing data is mirrored by a drop in the number of
students coded as eligible for free lunch. We do not drop students with missing free lunch status from our analysis.
Instead, our free lunch status variables include dummies for eligibility and for missing data. Under an alternative
specification, coding all students with missing data as eligible, we find almost exactly the same results as those
presented below.
13
    We do not match third graders to their teachers because we use prior test scores as a control variable in our
analysis, and this is only available for third graders who are repeating grades. We also do not examine reading test
outcomes for grade seven in the school year 2001-2002 and grade eight in the school year 2002-2003, because no
reading test scores are available for grade seven in the school year 2001-2002.




                                                           13
and GPA, and their progress through the application process.

         Because our testing data for students in New York is limited to reading and math tests

taken in grades three to eight, and because our empirical strategy requires a prior year score for

every teacher, our analysis focuses on those in grades four through eight. (In grades four and

five, most students have one teacher for both reading and math. In higher grades, we use the

instructors listed for mathematics or reading courses.) Table 3 shows how teachers are selected

into our analysis based on a number of criteria. The first row shows the overall number of

teachers hired during our sample period by certification and program. The second row shows the

number of teachers who worked in a school serving students in grades four to eight. We use

school level data because information on grade level and subject for all teachers is not collected

by the DOE. Roughly 20 percent of certified teachers, uncertified teachers, and teaching fellows

were not teaching in one of these schools. In contrast, only 7 percent of TFA corps members and

almost 35 percent of international teachers were not teaching in a school serving any children in

grades four to eight.

         In the third row of Table 3, we show the number of teachers who were matched to at least

one student in grades four through eight in the reading and math test data. Overall, we were able

to match 32 percent of all teachers to students with achievement data. Though this match rate

may appear low, it is due principally to the number of teachers giving reading and math


14
   There are a small but significant number of coding errors in the salary schedule information from the payroll data.
Most are a result of late updating of information regarding prior experience of incoming teachers. For example,
there are a number of cases where a teacher is classified as having no experience in September of their first year, but
is classified as having multiple years of experience by November. Teachers wishing to get credit for prior teaching
experience must submit a form, and this may create delays in accounting for prior experience in the payroll records.
We base our experience measures on the premise that the DOE does not overpay, but may underpay, its teachers
based on experience. Thus, if a teacher has a discontinuous jump in their experience profile, we use their highest
experience level to infer teaching experience in other years. We use the same method to impute experience in years
when it is missing, so long as experience is non-missing for the same teacher at some point during our sample period.



                                                          14
instruction to students in grades four through eight. 95 percent of elementary school students and

82 percent of middle school students are matched to their math and reading teacher(s). The

lower match rate for middle school students is due to our needing course identification

information in order to match them with teachers, and roughly 20% of schools do not use the

administrative system that reports this data.15 We investigate the relationship between schools’

reporting of course information and their average student characteristics, and we find no

statistically significant relationship with race, free lunch eligibility, ELL and special education

status, or prior test scores. (Results available upon request.)

        At the bottom of the Table 3, we show the number of teachers that are included in our

regression analysis. Overall, about 20 percent of teachers from each group are included in our

regression sample; only TFA corps members have a slightly higher rate of inclusion (27 percent).

We drop classrooms in which fewer than seven or more than 45 students are tested

(corresponding to the 1st and 99th percentile), because we are concerned that classes with

extremely low or high numbers of students may be incorrectly identified in our data. We drop

classrooms where the teacher did not work in the school during the entire year and classrooms

taught by teachers listed as working in more than one school per year. We also drop classrooms

in any school-year cell for which less than 75 percent of students were successfully matched to a

teacher. Finally, we drop classrooms where 25 percent or more of the students receive special

education. In addition, the regression sample does not include students who were not tested in

the prior year, since prior test scores are used as a control variable.

        The mean characteristics of teachers are quite similar between our regression sample and

15
   This system, called “Automate the Schools” or ATS, is available to all schools but not universally used. It
standardizes and automates the collection and reporting of student data at the school level. The DOE provides this
(cont’d on next page)


                                                        15
the full sample of teachers (Table 4). The one noticeable difference is that teachers in the

regression sample are more likely to be black. This is due mainly to the elimination of high

school teachers, who are more likely to be white.

         The distribution of students across groups of teachers is similar in our regression sample

and the full sample of teachers in terms of race and the proportion receiving free/reduced price

lunch (Table 5). However, students in our regression sample are substantially less likely to be

ELL students or to receive special education than the overall city averages. The decrease in

special education students is due to our dropping classrooms if more than 25 percent of its

students receive special education. (Over 95 percent of special education students in New York

attend such classrooms, most of which are filled entirely with special education students.) This

criterion also is responsible for about half of the decline in ELL students; 20 percent of students

in classes with more than 25 percent special education students are classified as English

Language Learners. The other factor that drives this change is our requirement of at least seven

tested students per classroom. More than 50 percent of ELL students—but only 6 percent of non-

ELL students—did not take the reading exam in the years we observe them, and 30 percent of

ELL students are observed in a classroom with fewer than seven tested students. Students in our

regression sample are also more likely to pass their exams than the overall student population.

This is driven almost entirely by the drop in ELL and special education population.16


4. Estimation of Teacher Effectiveness


system and training to schools, but does not mandate its use.
16
  A small part of this change is due to two other factors. First, the overall pass rate for New York City students was
higher in 2004-2005 than in past school years. As noted above, because we lack school level data—used to calculate
the full sample characteristics—from the school year 2004-2005, we assign those teachers the characteristics of
students in their school for the prior year. Second, we only use students with prior test scores in our regressions.
These students are slightly more likely to pass their exams.



                                                         16
         To generate estimates of teachers’ effectiveness in raising student achievement, we

estimate the following regression with student-level data:

                             (1) Ait = β g X it + γ g X itc + ζ g X its + δWit + π gt + ε it

where Ait represents the math or reading test score of student i in year t, Xit represents student

characteristics, X itc and X its are the mean characteristics of the students in student i’s classroom

and school respectively in year t, Wit represents characteristics of the teacher to which the student

is assigned in year t, and π gt is a fixed effect for the grade in which student i is enrolled and the

year t in which we observe him/her. Student characteristics include a cubic polynomial in prior-

year math scores, a cubic polynomial in prior-year reading score, gender, six categories for race

and ethnicity, an indicator for free/reduced price lunch status, an indicator for special education

status, an indicator for English Language Learners, and the number of absences and suspensions

for the student in the previous school year.17 The coefficients on individual, class, and school

characteristics (   g , g,   and g) are allowed to vary by the grade level of the test being taken. The

class-level variables also include class size, and school-level variables include average class size

in the school. All test scores are normalized within grade and year to have a mean of zero and a

standard deviation of one. A standard deviation of student test scores in New York City is

comparable to that of students nationally, according to data from the National Assessment of




17
   No reading test scores are available for seventh grade students in 2002-2003, so we do not examine seventh grade
reading achievement in that year and eighth grade reading achievement the following year. We do examine eighth
grade math achievement in both years. To correct for the fact that these students are missing prior reading scores in
2003-2004, we set their prior reading scores to zero and include an interaction between prior math scores and an
indicator variable for this group. We do not add a main effect for this group because grade by year fixed effects are
already included in the regression.



                                                            17
Educational Progress (NAEP).18

        When studying impacts on math (reading) scores, we focus on the teacher identified as

teaching the student’s math (reading) course in that year. In grades six through eight, these often

turn out to be different teachers. Students in grades four and five (and grade six students in

elementary schools) typically had the same teacher in both math and reading.

        To check the robustness of our results, we also run regressions that remove school

average characteristics and replace them with either school fixed effects or fixed effects for

permutations of school, grade and year. These fixed effects capture potentially important

variation at the school level in factors that we cannot observe (e.g., the effectiveness of the

school administration). When school or school-grade-year fixed effects are included, the

coefficients on teacher characteristics are identified only from variation among teachers working

within the same school or the same school, grade level, and year. Because uncertified and AC

teachers are not spread evenly over schools, grades, and years, this significantly reduces the

sample providing identification. We therefore prefer the specification given by equation (1),

though our results are substantially the same across specifications.



4.1 Baseline Results on Teacher Certification and Teacher Effectiveness

        In Table 6, we report differences in student performance in math and reading between

groups of teachers with different types of certification. In all specifications, we make these

comparisons while adjusting for individual years of teaching experience, and all standard errors

are calculated allowing for clustering by school-grade-year cells. For illustrative purposes, in


18
  The standard deviation (SD) of NAEP scores in New York City and the nation as a whole were identical for 4th
grade math (SD=28) and 8th grade reading (SD=35). The SD in New York City was slightly higher for 8th grade
(cont’d on next page)


                                                       18
columns (1) and (6) we show the results of regressions of test scores on teacher characteristics,

with no controls for student, classroom, or school characteristics. There are very large

differences in test scores for students assigned to different types of teachers. The math scores of

students assigned to teaching fellows and TFA corps members were .20 and .28 standard

deviations below those of students assigned to regularly certified teachers. Students assigned to

international recruits and uncertified teachers scored .48 and .13 standard deviations,

respectively, below students in classrooms taught by regularly certified teachers. These

differences were similar for reading test scores.

        However, much of the apparent difference in student performance for those assigned to

different groups of teachers is simply due to differences in students’ prior year test performance

and demographics. Uncertified teachers and those participating in an alternative certification

program tend to be concentrated in schools with low performing students. When we include test

scores from the prior year and other student level covariates in the regressions (columns (2) and

(7)), the coefficients change dramatically. In math, students assigned to teaching fellows

performed no differently than similar students assigned to traditionally certified teachers, while

those assigned to TFA corps members outperformed by .01 standard deviations. Students

assigned to international recruits and uncertified teachers continue to underperform relative to

those assigned to certified teachers, but the differences are much smaller (-.05 and -.005 standard

deviations, respectively). In reading, when controlling for baseline characteristics of students,

students assigned to teaching fellows, TFA corps members, international recruits, and uncertified

teachers underperformed those assigned to regularly certified teachers, but these differences are a



math (SD=38 versus SD=36), and slightly lower for 4th grade reading (SD=33 versus SD=36). These estimates were
calculated using the NAEP Data Explorer at http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/nde/.



                                                     19
small fraction of those reported in columns (1) and (6).

        In columns (3) and (8), we include classroom level and school level averages of student

characteristics as control variables. The addition of these group level control variables has little

impact on the coefficient estimates for teaching fellows and uncertified teachers. Relative to the

students of regularly certified teachers, Teach for America corps members’ students are now

estimated to score .02 standard deviations higher, and international recruits’ students score .03

standard deviations lower. In reading, students assigned to teaching fellows scored .01 standard

deviations below those assigned to regularly certified teachers. This is the only between-group

difference that is statistically significant for reading test scores.

        In columns (4) and (9), we include school fixed effects—thereby implicitly holding

constant all fixed school characteristics including test scores. The sole source of identification

for differences in teacher effectiveness is the variation in performance of students assigned to

different types of teachers within the same schools. Therefore, teachers in schools hiring only

traditionally certified teachers or only AC teachers play no role in identifying the differences

between these groups of teachers. Moreover, to the extent that principals are selecting for

specific traits when they hire, the differences between groups within schools may mask important

differences in effectiveness of teachers between schools. This is a potential downside to the

fixed effects specification. However, we find results that are very similar to those shown in

columns (2) and (7). Differences between groups of teachers are small and usually statistically

insignificant. In math, there is a positive and statistically significant coefficient for assignment to

a TFA corps member (.03) and a negative significant coefficient for assignment to an

international teacher (-.03). In reading, there is a negative significant coefficient for assignment

to a teaching fellow (-.02).


                                                    20
        In columns (5) and (10), we add fixed effects for each school by grade by year

permutation. While the results in columns (4) and (9) allowed for comparisons across grades and

school years, as long as teachers were working in the same schools, the results in column (5) and

(10) focus only on those teachers working in the same school and grade during the same school

year. This change in specification has little or no effect on the results. Again, in math, there is a

statistically significant positive effect for TFA corps members (.02) and a statistically significant

negative effect for international teachers (-.02). In reading, there is a statistically significant

negative effect for teaching fellows (-.01). Thus, controlling for school average student

characteristics, allowing for comparisons across grades and across years within the same school,

or allowing for comparisons only within school, grade, and year does not substantially change

our findings.

        It is important to note that the estimates we present—even those with school fixed

effects—can be identified with comparisons other than direct comparisons between teachers. To

see this, suppose that teaching fellows and certified teachers never worked in the same school,

but that both sets of teachers worked with members of another group of teachers. Our empirical

framework will still estimate a difference in value-added between teaching fellows and certified

teachers through comparisons with this third group. In other regressions (not shown), we restrict

our sample to (1) certified teachers and teaching fellows working in the same school and grade

and (2) uncertified teachers and teaching fellows working in the same school and grade. These

“head to head” comparisons produce very similar results to those in Table 6. .



4.2 Additional Estimates of the Relative Effectiveness of Groups of Teachers

        In Table 7, we present the results of several additional specifications that examine more


                                                   21
closely the relative effectiveness of different groups of teachers. As in columns (3) and (8) of

Table 6, these regressions included controls for teacher experience, the full set of student,

classroom level, and school level baseline characteristics, and fixed effects by grade and year.

The first column of Table 7 redisplays our baseline estimates from Table 6; results for math

(reading) are shown in the top (bottom) panel. In math, TFA corps members’ students score .02

standard deviations higher, and international recruits’ students score .03 standard deviations

lower. In reading, students assigned to teaching fellows score .01 standard deviations below

those assigned to regularly certified teachers. All other between-group differences are not

statistically significant.

        The remaining columns in Table 7 provide additional estimates based on various sub-

samples. First we separately examine elementary and middle school grades.19 Then, we

separately examine schools above and below the median average test score. In each of these

specifications, teachers at all levels of experience are included, and dummy variables are used to

control for years of teaching experience. Last, we separately examine teachers with zero, one,

and two years of experience. Here the identification of between-group differences comes only

from direct comparisons between teachers with the same amount of experience.

        When comparing elementary and middle grades or schools with above or below-median

test scores, we find few changes in our estimates of the impact of certification status. The only

notable exceptions are for international teachers: In math, their students underperform those

assigned to traditionally certified teachers by -.03 standard deviations in middle school grades.

In reading, their students outperform those assigned to traditionally certified teachers by .04


19
  Elementary grades are 4 and 5, middle grades are 7 and 8. 6th graders are considered elementary if they attend a
school where the maximum grade is 6, otherwise they are considered middle.



                                                        22
standard deviations in schools with above median average test scores. When focusing on

teachers with zero, one, or two years of experience, we find a pattern of coefficients that

indicates teaching fellows, TFA corps members, and uncertified teachers may fare worse as

rookie teachers than after they have gained a year or two of experience. For example, estimated

achievement impacts for teaching fellows with zero, one and two years of experience are -.009,

.005 and .018, respectively, for math and -.018, -.007, and -.003, respectively, for reading. One

possibility for this is that AC teachers and uncertified teachers may have higher returns to

experience than other teachers on average. Another possibility is that there is negative selective

attrition of these teachers, relative to traditionally certified teachers. In section 4.5 we focus

directly on the return to experience and explore these potential sources of dynamic heterogeneity

across groups of teachers.



4.3 Selection of Teaching Fellows and Teacher Effectiveness

        Prior research has found a relationship between teacher effectiveness and the selectivity

of the college a teacher attended (Summers and Wolfe (1977)), tests of teachers’ verbal ability

(Hanushek (1971)), or a teacher’s own ACT (American College Testing program) scores when

applying to college (Ferguson and Ladd (1996)). However, as Hanushek and Rivkin (2004) argue

in summarizing the research on teacher impacts on student achievement, the association between

teacher test scores and student outcomes is relatively weak. Moreover, the literature on teacher

effectiveness has consistently failed to find that those holding master’s degrees are more

effective, despite the fact that most teacher pay scales reward higher educational attainment

(Murnane (1975), Summers and Wolfe (1977), Ehrenberg and Brewer (1994), Aaronson et al.

(2003), Clotfelter et al. (2006)).


                                                  23
       Academic credentials are strongly related to teaching fellow applicants’ probabilities of

selection into the program (Figure 2), and, on average, teaching fellows attended more selective

colleges than traditionally certified teachers (Table 1). Yet we find that teaching fellows are, on

average, no more effective in the classroom than traditionally certified teachers. These facts

contrast with the evidence from other studies that measures of academic skills are positively

related to teachers’ effectiveness in raising student achievement. Moreover, whether academic

credentials are related to teaching effectiveness is an important issue for recruitment policies. If

attending a selective college is not a good indicator of teacher effectiveness, alternative

certification programs may do well to focus on other characteristics.

       We investigate whether value-added is associated with better academic credentials among

teaching fellows.   We focus on teaching fellows because we have high quality data from their

applications on their undergraduate institution and their own undergraduate GPA. Although we

do possess data on undergraduate institution for many teachers who are not in the teaching

fellows program, this information is missing for a considerable fraction.

       If academic skill is a significant predictor of teacher effectiveness, we would expect

higher value-added from teaching fellows with better academic credentials. Columns (1) and (4)

of Table 8 show the relationship between math and reading value-added and the median math

SAT score of teaching fellows’ undergraduate institution, measured in deciles. There is a

coefficient of .003 standard deviations in math and a coefficient of less than .0005 in reading,

neither of which are statistically significant at conventional levels.20 Thus, there is little evidence

that academic credentials are a strong predictor of teacher effectiveness. The point estimates still




                                                  24
indicate only small differences in value-added, even among students who went to vastly different

undergraduate institutions. For example, the difference in math value-added between teachers

whose colleges were three deciles away in the median math SAT distribution (e.g., CUNY

Baruch College vs. New York University) is about .009 standard deviations. This is less than 25

percent of the gains to experience in the first year of teaching (see column (2) of Table 10,

presented below).

         Columns 2 and 5 of Table 8 show the relationship between value-added and teaching

fellows’ undergraduate GPA. We do not find any statistically significant relationship for either

reading or math, and the point estimates are actually negative. Columns 3 and 6 add an

interaction between GPA and median math SAT score, to account for the fact that higher GPA

may be a greater signal of academic ability at more selective institutions. We do not find a

statistically significant interaction between GPA and median math SAT for either reading or

math, and the point estimates are negative. In other words, neither certification status nor easily

observable academic traits such as college selectivity and undergraduate GPA seem to be

associated with teacher effectiveness.



4.4 Validity of Within-School Comparisons

         Our estimates above are based on comparisons of teachers with different initial

certification status within schools or among schools with similar observable characteristics.

However, the certified teachers working in schools hiring large numbers of alternatively certified

teachers may be systematically different from certified teachers hired in other schools. In fact,


20
  These regressions control for year-grade fixed effects, student characteristics and classroom- and school-level
average student characteristics (as in Table 6 column (3)). Regressions using reading SAT decile show no
(cont’d on next page)


                                                         25
given that the teaching fellows are placed in the most hard-to-staff schools, one might fear that

the comparison teachers in those schools may be less effective than certified teachers working in

other schools. Teachers could be sorting across schools based on observed or unobserved traits.

In this section, we test whether the difference in observed traits between teaching fellows and

other teachers depends upon whether one is making comparisons within or between schools.

        We investigate sorting on observables by estimating regressions of observable teacher

characteristics on indicator variables for whether that teacher belongs to a particular group. This

specification is shown in equation 2.

                                 (2)      Ti st = α t + δWi + µ i , µ i = π s + ε i

Variation in characteristics (T) across teachers can be explained partially by the year (t) in which

the teachers were hired, teachers’ certification and program participation at the time of hire (W),

and an error term (µ) that can be decomposed into a school effect (πs) and an i.i.d. disturbance

(ε). The coefficients on certification and program participation (δ) estimate the average

difference in observable characteristics across groups of teachers. If teachers are sorted across

schools based on observables, estimates of between-group differences will be biased if school

effects are omitted from the regression.

        The characteristics we use as dependent variables include three measures of academic

skill (whether the teacher has a master’s degree and the percentile of their undergraduate median

math and verbal SAT scores) and two demographic measures (age and whether the teacher is

Black or Hispanic).21 Estimates of between-group differences in teacher characteristics (δ), with


significant predictive power for either math or reading value-added, so we do not present results for them here.
21
  We include all teachers hired on or after the school year 1999-2000. Time varying characteristics (including the
school in which the teacher works) are measured during the teacher’s first year. Year fixed effects are always
included. Undergraduate information is known for about 30 percent of the sample.



                                                        26
and without controlling for school fixed effects, are shown in Table 9. Coefficient estimates

from regressions without school fixed effects display the same facts shown earlier in Table 1.

Relative to traditionally certified teachers: (1) teaching fellows, TFA corps members, and

uncertified teachers are less likely to have graduate degrees, (2) teaching fellows and, to a greater

extent, TFA corps members attended more selective colleges, (3) TFA corps members are

younger, and (4) teaching fellows, international teachers, and uncertified teachers are more likely

to be Black or Hispanic.

       However, the inclusion of school fixed effects in these regressions produces little or no

change to the between-group differences in measures of academic credentials. For example,

teaching fellows are estimated to have attended colleges with a median math SAT score 8.2

percentile points (standard error .37) above traditionally certified teachers when school fixed

effects are omitted. When school fixed effects are included, the estimate difference is 8.6

percentile points (standard error .44).

       One instance where teachers’ sorting across schools does appear to matter is sorting on

ethnicity. While teaching fellows are, overall, far more likely to be ethnic minorities than

traditionally certified teachers, they are only slightly more likely to be so when examining

differences within schools. Similarly, while TFA corps members are equally likely to be ethnic

minorities than traditionally certified teachers, they are less likely to be so when examining

differences within schools. We check further that the ethnicity based sorting we find does not

lead us to misinterpret the regressions of measures of academic skills. This could happen

because ethnic minorities on average have lower measures of academic skill. For example, in a

regression of median math SAT percentile that includes school fixed effects, the lack of change

in the teaching fellows coefficient might reflect a combined effect of academic skills sorting


                                                 27
(pushing the coefficient towards zero) and ethnic sorting (pushing the coefficient away from

zero). If this were the case, one should be able to see academic skills sorting when ethnicity is

added as a control variable. This turns out not to be true. Adding a control for being an ethnic

minority barely changes the coefficient on teaching fellow; it moves from 8.6 percentile points

(standard error .44) to 8.45 (standard error .42).

       Unfortunately, we cannot test for sorting on unobservables. However, if the certified

teachers working in the type of schools hiring large numbers of teaching fellows were worse on

unobserved traits, one might have expected to see evidence of sorting on observables as well.



4.5 The Returns to Teaching Experience

       Throughout the analysis above, we were controlling for teaching experience in order to

make comparisons across different groups of teachers. In Table 10, we report results on the

returns to teaching experience in regressions that control for student, classroom average, and

school average baseline characteristics, as well as grade-year fixed effects. There are significant

returns to experience, most of which occur in the first two years of teaching. Teachers in their

second year of teaching have value-added .033 standard deviations higher in math and .023

standard deviations higher in reading than teachers in their first year. Teachers in their third year

of teaching have value-added .052 standard deviations higher in math and .034 standard

deviations higher in reading than teachers in their first year. However, the estimated returns to

additional years of experience are quite small.

       The above estimates of returns to experience are identified using two sources of variation:

comparisons between teachers with varying amounts of experience and comparisons within

teachers (observing changes in outcomes for a given teacher over time). The former source of


                                                     28
variation may lead to selection bias in estimating the returns to experience for the average

teacher. For example, if less effective teachers are more likely to remain teaching, we will

understate the returns to experience; if more effective teachers are more likely to remain, we will

overstate the returns to experience. Estimates of the return to experience that are identified using

variation within teachers over time are not susceptible to these sources of bias. In order to isolate

this variation, we include teacher fixed effects in our regression (column (2) and (8) of Table 10).

The inclusion of teacher fixed effects does not cause our estimates of the return experience to

change in reading, but it substantially increases the returns to experience in math. When

estimated using variation within teachers over time, the returns to experience are significantly

higher in math than in reading. On average, teachers in their 2nd through 4th year of teaching

achieve gains .019, .031 and .035 standard deviations higher in reading than when they were

first-year teachers and .037, .059 and .073 standard deviations higher in math.

       The rise in the estimated return to experience in math when teacher fixed effects are

added to the regression suggests that variation in experience among math teachers is negatively

correlated with variation in other characteristics that raise teacher effectiveness. We consider

several potential sources of bias. First, recently hired cohorts of math teachers may be more

effective than older cohorts. Second, more effective math teachers may have a higher attrition

rate. Third, identification with teacher fixed effects comes almost purely from experience gained

while teaching math to elementary or middle school students in New York, and the returns to

such experience (for individuals teaching math to elementary or middle school students in New

York) may be higher than the returns to experience gained elsewhere. We investigate these

potential sources of bias by estimating regressions that omit teacher fixed effects but include

additional controls that account for the biases mentioned above. If the source of bias is one of


                                                 29
those mentioned, we should find estimated returns to experience are more in line with those from

the regression with teacher fixed effects.22

         First, we control for differences across cohorts by including indicator variables for the

year teachers were hired. For simplicity, we include a single variable for teachers hired at or

before the school year 1992-1993. This change in specification does not move the estimated

returns to teaching experience closer to the teacher fixed effects results (Table 10 column (3)); if

anything, estimated returns are lower when controlling for cohort. Indeed, the pattern of

coefficients for the cohort dummy variables (shown in appendix Table A1) indicates that older

cohorts have slightly higher value-added.

         Next, we include dummy variables identifying teachers who left employment in the

district some time before the fall of 2005. Because selective attrition may vary over teachers’

careers, we include separate dummy variables for teachers who left the district at each level of

teaching experience. Again, this does not move the estimated returns to teaching experience

closer to the teacher fixed effects results; if anything, estimated returns are lower when

controlling for selective attrition. The pattern of coefficients for the attrition dummy variables

(shown in Table A1) indicates that teachers who leave with zero experience have lower value-

added (-.03 standard deviations) than teachers with zero experience who stay. Attrition among

more experienced teachers is not significantly related to teacher effectiveness; the point estimates

are generally positive but statistically distinguishable from zero.

         Next, we control for each teacher’s experience level in the first year for which we observe


22
  In theory, these results could also be driven by specification error. Teacher fixed effects may be correlated with
omitted variables at the school level. Hence, it is possible that the change in the estimated return to experience is
driven by the fact that school fixed effects are omitted from the first regression. However, if we include school fixed
effects (or even school-grade-year fixed effects) and then replace them with school by teacher fixed effects we find
the same increase in the estimated return to experience.



                                                          30
them in our data. Estimated returns to experience in this specification will not be identified from

variation in experience gained prior to observation in our sample and will more closely match the

identifying variation used in the teacher fixed effects specification.23 Including controls for

initial observed experience has a dramatic effect on estimated returns to experience. Estimated

returns in this specification are larger than in the teacher fixed effects regression. Moreover, the

pattern of coefficients on initial observed experience indicates that returns to experience are

significantly smaller if experience was gained prior to observation in our sample. Earlier

experience may come from teaching either inside or outside of New York, and inside or outside

of the grades and subjects we observe in our data. The fact that the return to earlier experience is

lower than experience gained in our sample suggests that experience gained in other districts or

in other grades and subjects is less useful than experience gained teaching math to elementary

and middle school students in New York.

         The issue of heterogeneous returns to different forms of experience has received little

attention in the value added literature, but has important policy implications. For example, if a

large part of the return to experience comes from learning district specific skills, then school

administrators should be far more concerned with retaining their current staff than recruiting

outsiders with experience from other districts. For reasons of space, we do not pursue the issue

further here, but plan to do so in future work.

         In Table 7, we presented some evidence that teaching fellows, TFA corps members, and

uncertified teachers improve, relative to other teachers, over their first few three years teaching in

New York. This suggests that the return to experience may be higher for these teachers than for


23
  Controlling for initial observed experience is different than controlling for cohort. If we had one year of data,
cohort fixed effects would capture most of the variation in observed experience. In a multi-year sample, the
(cont’d on next page)


                                                          31
traditionally certified teachers. There are several reasons why one might think these groups

should have higher returns to experience than traditionally certified teachers. These individuals

generally do not have student teaching experience, unlike traditionally certified teachers who

usually assist and teach in a public school under the supervision of a more experienced teacher

for one or two years while studying. Also, AC teachers are usually studying during their first two

years of teaching, and that might also lead to greater improvements when they complete their

coursework. However, it is equally plausible that returns to experience are higher for

traditionally certified teachers. Traditionally certified teachers, because of their training, may be

better equipped to learn and improve their teaching skills. Furthermore, the coursework AC

teachers are required to take at night and on weekends in their first two years of teaching may

well be a hindrance that stops them from learning as much as possible at work. (Alternatively,

AC teachers could have higher returns to experience; when coursework stops, the AC teachers

could see a jump in performance.)

         We investigate differential returns to experience across teacher certification groups by

including interactions between group dummy variables (e.g., whether a teacher is a teaching

fellow, TFA corps member, etc.) and experience level dummy variables. We also included

teacher fixed effects in these regressions to avoid the sources of selection bias discussed above.

We also restrict our sample to teachers with three years of experience or less, since AC teachers

are almost all in this population.

         In Table 11, we report the coefficients from these regressions and the p-value on the test

of the joint significance of the interactions between experience levels and being a teaching

fellow, being a TFA corps member, and being an uncertified teacher. (We exclude international


predictive power of cohort fixed effects for initial observed experience is greatly reduced.


                                                          32
teachers from this analysis since most arrive with several years of prior teaching experience.) For

math test scores, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the returns to experience are the same for

traditionally certified teachers, teaching fellows, and TFA corps members. However, we can

reject equal returns to experience between uncertified teachers and regularly certified teachers at

the 3 percent confidence level. For reading test scores, we cannot reject equal returns to

experience for traditionally certified teachers, uncertified teachers, and TFA corps members.

However, we could reject the hypothesis that teaching fellows have the same return to experience

as traditionally certified teachers (p-value=7 percent).

        For ease of exposition, in Figure 3 we plot point estimates and 95 percent confidence

intervals for the estimated returns to experience from Table 11. The top left panel of Figure 3

shows the estimated returns for traditionally certified teachers, and each subsequent panel

compares these estimates with estimates from one of the other three groups.24 For both math and

reading test scores, the point estimates for teaching fellows are noticeably higher than those of

traditionally certified teachers. In particular, it appears that teaching fellows gain appreciably

higher returns in their first two years of teaching. For example, for teachers who start with the

same value-added, teaching fellows are expected to have .03 standard deviations higher value-

added than traditionally certified teachers in both reading and math test scores in their third year

of teaching. For uncertified math teachers, initial returns to experience are also appreciably

higher. Given the same initial value-added, uncertified teachers are expected to have .03 standard

deviations higher value-added than traditionally certified teachers in both reading and math test

scores in their third year of teaching.


24
  We do not plot estimates for TFA corps members after 2 years of experience because of extremely large standard
errors.



                                                       33
4.5 Attrition and Steady State Differences in Experience

       Holding constant a teacher’s baseline effectiveness, the positive payoff to teaching

experience implies that there is a cost to hiring a teacher with a higher probability of turnover.

Therefore, an analysis of between-group differences in value-added is not complete without

considering differences in attrition. Suppose that there were two groups of teachers with

identical impacts on student achievement after controlling for experience, but with different

retention rates. Given significant returns to experience, a school district would be better off

hiring the group of teachers with higher retention rates, since this would lead to fewer novice

teachers in the steady state. Lower turnover would also reduce hiring and training costs, though

we do not consider this effect in our analysis here.

       Suppose that e j1 , e j 2 ,...e jT represents the proportion of teachers from a given group j that

would be in their 1st through Tth year of teaching in steady state, given group-specific retention

rates. And suppose δ j represents the mean value-added of group j teachers in their first year of

teaching and that r j 2 ,...r jT represent the average returns to experience for the same group of

teachers in their 2nd through Tth year of teaching. In steady state, the average value-added of the

                                                                 T
jth group of teachers in steady state would be equal to δ j +          e jt r jt .
                                                                t =2


       To study the differences in retention for different groups of teachers, we estimated

logistic regressions of hazard rates for certified, uncertified, and AC teachers hired since the

school year 1999-2000 with 0 to 7 years of experience, while controlling for age (in 5 year




                                                   34
categories) and year dummies.25 Unlike our analysis of teacher effectiveness, we use the full

sample of teachers in the payroll files, and do not limit the analysis to those teaching reading and

math in grades three through eight. However, this has little impact on our results. We also do

not include international recruits; although they have high turnover, they are generally hired with

several years of experience. We included interactions between years of experience and initial

certification status at time of hiring (teaching fellow, TFA corps member and uncertified

teachers). For uncertified teachers, we also included an interaction with the year dummy in 2003.

As mentioned above, starting in the fall of the school year 2003-2004, school districts in New

York State were no longer permitted to employ uncertified teachers. As a result, many of them

left after the school year 2002-2003.

        Figure 4 reports the cumulative retention rates adjusting for age and year for the different

groups of teachers. Teaching fellows have very similar retention rates to regular certified

teachers (with teaching fellows having slightly higher retention rates in the first two years). By

their fifth year in teaching (with four years of experience), approximately 50 percent of both

groups are still with the district.     Uncertified teachers have somewhat lower retention rates, with

45 percent remaining with the district in their fifth year.

        In contrast, Teach for America corps members have much lower cumulative retention

rates. By the fifth year, only about 18 percent of corps members remain with the district.

Presumably, this reflects the fact that TFA corps members sign up for a two-year teaching

commitment.

        Assuming a constant hazard rate between the 5th year and the 30th year of experience,


25
  We found no substantive impact on the results using logistic regression versus OLS, nor adding school fixed
effects.



                                                        35
Figure 5 reports the steady state proportions of all four groups by year of experience implied by

the above analysis. The only large difference is between TFA corps members and the other three

groups. In steady state, TFA corps members would be roughly twice as likely to be in their first

year of teaching ( e1TFA = .256 ) than certified teachers ( e1Cert = .111 ).

        The above framework provides a means for resolving a longstanding debate about the

TFA program. Many supporters of the TFA program argue that corps members have larger

impacts on student achievement than regularly certified teachers, particularly among those

certified teachers willing to work in low-income schools (that is, they argue that the corps

members have a high δ TFA ). Critics of the program argue that because of high turnover rates,

school districts are constantly having to replace TFA corps members with novice teachers (i.e.,

they argue that the program has low e j 2 ,...e jT ). To the extent that novice teachers underperform

experienced teachers, there would be some cost to hiring high-turnover teachers. But it is a

question of magnitude. Both groups could be correct in their assertions, but the net result

depends upon the magnitude of the differences in retention rates and experience-adjusted impacts

on student performance. Assuming that returns to experience are similar between TFA corps

members and certified teachers (which is consistent with our findings), we can calculate the

difference between δ TFA and δ Cert that would be required to ensure that TFA corps members had

larger steady state impacts than certified teachers:

                                             T                             T
                                  δ TFA +          eTFAt rt > δ Cert +           eCertt rt
                                            t =2                          t =2
                                                               T
                                     (δ TFA − δ Cert ) >             (eCertt − eTFAt )rt
                                                              t =2



        We do this using the point estimates from Table 10, columns (2) and (8), which are not

affected by common selection biases such as correlation between attrition and teacher

                                                            36
effectiveness. We estimate that δ TFA − δ Cert would have to be greater than .019 in math and .012

in reading in order for TFA corps members to have greater steady state value-added.26 This is

quite a modest difference. In other words, despite large differences in retention rates, the

differences in returns to experience and retention rates are not enough to generate large

differences in steady-state impacts between TFA and other groups of teachers.27 The results of

our analysis suggest that even the small positive difference in value-added for TFA corps

members’ teaching math is enough to compensate for their higher turnover.




5. Variation in Value-Added Within Groups of Teachers

         The evidence presented above suggests that there are little or no differences in average

value-added between groups of teachers with different types of certification. It is important to

distinguish this lack of variation from variation in value added among teachers within each of

these groups. Variation in teacher effectiveness within groups provides a measure of the

potential benefits of policies that enable districts to selectively retain only the highest performing

teachers.

         In order to measure variation in value-added among teachers, we first estimate each

teacher'
       s value-added in each class and year controlling for student, classroom, and school

characteristics, as well as grade by year fixed effects. Specifically, we first take estimates of

equation (1) and calculate classroom average residuals ( ε jct )


26
   If we limited our analysis only to teachers included in our regression analysis, we estimate that δ TFA − δ Cert
would have to be greater than .014 in math and .008 in reading in order for TFA corps members to have greater
steady state value-added. These differences are approximately two-thirds of those for the full sample of teachers.
27
   Ballou (1996) makes this point more generally using a simulation. Large differences in turnover and modest
experience effects do not generate large costs to hiring high turnover teachers in terms of value added.



                                                          37
                (1) Ait = β g X it + γ g X itc + ζ g X its + δWit + π gt + ε it , ε jct =    1
                                                                                            N jct            ε it
                                                                                                    i ,t∈ j ,c ,t



εjct is the average student level residual for classroom c, taught by teacher j, in year t. Our sample

restrictions are the same as in the analysis in Section 4. The residual ( ε jct ) represents each

teacher'
       s individual contribution to value-added in that class—a teacher'
                                                                       s performance residual in

class c and year t , after controlling for the teacher’s observable characteristics and the observable

characteristics of his/her students, classroom, and school.

        There is considerable variation in this teacher performance residual in any given year. As

can be seen in Table 12, the standard deviation of ε jct is 0.21 student standard deviations for

elementary school math, and 0.20 for elementary school reading, with only slightly less variation

in middle school. In other words, even within grade-year cells and after controlling for

observable differences among classrooms, the standard deviation in our estimates of teacher

value-added is about one-fifth of a student-level standard deviation. The finding of large

variation in value-added is common to other studies of teachers, e.g., Aaronson et al. (2003),

Rockoff (2004), Rivkin et al. (2005), and Hanushek et al. (2005).

        Of course, not all of this variation is the result of persistent differences in ability across

teachers: some of the variation may reflect random sampling error in estimating the teacher fixed

effect, while some may reflect other non-persistent factors such as a particularly disruptive

student or a dog barking on the day of the test.

        A simple method of determining the proportion of the variation that is persistent from

classroom to classroom is to estimate correlations in the teacher performance residuals when

teaching in different years. Suppose we decompose ε jct into two components: a persistent

component ( µ jct ) that represents teacher effectiveness and a non-persistent component ( ξ jct ) that


                                                         38
represents sampling variation, unobserved classroom characteristics, and other idiosyncratic

shocks to classroom performance. The non-persistent component is independent from class to

class. If the persistent component is fixed across years (i.e., unchanging teacher effectiveness

with µ jct = µ j ), then it is straightforward to show that the covariance in              jct   between any two

classrooms is equal to the variance of the persistent component.28

         In Table 12, we also report estimates of the standard deviation in the signal variance

based on the covariance in the teacher performance residual (                jct)   between classrooms. The

estimates suggest that there is a large persistent component in the teacher residuals, particularly

in elementary schools. In elementary schools, the standard deviation of the persistent component

of teacher performance ( µ j ) is estimated to be 0.13 in math and 0.10 in reading. There is slightly

less variation (0.12 and 0.08) in teacher performance among novice teachers —those in their first

3 years of teaching —with similar amounts of variation found among certified, uncertified, and

teaching fellows. In results not reported in the table, we found little variation across cohorts of

teachers in the estimated signal variance, while within cohorts of teachers the estimated signal

variance was always lower for novice teachers. Thus, less variation in performance among new

teachers reflects an experience effect (as teachers gain experience, the variation in performance

grows) rather than a cohort effect (recent cohorts are not more uniform in performance).

         In middle school, we see considerably less variation, with the standard deviation of the



28
  The assumption that teacher effects are the same across classrooms and time may be too strong. If the persistent
component follows a time series process such as an AR(1) or a martingale (e.g., teacher ability evolves over time
with µ jt = ρ jt −1 +ν jt ), then the correlation in ε between any two years will be strongest in adjacent years.
Similarly, if a teacher'  s skills are specific to particular subject matter, then the correlation in ε between any two
classes will be stronger when the subject matter is more closely related (e.g. 2 sections of the same course). We did
not see any consistent evidence that the correlations were stronger in adjacent years, but there was evidence from
middle school that correlations were stronger between sections of the same course. We discuss this issue in more
detail when we present our results.



                                                           39
persistent component of performance being about two-thirds as large. Part of the explanation for

this result is that performance is less persistent when a middle school teacher is teaching different

courses (e.g., advanced versus remedial math): when we focus on teachers teaching the same

course in multiple classrooms (the bottom panel of Table 12), the persistent component grows.

To the extent that teachers in middle school often change the courses they teach from year to

year, this will make it more difficult to reliably identify performance differences for middle

school teachers.

       For both math and reading in elementary and middle school, the estimates in Table 12

imply that there are large and persistent performance differences across teachers. If we were able

to rank teachers by their value added, the difference in average value added between the top 25

percent and the bottom 25 percent of teachers would be approximately 2.5 times the standard

deviation across teachers (assuming that teacher performance is normally distributed). Thus, the

estimates in Table 12 imply that the average value added among the top quarter of elementary

school math teachers is 0.33 standard deviations greater than the value added among the bottom

25 percent of teachers. For middle school teachers, this difference is somewhat smaller, but there

is still at least a 0.20 standard deviation difference in value added between the top and bottom 25

percent of teachers. In other words, the impact of assigning a student to a bottom quarter teacher

rather than a top quarter teacher is roughly three times the impact of being assigned to a novice

teacher rather than an experienced teacher, and more than ten times the impact of being assigned

to a teacher with a particular kind of certification or from a particular program!

       Figure 6 shows the variation in teacher effectiveness (value-added) within and among

four groups of teachers—certified, uncertified, Teaching Fellows, and Teach for America. This

figure plots kernel density estimates of the distribution of the persistent component ( µ j ) of


                                                  40
teacher effectiveness (value-added). For each teacher, we estimated their persistent component

using an empirical Bayes (shrinkage) estimator of the form (ignoring the c subscript, and

assuming that every classroom has the same number of students for simplicity):



                       E (µ j | ε j ,1 ,..., ε j ,t ) = ε
                                                                                                 t
                                                                  t
                                                                               , where ε = 1t          ε j ,s
                                                                 σ ξ2                           s =1
                                                            t+
                                                                        σ µ2

In other words, the estimate of each teacher’s performance residual is simply their average

teacher performance residual multiplied by a scaling factor. The scaling factor lies between zero

and one, and depends positively on the number of years the teacher has been observed, and

depends negatively on the ratio of noise (non-persistent) variance to signal (persistent) variance.

Thus, these estimators account for noise in the teacher estimates (which overstates the dispersion

across teachers) by shrinking noisier estimates back toward zero. The estimates of noise and

signal variance come from Table 12. Finally, we add the mean difference between groups (from

Table 6, columns 3 and 8) to the each teacher’s empirical Bayes estimate of their performance

residual.

        While the differences between the four groups observed in Figure 6 are small, the

differences within the four groups are quite dramatic. In other words, there is not much

difference between certified, uncertified, and alternatively certified teachers overall, but

effectiveness varies substantially among each group of teachers. To put it simply, teachers vary

considerably in the extent to which they promote student learning, but whether a teacher is

certified or not is largely irrelevant to predicting their effectiveness.


7. Conclusion

        State and federal efforts to regulate teacher effectiveness focus almost entirely on ex ante

                                                                 41
qualifications of prospective teachers. For example, under the federal No Child Left Behind act,

states and districts are required to hire certified teachers or those enrolled in an alternative

certification program. However, our results suggest the emphasis on certification status may be

misplaced. We find little difference in the average academic achievement impacts of certified,

uncertified and alternatively certified teachers.

        On average, the students assigned to teaching fellows performed similarly to students

assigned to certified teachers in math, and slightly lower (-.01 standard deviations) in reading.

This average difference belies somewhat larger gaps among novice teachers (-.02 standard

deviations) and no differences between teaching fellows and certified teachers with multiple

years of experience. This is because teaching fellows have somewhat higher average returns to

experience than certified teachers in generating reading gains at the beginning of their careers.

        We find evidence that Teach for America corps members have slightly higher value-

added (.02 standard deviations) for math test scores than traditionally certified teachers, but we

find no difference in reading. (Although the magnitudes of our estimates are smaller, Decker et

al. find the same pattern of positive effects on math but not reading in their evaluation of TFA.)

The other notable difference between TFA corps members and other teachers is that they have

much higher turnover after two years, reflecting the two-year commitment that is part of the TFA

program. We estimate that the steady-state difference in experience between TFA corps

members and other teachers implies a small loss in value-added of about -.01 or -.02 standard

deviations. Thus, the cost of higher TFA turnover (i.e., more of them will be novice teachers) in

terms of value-added is quite small, and, at least in math, appears to be compensated by higher




                                                    42
average teacher effectiveness.29

         The fact that we find little or no differences in the average teacher effectiveness of

certified, uncertified, and AC teachers does not imply that selection of teachers is unimportant.

The standard deviation in value-added among teachers is roughly .10 student level standard

deviations. Moreover, variation in effectiveness is roughly equivalent within each group of

teachers (e.g., certified teachers, teaching fellows, etc.). To put this value in context, raising the

effectiveness of novice teachers in New York by one standard deviation would have a similar

impact on student achievement as the expected improvement of novices who spend 8 years

teaching in the district! Thus, policies that enable districts to attract and retain high quality

teachers (or screen-out less effective teachers) have potentially large benefits for student

achievement.

         Our work suggests that selecting high quality teachers at the time of hire may be difficult

if districts rely on information related to teachers’ academic background. We find that neither

selectivity of undergraduate institution nor undergraduate GPA have predictive power for a

teaching fellow’s value-added, yet these characteristics are highly predictive of whether or not an

applicant is selected to become a teaching fellow.

         The large observable differences in teacher effectiveness ex post suggest that districts

should use performance on the job, rather than initial certification status to improve average

teacher effectiveness. Recent research on teachers certified by the National Board for

Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) suggests that ex post measurement of teacher quality



29
  It is also worth noting that TFA corps members leave teaching for other positions in education. TFA alumni
surveys indicate that more than 50 percent of its corps members are working in education even ten years after they
enter the program, 18 alumni are currently working as principals or assistant principals in New York City’s schools,
and another ten alumni are working for the DOE in other district level jobs.



                                                         43
has large potential benefits.30 Goldhaber and Anthony (2004), Cavalluzzo (2004) and

Vandevoort, Amrein-Beardsley and Berliner (2004) all find that student achievement is higher in

classrooms taught by NBPTS certified teachers. Admittedly, some states and districts, such as

the Los Angeles Unified School District, offer salary bonuses to those with certification by the

NBPTS. However, most of those bonus programs preceded the recent evidence that these

teachers are more effective in promoting student achievement.

        While traditional measures of teacher effectiveness, e.g. certification, have come up short,

more research is needed on alternative, non-traditional ex ante measures. It is also important to

investigate the potential use of value-added measures as an ex post signal of teacher

effectiveness. Value-added measures have drawbacks, such as their limited scope and their

potential malleability (Figlio 2005 and Figlio and Winicki 2002), but they also have appealing

characteristics, such as objectivity, and the data necessary to construct them is already being

collected by most school districts. We intend to pursue these issues in future work.




30
   The NBPTS, a non-profit organization, was created in 1987 to provide an objective means for recognizing and
rewarding effective teaching. When applying for certification by NBPTS, teachers provide a videotape of their work
in front of class, submit examples of written assignments and the feedback they provided to students, and answer a
number of essay questions in a testing center.



                                                       44
References:
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow and William Sander. (2003) “Teachers and Student Achievement
       in the Chicago Public Schools,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago WP-2002-28.

Ballou, Dale (1996) “Do Public Schools Hire the Best Applicants?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, February 1996

Boyd, Donald, Pamela Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, James Wyckoff (2005a)
       “How Reduced Barriers to Entry into Teaching Changes the Teacher Workforce and
       Affects Student Achievement” Manuscript, July 2005.

Boyd, Donald, Pamela Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, James Wyckoff (2005b)
       “How Reduced Barriers to Entry into Teaching Changes the Teacher Workforce and
       Affects Student Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. 11844, December 2005.

Cavalluzzo, Linda C. (2004) “Is National Board Certification an Effective Signal of Teacher
       Quality?” CNA Corporation Working Paper, November, 2004.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor (2006) “Teacher-Student Matching
        and the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness,” NBER Working Paper No. 11936, January
        2006.

Darling-Hammond, Linda, Deborah J. Holtzman, Su Jin Gatlin and Julian Vasquez Heilig.
       (2005) “Does Teacher Preparation Matter? Evidence about Teacher Certification, Teach
       for America, and Teacher Effectiveness,” Stanford University Working Paper, April
       2005.

Decker, Paul T., Daniel P. Mayer and Steven Glazerman. (2004) “The Effects of Teach For
       America on Students: Findings from a National Evaluation,” Mathematica Policy
       Research Report No. 8792-750, June 9, 2004.

Ehrenberg, Ronald and Dominic Brewer. (1994) “Do School and Teacher Characteristics
      Matter?: Evidence from High School and Beyond,” Economics of Education Review
      Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-17.

Ferguson, Ronald and Helen Ladd. (1996) “How and Why Money Matters: An Analysis of
       Alabama Schools,” in Helen Ladd (ed.) Holding Schools Accountable (Washington, DC:
       Brookings Institution).

Feistritzer, Emily C. (2005) Alternative Teacher Certification: A State-by-State Analysis: 2005,
        (Washington, DC: National Center for Education Information, 2005).

Figlio, David N. (2005) “Testing, Crime and Punishment,” NBER Working Paper 11194, March
        2005.




                                               45
Figlio, David N. and Joshua Winicki. (2002) “Food for Thought: The Effects of School
        Accountability Plans on School Nutrition” NBER Working Paper No. 9319, November,
        2002.

Goldhaber, Dale and Emily Anthony. (2004) “Can Teacher Quality Be Effectively Assessed?”
      University of Washington and Urban Institute Working Paper, April 27, 2004.

Hanushek, Eric. (1971) “Teacher Characteristics and Gains in Student Achievement: Estimation
      using Micro Data,” American Economic Review Vol. 61, No. 2, pp. 280-288.

Hanushek, Eric and Steven G. Rivkin. (2004) “How to Improve the Supply of High-Quality
      Teachers,” in Diane Ravitch (Ed.) Brookings Papers on Education Policy 2004
      (Washington DC: Brookings Institution)

Hanushek, Eric, John F. Kain, Daniel O’Brien and Steven G. Rivkin. (2005) “The Market for
      Teacher Quality,” NBER Working Paper 11154, February 2005.

Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff and Douglas O. Staiger. (2005) “Identifying Effective
       Teachers in New York City” Manuscript, July 2005.

Murnane, Richard. (1975) “The Impact of School Resources on the Learning of Inner City
      Children,” (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger).

Raymond, Margaret, Stephen H. Fletcher and Javier Luque. (2001) “Teach For America: An
     Evaluation of Teacher Differences and Student Outcomes in Houston, Texas,” (Stanford,
     CA: The Hoover Institution, Center for Research on Education Outcomes).

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric Hanushek, and John Kain. (2005) “Teachers, Schools and Academic
       Achievement,” Econometrica Vol. 73, No. 2.

Rockoff, Jonah E. (2004) “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement:
      Evidence from Panel Data,” American Economic Review, May Papers and Proceedings.
Summers, Anita and Barbara Wolfe. (1977) “Do Schools Make a Difference?” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 4, pp. 639-652.

Vandevoort, Leslie G., Audrey Amrein-Beardsley and David Berliner. (2004) “National Board
      Certified Teachers and Their Students’ Achievement,” Education Policy Analysis
      Archives Vol. 12, No. 46.




                                              46
Appendix: Additional Specification Checks

       Analyses of teacher quality have generally used one of four different empirical

specifications, which we will refer to as “quasi-gains,” “gains,” “levels with fixed effects,” and

“gains with fixed effects.” Our specification falls under the “quasi-gains” category: the

dependent variable in our regressions is the level of current student achievement, and prior

achievement levels are used as control variables. In a “gains” specification, the dependent

variable would be the change in student test scores from the current period to some base period,

usually the end of the prior school year (see Rivkin et al. 2005). This is essentially a quasi-gains

specification where past achievement is restricted to have a one-to-one relationship with current

achievement. In a “levels with fixed effects” specification, the level of current student

achievement is the dependent variable and student fixed effects—not prior achievement levels—

are used as control variables (see Rockoff (2004)). A “gains with fixed effects” specification, as

the name implies, combines both of these features.

       The results shown in this paper do not vary when we use any of these three other

approaches. In columns (1) and (5) of Table A2, we display the main results of our paper,

replicated from columns (3) and (8) of table 6. In columns (2) and (6) we show results using a

“gains” specification, in columns (3) and (7) we show results using a “levels with fixed effects”

specification, and in columns (4) and (8) we show results using a “gains with fixed effects”

specification. While the point estimates change slightly across specifications, the qualitative

findings of our analysis are unchanged. Teaching Fellows perform similarly to certified teachers

in math instruction but slightly worse in reading instruction, a difference of about .01 standard

deviations. In math, TFA corps members perform slightly better (.02 standard deviations) and




                                                 47
international teachers perform slightly worse (-.03 standard deviations). Overall, there is little

evidence of substantial variation in value-added between groups of teachers.




                                                 48
Table 1: Characteristics of Teachers by Certification and Program
                                                Regular           Regular            Teaching           Teach For          Internat'l
                                                Certified        Uncertified          Fellow             America            Teacher

Number of Teachers                                23,306            15,910              8,976              1,544             2,052


Black                                             11.1%              30.9%             18.9%               8.9%              40.1%

Hispanic                                           8.9%              17.7%             11.2%               9.1%               7.9%

Female                                            79.8%              66.7%             66.7%              72.6%              72.9%

Median Age at Hire                                   27                29                 27                 23                36

Graduate Education at Hire                        35.5%              15.0%             13.9%               3.6%              60.1%

College SAT Math Pctile                              59                55                 68                 74                n/a

College SAT Verbal Pctile                            63                59                 73                 79                n/a
Note: This table includes data for teachers hired during the 1999-2000 to 2004-2005 school years. Age at hire is calculated as the
difference between school year and birth year. College data is unavailable for over 99% of international teachers, so we do not report
means of SAT percentiles for this group.




                                                              49
Table 2: School Avg. Student Characteristics, by Certification and Program
                                                Regular            Regular          Teaching         Teach For          Internat'l
                                                Certified         Uncertified        Fellow           America           Program

Black or Hispanic                                 72.8%             78.4%             88.1%             96.2%             89.1%

Free Lunch                                        70.5%             72.4%             80.3%             88.9%             77.4%

English Language Learner                          13.4%             13.6%             15.3%             19.0%             14.2%

Special Education                                 10.3%             10.3%             10.9%             13.2%             10.2%

Math Pass (ES)                                    78.1%             69.8%             69.2%             68.6%             66.3%

English Pass (ES)                                 83.7%             79.3%             76.5%             75.9%             77.4%

Math Pass (HS)                                    68.9%             66.8%             65.6%               n/a             63.5%

English Pass (HS)                                 75.3%             75.3%             72.5%               n/a             71.6%

Graduation Rate                                   58.8%             57.2%             55.4%               n/a             53.5%
Note: "Math/English Pass (ES)" denotes the fraction of students scoring above level 1 on city and state exams for grades 3-8.
"Math/English Pass (HS)" denotes the fraction of students scoring above a 55 on the state Regents examinations. High school
information is not given for Teach for America corps members because very few of these teachers work in high schools; less than 3
percent of all TFA corps members teach in schools that do not serve grades three to eight.




                                                             50
Table 3: Sample Selection of Teachers Hired Since 1999, by Certification and Program
                                                                                                                 Teach
                                                   All            Regular       Regular    Teaching               For          Internat'l
                                                 Teachers         Certified    Uncertified Fellow               America        Program
Total                                             51,977           23,306        15,910      8,976               1,544           2,052

Worked in School Serving Grades 4-8 42,075                         19,160         12,979           7,060          1,431          1,356
Percent of Total                     81%                            82%            82%             79%            93%            66%

Matched with Student Data                         16,542           6,447           5,939           2,933            592            602
Percent of Total                                   32%             28%             37%             33%             38%            29%

Regression Sample                                 10,040           4,465           3,037           1,749            416            366
Percent of Total                                   19%             19%             19%             19%             27%            18%
Note: This includes only teachers hired from the 1999-2000 through 2004-2005 school years. Regression sample refers to teachers successfully
matched with students included in our analysis. See the text for additional details on sample selection.




                                                             51
Table 4: Teacher Characteristics by Certification, Program, and Sample Selection
                                          Regular Certified               Regular Uncertified                Teach For America                 Internat'l Program                Teaching Fellow
                                         Full    Regression                Full   Regression                 Full    Regression                 Full    Regression              Full    Regression
                                        Sample     Sample                Sample     Sample                  Sample     Sample                 Sample       Sample              Sample    Sample

Number of Teachers                      23,306           4,027            15,910          3,113              1,544            445              2,052            419              8,976          1,845


Black                                    11.1%           13.4%            30.9%           37.9%              8.9%           11.2%              40.1%          64.9%             18.9%           24.6%

Hispanic                                  8.9%            8.0%            17.7%           16.2%              9.1%            9.4%               7.9%           6.4%             11.2%           10.0%

Female                                   79.8%           82.5%            66.7%           71.2%             72.6%           68.3%              72.9%          81.1%             66.7%           66.6%

Median Age at Hire                         27              27                29             28                 23              23                36              38                27             27

College SAT Math Pctile                    59              58                55             55                 74              75                n/a            n/a                68             67

College SAT Verbal Pctile                  63              61                59             59                 79              81                n/a            n/a                73             73

Graduate Education                       35.5%           36.9%            15.0%           12.9%              3.6%            4.3%              60.1%          66.3%             13.9%           15.8%
Note: This table includes data for teachers hired during the 1999-2000 to 2004-2005 school years. Regression sample refers to teachers successfully matched with students included in our analysis. See the
text for additional details on sample selection.
Table 5: Student Characteristics in Full and Regression Samples, by Certification and Program
                                      Regular Certified                Regular Uncertified             Teaching Fellow                 Teach For America                Internat'l Program
                                      Full   Regression                 Full Regression                Full Regression                 Full   Regression                 Full    Regression
                                     Sample    Sample                  Sample Sample                  Sample Sample                   Sample    Sample                 Sample      Sample

Black or Hispanic                     72.8%           69.8%             78.4%          78.2%           88.1%          90.4%            96.2%          96.5%             89.1%           92.7%

Free Lunch                            70.5%           67.2%             72.4%          74.3%           80.3%          80.9%            80.3%          84.6%             88.9%           79.8%

English Language Learner 13.4%                         2.5%             13.6%           3.5%           15.3%           5.2%            15.3%           7.6%             19.0%           4.7%

Special Education                     10.3%            0.3%             10.3%           0.4%           10.9%           0.2%            10.9%           0.2%             13.2%           0.2%

Math Pass (ES)                        78.1%           83.7%             69.8%          76.3%           69.2%          75.8%            69.2%          70.7%             68.6%           69.0%

English Pass (ES)                     83.7%           90.4%             79.3%          86.6%           76.5%          84.8%            76.5%          81.3%             75.9%           81.5%

Note: Characteristics in the full sample represent the school average characteristics of students in the school in which teachers work. Characteristics in the regression sample represent the
characteristics of students in teachers'classrooms. The regression sample does not include classrooms: in which fewer than seven or more than 45 students are tested; where the teacher did not
work in the school during the entire year; where the teacher is listed as working in more than one school per year; where less than 75% of students in the school-year cell were successfully matched
to a teacher; where where 25% or more of the students receive special education. In addition, the regression sample does not include students who were not tested in the prior year, since that is
used as a control variable. "Math/English Pass (ES)" denotes the fraction of students scoring above level 1 on city and state exams for grades 3-8.




                                                                                                 1
Table 6: Differences Between Teacher Certification Groups in Math and Reading Value-Added
                                             Math                                         Reading
                                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
Teaching Fellow                    -0.199         0.004          0.007          0.004          0.000          -0.238        -0.017        -0.012        -0.016        -0.012
                                   (0.014)       (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.014)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)
Teach for America                  -0.280         0.012          0.019          0.031          0.024          -0.311        -0.018        -0.003        -0.000         0.005
                                   (0.022)       (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.023)       (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)
Internat'
        l Programs                 -0.476        -0.054         -0.027         -0.029         -0.023          -0.445        -0.030         0.004         0.002         0.004
                                   (0.025)       (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.026)       (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.007)
Other Uncertified                  -0.126        -0.005          0.002          0.001         -0.000          -0.128        -0.010        -0.000         0.002         0.005
                                   (0.011)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.011)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)

Student Covariates
Class Average Covariates
School Average Covariates
School FE
School*Grade*Year FE
Grade*Year FE
Sample Size                      1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100                           1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479
  2
R                                   0.03      0.67      0.68      0.68      0.70                                0.03      0.63      0.64      0.64      0.66
Note: Coefficients on indicator variables for TOP scholars and Peace Corps fellows were also estimated but were not reported given large standard errors. All specifications
include dummy variables for teacher experience, a dummy for those missing experience and a dummy for those hired before the 1999-2000 school year. Student-level covariates
include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year math and reading scores, gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch status, an
indicator for special education status, and an indicator for English Language Learners. Each of these were also interacted with grade level. The school average and class average
covariates included the school-level and classroom-level means of the student-level covariates and class size, each also interacted with grade level. Standard errors (in
parentheses) allow for clustering within school, grade level and year.




                                                                                    1
Table 7: Additional Estimates of Between Group Differences in Teacher Value-Added
                               Baseline                                          Schools w/  Schools w/                              Teachers
                               Estimates        Students in      Students in       Above       Below     Teachers with               with One Teachers with
                             from Table 6       Elementary         Middle        Median Avg Median Avg Zero Years of                  Year of  Two Years of
Math Test Scores               Column 3           Grades           Grades        Test Scores Test Scores  Experience                Experience Experience

Teaching Fellow                  0.007            0.001             0.003           0.006           0.001             -0.009           0.005           0.018
                                (0.005)          (0.007)           (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.006)           (0.008)          (0.009)         (0.012)
                                [1,261]           [784]             [477]           [336]           [925]              [505]           [410]           [203]
Teach for America                0.019            0.015             0.027           0.039           0.016             -0.006           0.016           0.021
                                (0.009)          (0.015)           (0.011)         (0.026)         (0.010)           (0.013)          (0.017)         (0.031)
                                 [260]            [145]             [115]            [41]           [219]              [127]            [96]            [20]
Internat'
        l Programs               -0.027           0.002             -0.033          -0.028          -0.036            -0.005           -0.034         -0.024
                                (0.008)          (0.017)           (0.009)         (0.017)         (0.009)           (0.029)          (0.028)         (0.024)
                                  [238]            [76]              [162]           [49]            [189]             [16]             [15]            [16]
Uncertified Teachers             0.002           -0.005             -0.001          0.000           0.001             -0.017           -0.015         -0.000
                                (0.003)          (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.008)
                                [2,210]          [1,243]             [967]          [883]          [1,327]             [539]            [498]          [430]
Sample Size                   1,462,100          749,552          712,548          796,388         665,712          129,000          163,612          139,941
R2                               0.68              0.66             0.70             0.66            0.60             0.65             0.65             0.66

                               Baseline                                          Schools w/  Schools w/                              Teachers
                               Estimates        Students in      Students in       Above       Below     Teachers with               with One Teachers with
                             from Table 6       Elementary         Middle        Median Avg Median Avg Zero Years of                  Year of  Two Years of
Reading                        Column 3           Grades           Grades        Test Scores Test Scores  Experience                Experience Experience

Teaching Fellow                  -0.012          -0.018             -0.009          -0.009          -0.009            -0.018           -0.007         -0.003
                                (0.004)          (0.006)           (0.006)         (0.009)         (0.005)           (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.011)
                                [1,246]           [756]              [490]           [289]           [957]             [546]            [397]          [205]
Teach for America                -0.003          -0.012             -0.001          0.002           0.001             -0.015           0.005          -0.025
                                (0.007)          (0.011)           (0.009)         (0.017)         (0.008)           (0.011)          (0.012)         (0.021)
                                  [301]           [140]              [161]           [43]           [258]              [167]           [100]            [18]
Internat'
        l Programs               0.004           -0.008             0.006           0.045           -0.011            0.062            -0.018         -0.025
                                (0.008)          (0.015)           (0.009)         (0.017)         (0.009)           (0.027)          (0.025)         (0.031)
                                 [219]             [78]             [141]            [51]            [168]             [12]             [15]            [11]
Uncertified Teachers             -0.000           0.002             -0.006          -0.002          0.004             -0.013           -0.010         -0.012
                                (0.003)          (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.004)           (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)
                                [2,100]          [1,214]             [886]           [832]         [1,268]             [450]            [500]          [427]
Sample Size                   1,366,479          746,465          620,014          768,767         597,712          125,857          159,126          140,292
R2                               0.64              0.63             0.66             0.62            0.57             0.61             0.62             0.63

Note: The number of teachers from each group included in the regression is shown in brackets. All specifications (excluding those where experience is used to
restrict the sample) include dummy variables for years of teaching experience and a dummy for those missing experience. They also include student-level
covariates, and class and school average student covariates, each interacted with grade level. Student covariates include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year
math and reading scores, gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch status, an indicator for special education status,
an indicator for English Language Learners. Elementary grades are 4 and 5, middle grades are 7 and 8. 6th graders are considered elementary if they attend a
school where the maximum grade is 6, otherwise they are considered middle. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for clustering within school, grade level and
year.
Table 8: Teaching Fellows'Academic Credentials and Value-Added
                                                       Math                                              Reading
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)            (5)                (6)
Teaching Fellow                       0.005           0.004            0.004             -0.013           -0.012           -0.012
                                     (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)
College SAT Math Decile 0.003                                          0.003              0.000                             0.000
                        (0.002)                                       (0.002)            (0.002)                           (0.002)
College GPA                                          -0.008           -0.009                              -0.007           -0.008
                                                     (0.011)          (0.011)                             (0.011)          (0.011)
SAT Math * GPA                                                        -0.006                                               -0.001
                                                                      (0.006)                                              (0.006)

Sample Size                        1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100                       1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479
    2
R                                      0.68            0.68             0.68               0.64             0.64             0.64

Note: Standard errors (in paretheses) allow for clustering within school, grade level and year. All specifications include dummy
variables for participation in other recruitment programs, being an uncertified teacher, teacher experience, a dummy for those missing
experience, a dummy for those hired before the school year 1999-2000, and student, classroom, and school level covariates. Student-
level covariates include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year math and reading scores, gender, six categories for race and ethnicity,
an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch status, an indicator for special education status, an indicator for English Language
Learners. Each of these were also interacted with grade level. The classroom and school covariates included the classroom-level and
school-level means of all the student-level covariates, each also interacted with grade level. Controls are also included for a teaching
fellow missing either GPA or SAT scores when those variables are included in the regressions.
Table 9: Sorting on Observables of Teachers Among Schools
                                        Has a                Percentile Math SAT           Percentile Verbal SAT                  Age                   Black or Hispanic
                                   Graduate Degree           of Undergaduate Inst.         of Undergaduate Inst.               (in Years)                Race/Ethnicity
                                    (1)       (2)                (3)       (4)                 (5)        (6)                (7)        (8)               (9)       (10)
Teaching Fellow                   -0.211        -0.190          8.217         8.632           9.704         9.097           1.830        0.749           0.111        0.013
                                  (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.369)       (0.442)         (0.418)       (0.499)         (1.074)      (1.189)         (0.006)      (0.006)
Teach for America                 -0.279        -0.236         16.460        17.413          17.090        16.213          -4.368       -5.155          -0.010       -0.177
                                  (0.011)       (0.012)        (2.297)       (2.363)         (2.599)       (2.668)         (2.258)      (2.541)         (0.012)      (0.012)
Internat'
        l Programs                 0.108         0.126          0.614        -2.961           5.120         2.569           7.489        6.238           0.273        0.164
                                  (0.009)       (0.010)        (7.543)       (7.547)         (8.534)       (8.522)         (1.991)      (2.128)         (0.010)      (0.010)
Uncertified Teachers              -0.219        -0.211         -2.138        -2.258          -1.928        -1.458           1.661        1.071           0.249        0.209
                                  (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.415)       (0.457)         (0.469)       (0.516)         (0.984)      (1.065)         (0.005)      (0.005)

School Fixed Effects
Sample Size                       52,977        52,977         15,147        15,147          15,147        15,147          52,977       52,977          52,977       52,977
Note: The sample is limited to all teachers hired before the 1999-2000 school year, observed in their first year of working in New York City. Differences were also estimated
for TOP scholars and Peace Corps Fellows but were not reported given the small number of teachers in these programs.
Table 10: The Returns to Teaching Experience for Math and Reading Value-Added
                                                                                           Math                                                             Reading
(Relative to 0 Years Experience)                  (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)              (8)
1 Year Experience                                0.033           0.037            0.027           0.030           0.048           0.039              0.023            0.019
                                                (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.004)
2 Years Experience                               0.052           0.059            0.044           0.049           0.074           0.064              0.034            0.031
                                                (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.005)            (0.004)          (0.004)
3 Years Experience                               0.055           0.073            0.045           0.051           0.088           0.076              0.035            0.035
                                                (0.004)         (0.005)          (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.006)            (0.004)          (0.005)
4 Years Experience                               0.061           0.080            0.051           0.058           0.102           0.090              0.041            0.041
                                                (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.006)         (0.007)            (0.005)          (0.006)
5 Years Experience                               0.056           0.087            0.046           0.054           0.107           0.094              0.045            0.049
                                                (0.005)         (0.007)          (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.007)            (0.005)          (0.007)
6 Years Experience                               0.058           0.089            0.048           0.056           0.117           0.103              0.035            0.042
                                                (0.005)         (0.008)          (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.008)            (0.005)          (0.008)
7+ Years Experience                              0.051           0.088            0.050           0.050           0.130           0.115              0.044            0.052
                                                (0.004)         (0.008)          (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.008)            (0.004)          (0.009)

Teacher Fixed Effects
Cohort Fixed Effects
Attrition Interactions
Initial Experience Effects
Sample Size                                   1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100                                         1,366,086 1,366,086
  2
R                                                0.68      0.71      0.68      0.68      0.68      0.68                                              0.64      0.66
Note: Standard errors allow for clustering within school, grade level and year. All specifications include student, classroom, and school covariates, as well as dummy variables
for teacher certification status and a dummy for those missing experience. Student-level covariates include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year math and reading scores,
gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch status, an indicator for special education status, an indicator for English Language
Learners. Each of these were also interacted with grade level. Classroom level and school-level covariates included the classroom-level and school-level means of all the student-
level covariates, each also interacted with grade level.




                                                                                       1
Table 11: Differences in Math and Reading Impacts by Teacher
Experience for Regular Certified Teachers and Teaching Fellows
                                                                   Math                               Reading
2nd Year Teachers                                                  0.033                                0.018
(Relative to 1st Yr)                                              (0.006)                              (0.006)
3rd Year                                                           0.047                                0.027
                                                                  (0.007)                              (0.006)
4th Year                                                           0.069                                0.037
                                                                  (0.009)                              (0.008)
5th+ Year                                                          0.082                                0.048
                                                                  (0.010)                              (0.010)
Teaching Fellow                                                    0.011                                0.010
*2nd Year                                                         (0.009)                              (0.010)
TF*3rd Year                                                        0.030                                0.036
                                                                  (0.013)                              (0.013)
TF*4th Year                                                        0.014                                0.015
                                                                  (0.018)                              (0.017)
TF*5th+ Year                                                       0.013                                0.023
                                                                  (0.028)                              (0.030)
TFA Corps Member                                                   -0.006                               0.022
*2nd Year                                                         (0.015)                              (0.013)
TFA*3rd Year                                                       -0.001                               0.012
                                                                  (0.030)                              (0.024)
TFA*4th Year                                                       -0.042                               0.037
                                                                  (0.041)                              (0.027)
TFA*5th+ Year                                                      -0.136                               0.023
                                                                  (0.091)                              (0.048)
Uncertified Teacher                                                0.016                                -0.007
*2nd Year                                                         (0.008)                              (0.010)
Uncertified*3rd Year                                               0.029                                -0.007
                                                                  (0.010)                              (0.011)
Uncertified*4th Year                                               0.015                                -0.007
                                                                  (0.011)                              (0.012)
Uncertified*5th+ Year                                              0.006                                -0.019
                                                                  (0.013)                              (0.014)
Teaching Fellow Experience
                                                                   0.197                                0.067
Interactions = 0 (p-val)
TFA Experience
                                                                   0.558                                0.462
Interactions = 0 (p-val)
Uncertified Experience
                                                                   0.031                                0.736
Interactions = 0 (p-val)
Sample Size                                                    1,462,100                            1,366,479
R2                                                                0.71                                 0.66
Note: Standard errors allow for clustering within school, grade level and year. All specifications include dummy
variables for teacher certification status and a dummy for those missing experience, as well as student-, classroom-, and
school-level covariates. Student-level covariates include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year math and reading
scores, gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch status, an indicator for
special education status, an indicator for English Language Learners. Each of these were also interacted with grade
level. The classroom- and school-level covariates included the classroom- and school-level means of all the student-
level covariates also interacted with grade level.
Table 12: Variation of Teacher Quality Within Groups
                                               A. Elementary School
                                                        Math                                      Reading
Standard Deviation:                          Total                 Signal                Total                 Signal
Full sample                                  0.21                   0.13                  0.20                  0.10
Novices
 All Novices                                 0.21                   0.12                  0.19                  0.08
 Traditionally Certified                     0.20                   0.12                  0.19                  0.08
 Uncertified                                 0.22                   0.12                  0.19                  0.09
 Teaching Fellows                            0.22                   0.12                  0.20                  0.07
                                                  B. Middle School
                                                        Math                                      Reading
                                             Total                 Signal                Total                 Signal
Full sample                                  0.17                   0.08                 0.17                   0.06
Novices
 All Novices                                 0.16                   0.09                  0.16                  0.07
 Traditionally Certified                     0.16                   0.08                  0.16                  0.07
 Uncertified                                 0.16                   0.09                  0.15                  0.07
 Teaching Fellows                            0.16                   0.09                  0.17                  0.08
                                  C. Middle School Teaching Same Course
                                                        Math                                      Reading
                                             Total                 Signal                Total                 Signal
Full sample                                  0.17                   0.09                 0.16                   0.07
Novices
 All Novices                                 0.16                   0.10                  0.16                  0.08
 Traditionally Certified                     0.16                   0.10                  0.16                  0.09
 Uncertified                                 0.17                   0.10                  0.16                  0.08
 Teaching Fellows                            0.16                   0.10                  0.16                  0.09

Note: "Total" is the variation among classroom-mean residuals in a regression of student test scores on student, classroom,
teacher, and school characteristics. "Signal" is the covariance among mean residuals for classrooms taught by the same
teacher. Regressions include dummy variables for teacher certification and program participation (e.g. teaching fellows),
teacher experience, a dummy for those missing experience and a dummy for those hired before the 1999-2000 school year.
They also include student, classroom, and school level covariates. Student-level covariates include a cubic polynomial in
both prior-year math and reading scores, gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price
Lunch status, an indicator for special education status, and an indicator for English Language Learners. Each of these were
also interacted with grade level. The school average and class average covariates included the school-level and classroom-
level means of the student-level covariates and class size, each also interacted with grade level. Standard errors (in
parentheses) allow for clustering within school, grade level and year.




                                                               1
Table A1: Additional Coefficent Estimates from Regressions in Table
10, Columns (3) Through (6)
(Relative to 1993 Cohort or Prior)                        (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)
1994 Cohort                                              0.014                                                   0.011
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.006)
1995 Cohort                                              0.017                                                   0.015
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.006)
1996 Cohort                                              0.015                                                   0.014
                                                        (0.006)                                                 (0.007)
1997 Cohort                                              0.018                                                   0.015
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.005)
1998 Cohort                                              0.009                                                   0.002
                                                        (0.004)                                                 (0.005)
1999 Cohort                                              0.015                                                   0.006
                                                        (0.004)                                                 (0.005)
2000 Cohort                                              0.014                                                   0.002
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.005)
2001 Cohort                                              0.011                                                   0.002
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.005)
2002 Cohort                                              0.012                                                   0.006
                                                        (0.005)                                                 (0.005)
2003 Cohort                                              0.000                                                  -0.003
                                                        (0.006)                                                 (0.006)
2004 Cohort                                             -0.004                                                  -0.004
                                                        (0.006)                                                 (0.007)
2005 Cohort                                             -0.041                                                  -0.037
                                                        (0.008)                                                 (0.009)
(Relative to Non-Attriters)
Attrited with Experience = 0                                                -0.033                               0.005
                                                                           (0.009)                              (0.006)
Attrited with Experience = 1                                                0.006                                0.005
                                                                           (0.006)                              (0.007)
Attrited with Experience = 2                                                0.005                                0.004
                                                                           (0.007)                              (0.006)
Attrited with Experience = 3                                                0.004                                0.016
                                                                           (0.006)                              (0.010)
Attrited with Experience = 4                                                0.017                               -0.007
                                                                           (0.010)                              (0.012)
Attrited with Experience = 5                                                -0.008                               0.005
                                                                           (0.012)                              (0.012)
Attrited with Experience = 6                                                0.006                               -0.002
                                                                           (0.012)                              (0.003)
Attrited with Experience = 7+                                               -0.005                               0.000
                                                                           (0.003)                              (0.000)
(Relative to Initial Experience = 0)
Initial Experience = 1                                                                       -0.026             -0.032
                                                                                             (0.004)            (0.005)
Initial Experience = 2                                                                       -0.033             -0.051
                                                                                             (0.005)            (0.006)
Initial Experience = 3                                                                       -0.051             -0.059
                                                                                             (0.005)            (0.007)
Initial Experience = 4                                                                       -0.060             -0.065
                                                                                             (0.006)            (0.007)
Initial Experience = 5                                                                       -0.066             -0.065
                                                                                             (0.007)            (0.008)
Initial Experience = 6                                                                       -0.067             -0.073
                                                                                             (0.007)            (0.008)
Initial Experience = 7+                                                                      -0.083             -0.076
                                                                                             (0.007)            (0.074)

Cohort Fixed Effects
Attrition Interactions
Initial Experience Effects
Sample Size                                            1,462,100         1,462,100          1,462,100         1,462,100
R2                                                        0.68              0.68               0.68              0.68

Note: Dependent variable is math test scores. Standard errors allow for clustering within school, grade level and year. See
Table 10 for other covariates in the regressions.

                                                            2
Table A2: Specification Checks on Use of Quasi-Gains vs. Gains and Student FE
                                                   Math                                                 Reading
                               Levels        Gains       Levels        Gains          Levels        Gains        Levels        Gains
                                (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
Teaching Fellow                0.007         0.009        0.000        0.005          -0.012       -0.011        -0.006       -0.009
                              (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.006)         (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.006)
Teach for America              0.019         0.020        0.024        0.035          -0.003       -0.002        -0.009       -0.006
                              (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.012)         (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.009)
Internat'
        l Programs             -0.027        -0.020       -0.034       -0.043          0.004        0.008        -0.003       -0.004
                              (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.010)         (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.010)
Other Uncertified              0.002         0.005        0.004        0.000          -0.000        0.000         0.005        0.000
                              (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.004)

Prior Test Scores
Student Fixed Effects
Student Covariates
Sample Size                   1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100 1,462,100                1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479 1,366,479


Note: Standard errors allow for clustering within school, grade level and year. All specifications include dummy variables for teacher
experience, a dummy for those missing experience and a dummy for those hired before the school year 1999-2000. Differences were also
estimated for TOP scholars and Peace Corps Fellows but were not reported given the small number of teachers in those groups. Prior test
score controls include a cubic polynomial in both prior-year math and reading scores. All specifications include class-, and school-level
covariates. Student-level covariates include gender, six categories for race and ethnicity, an indicator for Free/Reduced Price Lunch
status, an indicator for special education status, an indicator for English Language Learners. The classroom level and school-level
covariates included the classroom-level means of all the student-level covariates. All of these are interacted with grade level.




                                                               3
                                        Figure 1
Percent of Uncertified Hires in 1999-2000, by Decile of Pass Rate on Math Examinations

                        Elementary School                                High School
      80%
      60%
      40%
      20%




            1   2   3     4   5   6   7     8   9   10       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                          Math Pass Rate Decile




                                                         4
5
                       Figure 3, Heterogeneous Returns to Experience Across Groups of Teachers:

                                                                                             Math Test Scores



                                  .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                                  .125




                                                                                                                    .125
                                  .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                  .075




                                                                                                                    .075
                                  .05




                                                                                                                    .05
Estimated Return to Experience

                                  .025




                                                                                                                    .025
                                  0




                                                                                                                    0
                                         0             1                 2                     3                4          0       1                  2                     3                4
                                                                Years of Experience                                                          Years of Experience

                                                                   Traditionally Certified                                        Teaching Fellow              Traditionally Certified
                                  .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                                  .125




                                                                                                                    .125
                                  .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                  .075




                                                                                                                    .075
                                  .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                                  .025




                                                                                                                    .025
                                  0




                                                                                                                    0


                                         0             1                 2                     3                4          0       1                  2                     3                4
                                                                Years of Experience                                                          Years of Experience

                                                    TFA Corps Member                  Traditionally Certified                   Uncertified Teacher                Traditionally Certified


                                 Note: Plotted are point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of experience effects for different groups. Estimates are taken from regressions
                                 that include teacher fixed effects.



                                                                                        Reading Test Scores
                                  .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                                  .125




                                                                                                                    .125
                                  .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                  .075




                                                                                                                    .075
                                  .05




                                                                                                                    .05
Estimated Return to Experience

                                  .025




                                                                                                                    .025
                                  0




                                                                                                                    0




                                         0             1                 2                     3                4          0       1                  2                     3                4
                                                                Years of Experience                                                          Years of Experience

                                                                   Traditionally Certified                                        Teaching Fellow              Traditionally Certified
                                  .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                                  .125




                                                                                                                    .125
                                  .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                  .075




                                                                                                                    .075
                                  .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                                  .025




                                                                                                                    .025
                                  0




                                                                                                                    0




                                         0             1                 2                     3                4          0       1                  2                     3                4
                                                                Years of Experience                                                          Years of Experience

                                                    TFA Corps Member                  Traditionally Certified                   Uncertified Teacher                Traditionally Certified


                                 Note: Plotted are point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of experience effects for different groups. Estimates are taken from regressions
                                 that include teacher fixed effects.




                                                                                                                6
                                                                      Figure 4
                                         Cumulative Retention Estimates for Certification and Program Groups



Cumulative Proportion Still Employed

                                         1
                                         .8
                                         .6
                                         .4
                                         .2




                                               0                 1                      2              3             4
                                                                           Years After Hire
                                                             Regular Certified                 Regular Uncertified
                                                             Teaching Fellow                   Teach for America
                                              Estimates from Logit Regression on Teacher Leaving NYC

                                                                       Figure 5
                                              Steady State Distributions of Teacher Experience by Group
                                  .25
Proportion of Teachers in Steady State
                                  .2
                                  .15
                                  .1
                                  .05
                                  0




                                                   0                 1              2             3             4
                                                                         Years of Experience
                                                            Regular Certified                 Regular Uncertified
                                                            Teaching Fellow                   Teach for America




                                                                                7
 Figure 6, Variation in Value-Added Within and Between Groups of Teachers

                                                                       Math Test Scores



            8
Kernel Density Estimate
 2        4 0        6




                          -.4             -.3              -.2          -.1        0        .1       .2                                          .3               .4
                                                                   Student Level Standard Deviations

                                                         Traditionally Certified                                         Teaching Fellow
                                                         Teach for America                                               Uncertified
                          Note: Shown are estimates of teachers'impacts on average student performance, controlling for teachers'experience levels and students'baseline
                          scores, demographics and program participation; includes teachers of grades 4-8 hired since the 1999-2000 school year.



                                                                    Reading Test Scores
            10
Kernel Density Estimate
         5  0




                          -.3                   -.2                  -.1           0           .1                                          .2                     .3
                                                                   Student Level Standard Deviations

                                                         Traditionally Certified                                         Teaching Fellow
                                                         Teach for America                                               Uncertified
                          Note: Shown are estimates of teachers'impacts on average student performance, controlling for teachers'experience levels and students'baseline
                          scores, demographics and program participation; includes teachers of grades 4-8 hired since the 1999-2000 school year.




                                                                                        8
