                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                WHY DO IPO AUCTIONS FAIL?

                                         Ravi Jagannathan
                                         Ann E. Sherman

                                       Working Paper 12151
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12151


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2006




© 2006 by Ravi Jagannathan and Ann E. Sherman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Why Do IPO Auctions Fail?
Ravi Jagannathan and Ann E. Sherman
NBER Working Paper No. 12151
April 2006, Revised November 2006
JEL No. G24,G28,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

We document a somewhat surprising regularity: of the many countries that have used IPO auctions,
virtually all have abandoned them. The common explanations given for the lack of popularity of the
auction method in the US, viz., issuer reluctance to try a new experimental method, and underwriter
pressure towards methods that lead to higher fees, do not fit the evidence. We examine why auctions
have failed and verify, to the extent possible, that they are consistent with what academic theory predicts.
 Both uniform price and discriminatory auctions are plagued by unexpectedly large fluctuations in
the number of participants. The free rider problem and the winner's curse hamper price discovery
and discourage investors from participating in auctions. Calculating the optimal bids in large multi-unit
common value auctions with endogenous entry imposes a huge computational burden. With IPOs
taking place sporadically, and each firm being different, auctions are likely to end up being unstable.

Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Ann E. Sherman
University of Notre Dame
Department of Finance
P.O. Box 399
Notre Dame, IN 46556-0399
             "Improbable as it is, all other explanations are more improbable still."
               Sherlock Holmes in "Sliver Blaze," 1892, by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle



        Book building is the primary method through which initial public offerings (IPOs) are
brought to the market in the United States (US). An ongoing debate in the academic literature
explores the advantages and disadvantages of the book building method, relative to sealed bid
auctions. On the one hand, the greater control and flexibility of book building provides
substantial benefits to issuers.1 On the other hand, the book building procedure necessarily
gives the underwriter substantial discretion over allocations. When agents are given discretion,
there is always the potential for abuse, and the scandals following the internet bubble suggest
that at least some abuses have occurred in practice2. Moreover, there is a general agency
problem between underwriters and issuers that has not yet been fully explored for IPOs.3 Thus
there are both advantages and disadvantages to the flexibility offered by book building.
        In the search for an alternative, much of the focus has been on auctions, which have
been extremely successful in a wide range of alternative settings. With sealed bid auctions,
theory also offers trade-offs – auction theory predicts that sealed bid auctions will lead to very
accurate pricing under some circumstances but to substantial problems under others. In this
case, the theoretical differences are in the underlying assumptions regarding information
structures and the determinants of entry. If information is endowed (i.e. costless) and bidder
entry is predictable, auctions should be relatively efficient. But if accurate estimates of IPO
share values are difficult to produce and entry is uncoordinated, theory predicts that auction
outcomes may be far less desirable (see Sherman, 2005).
        Because theory predicts varying outcomes for both auction and book building IPOs, it is
worth examining the available evidence regarding the track records of each method. In this
paper we offer evidence on overall usage patterns for many countries – the ‘market test’ - and
then examine IPO auction outcomes in more detail. We find that, when standard auctions have




1
  As first shown by Benveniste and Spindt (1989) and Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990). Ritter and Welch (2002),
Ljungqvist (2004) and Wilhelm (2005) offer reviews of the academic IPO literature.
2
   See Loughran and Ritter (2004) for discussion of the scandals and overall trends in IPO underwriting.
3
   with the notable except of Biais, Bossaerts and Rochet (2002), for the French regulatory regime.
                                                                                                                    2


had to compete with another method - either with fixed price public offers4 or with book
building - auctions have been driven out.
         The lack of popularity of auctions cannot be explained by either lack of familiarity or
by differences in underwriting fees. The fees for fixed price public offers in most countries
have been the same as those for auctions, leaving investment banks with no incentive to favor
one method over the other based on fees. In spite of that, when issuers have been allowed to
choose between fixed price public offers and auctions, the former method has prevailed and
auctions have lost out5. And when fixed price public offers later were faced with competition
from book building, the fixed price public offer method has generally lost out, although not as
completely as the auction method.
         The observation that auctions have consistently lost out to other methods is an
important piece of evidence but is not, by itself, sufficient to conclude that the predictions of
auction theory are correct. We therefore examine the reasons why auctions have failed and
verify, to the extent possible, that they are consistent with auction theory in an IPO setting.
         The auction method is old and well established, and has been particularly successful for
the largest security issue markets – those for government debt, particularly US Treasury
securities; and auctions have been frequently used for new preferred stock issues in the United
Kingdom (UK), particularly for government-owned utilities6.                       Treasury auctions are held
frequently at regular time intervals, with a core of regular participants.                          Further, close
substitutes to the securities being issued are already trading actively in the market, making
valuation relatively easy and precise7. Preferred stocks of regulated utilities are relatively easy
to value since they resemble high quality bonds. In contrast, IPOs occur less frequently, at
sporadic intervals, and their value is difficult to determine. Each issue is different and may


4
   With fixed price public offers, the price is set before any information on demand is received, as shown by
Loughran, Ritter and Rydqvist (1994, Table 2). With book building (a term coined in the 1990s), the underwriter
arranges for investors to attend a road show and then collects indications of interest, which are used to fill (build)
the order book. The offering price is set only after the order book is full, giving the underwriter some idea of
demand. With standard auctions, pricing and allocation are based on bids, using pre-established rules. Sherman
(2005) argues that the main difference between the methods, from a regulatory standpoint, is the underwriter’s
discretion over allocations with book building. With either fixed price public offers or sealed bid auctions,
underwriters may, and sometimes do, hold road shows before the offer price is set. They are allowed to ask for
feedback but, without control over allocations, they cannot give investors an incentive to offer reliable feedback.
5
   The only exception that we know of is France, which used a unique auction method that discouraged free riders.
6
   In the six month period from Oct. 1, 1974 to March 31, 1975, all seven preferred stock issues in the UK used
"Offers for Sale by Tender", i.e. auctions. The issuers were all local waterworks or water companies.
7
   Nevertheless, Goldreich (2005) shows that even uniform price Treasury auctions lead to underpricing.
                                                                                                         3


attract a different set of participants. Therefore, theory predicts that IPO auctions may face
wide variations in the number of participants. We find evidence supporting this prediction.
        A well established problem in auction theory is the winner’s curse faced by bidders in a
common value setting. Auction participants can adjust for this by shaving their bids, but this
adjustment depends on the number of other investors that choose to enter the auction. If
bidders do not know how many will participate in the auction, there may be unpleasant
surprises. Auctions that have an unexpectedly large number of random entrants will on average
be grossly oversubscribed and overpriced, while those that, by chance, have an unexpectedly
low number of participants may be undersubscribed. We find that this is indeed the case.
        When it is costly to gather information relevant to valuing a new issue, investors who
do so must be rewarded. Standard auctions do not guarantee this. In fact, in uniform price
auctions, some participants may have an incentive to free ride on the effort of others, by
bidding high.      Any such free riding will make the auction clearing price volatile and
uninformative, contributing to the failure of the market for the issue. We find evidence of this.
        The winner’s curse and free rider problems can be overcome if all bidders adjust their
entry and bidding decisions accordingly, but this is complicated. Large multi-unit IPO auctions
will work only if essentially all potential participants are highly knowledgeable, disciplined and
sophisticated, yet the very nature of IPOs – occurring sporadically, with each issuer different –
makes it difficult for millions of potential investors to all obtain that high level of skill and
sophistication. If only a small fraction of potential investors fail to reach that level, it may not
be optimal for sophisticated investors to enter at all.           We find suggestive evidence that
unsophisticated return-chasers have tended to overbid, driving away other bidders.
        The magnitude of underpricing is often mentioned as a disadvantage of the book
building method.       However, underpricing in fixed price offers tends to be larger than
underpricing under either auctions or book building.           In spite of that, we find that the fixed
price public offer method has driven out auctions, when both were allowed. Hence the money
left on the table through underpricing, in and of itself, does not appear to be the primary issue8.
        Discriminatory auctions have many of the same shortcomings as standard uniform price
auctions. Both discriminatory and uniform price auctions suffer from uncertainty about the

8
    In other words, objective functions for issuers that are based on IPO proceeds alone appear inadequate.
Loughran and Ritter (2004) offer a more general objective function. In addition, Sherman and Titman (2002),
Sherman (2005) and Chemmanur and Liu (2004) analyze IPO methods assuming that the issuer’s objective
                                                                                                                      4


number of bidders, and neither guarantees that a stable set of serious investors has an incentive
to devote time and resources to evaluating each offering. The most successful IPO auctions
have been of the “dirty” 9 type that attempt to approximate the book building approach.
         The debate on IPO methods in the US has largely focused on two extremes: either the
status quo, or the use of standard sealed bid auctions, which mandate simple, rigid allocation
and pricing rules. There are, however, alternatives that fall somewhere in between the opaque
allocation system currently used and the elimination of all underwriter discretion or control.
Jagannathan and Sherman (2005) propose reforming the bookbuilding method to introduce
greater transparency of the allocation process, in a way that still allows underwriters to consider
all relevant factors when allocating and pricing offerings. Large fund management companies
already use such systems to determine allocations of trades, taking into account many variables
in a balanced, relatively transparent way.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I establishes trends in the use of
IPO methods, including the many countries that have tried and abandoned the auction method.
Section II shows that the failure of auctions cannot be explained by lack of familiarity or by
pressure from investment banks to use book building. Section III lays out the problems that we
would expect to find with IPO auctions in theory, including the winner’s curse with
endogenous entry (III.A), the free rider problem (III.B), and the overall difficulties reaching a
robust, stable equilibrium (III.C).            We conclude this section with a general summary of
theoretical predictions regarding large, multi-unit sealed bid auctions (III.D).
         Section IV examines evidence of uncertainty in IPO auctions, including fluctuations in
the number of bidders (IV.A), undersubscription (IV.B) and overall instability (IV.C). In the
subsection on instability, we would first explore Argentina'
                                                           s experience (IV.C.1), where the
success of the first auction led too many investors to flood into the second, precipitating a
market crash; then Singapore'
                            s two year experiment with the method (IV.C.2), and last our
more quantitative analysis of Singapore'
                                       s experience (IV.C.3). Section V concludes.

function includes more than just maximizing expected one-time proceeds.
9
   A “dirty” IPO auction is a uniform price auction where they “leave something on the table” by pricing below
market-clearing. Uniform price auctions, often mistakenly called Dutch or Vickrey auctions, are multi-unit sealed
bid auctions in which all winning bidders pay the same price. The price paid may be the market-clearing price (the
highest price that allows all shares to be sold), or it may be below the clearing price, leading to increased rationing.
We will focus on X+1st price auctions, where the company is auctioning off X shares and the price is based on the
X + 1st highest bid. In practice, for IPO auctions with thousands of bidders for millions of shares, it is
extraordinarily rare for the X-highest bid to be at a different price than the X+1-highest bid. In a discriminatory
                                                                                                              5




I. Global Patterns

        When Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister of the UK, began privatizing British
companies, she set off major changes around the world in government, in industries and in IPO
methods. Before then, the IPO method in most countries outside the US was fixed price public
offers (a.k.a. open offers, universal offers or often simply called “the IPO method”). The trend
towards floating extremely large public companies forced countries to try new methods and to
coordinate IPOs across borders, since many privatizations were too big to be absorbed entirely
by the local market. The wave of privatizations led to experimentation first with auctions and
then with the US book building method.
        Table 1 summarizes the IPO methods used in various countries.                         More detailed
information is given in Appendix D, which is available on the Social Science Research
Network10 and on request, and which shows that most countries allow the use of many
methods. We do not know of any country that had formerly allowed auctions and then changed
their regulations to prohibit or limit them – the general trend in the last two decades has been to
allow greater choice among issuers. The book building method was once rare outside the US
but is now common. Auctions have been tried in more than 20 countries but are rare today.
        The rarity of IPO auctions is not due to unfamiliarity. Auctions were used in Italy,
Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK in the 1980s, and in Argentina, Malaysia, Singapore
and Turkey in the 1990s, but they were abandoned in all of these countries well before book
building was introduced. Auctions were required for many years in Japan, yet quickly vanished
once book building was allowed.
        In France, auctions were popular in the first half of the 1990s. On the regulated
exchanges, they gradually lost market share to a restricted form of book building over several
years, then dried up quickly in 1999 when a more standard form of book building was allowed.
Auctions continued to be used on the unregulated over-the-counter market (the Marche Libre or
Free Market) for several more years, although they eventually seem to have dried up there,


auction, each winning bidder pays his or her own bid.
10
     At http://ssrn.com/abstract=892026. Appendix A gives additional information on IPO auction methods in
various countries. It should be noted that Table 1 focuses on methods used within various countries. Issuers may
instead list elsewhere, rather than in the domestic market. Ljungqvist, Jenkinson and Wilhelm (2003) examine
both international and purely domestic IPOs.
                                                                                                                    6


also. There were, however, two IPO auctions in France in early 200511, which came after there
had been no auctions on regulated French exchanges for half a decade. It remains to be seen
whether the two auctions indicate a temporary phenomenon inspired by Google.
         Auctions were the only method allowed in Israel for a decade. The law requiring their
use expired in December, 2003, although book building was still banned. The only IPOs that
we know of in Israel since then have been debt rather than equity IPOs. Of those debt IPOs,
two of the three effectively chose fixed price public offer, rather than an auction12. Legislation
that would allow book building is pending but has not yet been passed.
         Many countries have used hybrids – combinations of any two of the three methods.
There have been hybrid auction/public offer and auction/book building IPOs, but the most
common combination is book building/public offer. For most hybrids, book building (or
sometimes an auction) is used to set the price and to allocate shares to institutional and foreign
investors, while a fixed price public offer tranche is reserved for local retail investors that do
not participate in the price-setting process. Hybrid book building/auctions on the exchange are
used in Chile because of regulations, but the offer price is set through book building13.
         In Latin America, auctions have been used in Brazil and Peru in the past. Latin
American markets were quiet for much of the last decade, with delistings outnumbering listings
in Brazil, Argentina and Chile14. Thus it was hard to predict if auctions were gone completely.
However, Brazilian, Chilean and later Argentinean IPO markets began picking up in 2004-
2005, and book building has been the dominant method, with no auctions that we know of.
         Since 1995, Taiwan has allowed both auctions and book building, in addition to the
traditional fixed price public offers. Taiwan’s auctions are similar to those that were once
required, and are still allowed, in Japan – discriminatory (pay-what-you-bid) auctions followed

11
      The two 2005 auctions were for Cafom, on the Second Marche in January and for MG International, on
Alternext in June. Cafom chose an unusually narrow range for accepted bids - the minimum bid was 11.65; the
offering price was 13.50; and only bids between 13.50 and 14 were accepted, although bids had gone as high
as 20. There have been no further auctions in France as of July, 2006.
12
    The actual restriction was against setting a maximum price in an auction. Technically, all IPOs even before the
10-year restriction were auctions, but issuers were allowed to set a maximum as well as a minimum price for the
auction. Issuers before 1993 tended to set their maximum price so low that the offering was highly like to price at
the upper limit, effectively making it a fixed price offer. Since December, 2003, at least two of the first three debt
IPOs chose to set a maximum price (actually a minimum yield), effectively using the fixed price method.
13
     Pension funds may only purchase shares through an exchange in Chile, so some IPO shares are sold on the
floor of the exchange, after the offering price has been set and the rest of the shares have been allocated through
book building. Such auctions may occur only minutes before general trading on the same floor. In its 2003 IPO,
La Polar cancelled the auction completely and distributed its shares through a bookbuild and through brokerages.
14
     For example, Chile had no IPOs at all from 1998 to 2001 and only one each in the years 2002 and 2003.
                                                                                                                    7


by fixed price public offer tranches. Book building is allowed only in certain restrictive
circumstances15 and is not used. Auctions were initially popular but lost market share over
time, with more and more issuers returning to fixed price public offers.
         In the US, the investment bank WR Hambrecht has been encouraging issuers to use
auctions since mid-1999. The method got much publicity when Google, a popular search
engine company, chose to use the auction method for its August, 2004 IPO, but still the auction
method is not popular in the US As of September, 2006, there have been 18 US IPO auctions,
17 of them using WR Hambrecht’s OpenIPO auction method.
         Thus out of 46 countries, auctions have been tried in more than 20, and yet all except
France, Israel, Taiwan and the US seem to have abandoned them entirely, and auctions are rare
even in these last four countries. Book building is gaining in popularity or is already the
dominant method in 34 of the 46 countries. Fixed price public offer is still used in smaller
countries and for smaller offerings, and is common for the retail tranche of hybrids.


II. Auctions versus Bookbuilding: Popular Explanations

         II.A. Were Issuers Unwilling to Try a New Method?

         One explanation for the low numbers of IPO auctions in the US is that the auction
method is simply too new and experimental, and that issuers are afraid to try an unproven
method. However, this ‘lack of familiarity’ argument cannot explain the overall rejection of
the auction method around the world. First, the mere fact that IPO auctions have been used in
nearly half the countries for which we have information implies that quite a few issuers have
been willing to experiment. More importantly, if we look at relative usage patterns over time,
issuers have been most enthusiastic about IPO auctions when the method was new, and they
generally became less willing to use it after they had become more familiar with the method.
         Figure 1 shows the relative auction usage patterns over time in four countries. For
Singapore, Taiwan and Turkey, the main alternative method was fixed price public offers,
which had been the traditional method in those countries. Auctions were first allowed in 1993


15
    when the majority of the shares sold are primary. Auctions may only be used when the majority are secondary
shares (sold by current stockholders). Most companies planning an IPO first issue new shares to existing
stockholders, who then sell the shares to the public, thus making the firms ineligible to use book building. This is
done reportedly because it is believed that primary issues leads to greater regulatory scrutiny and to a longer delay.
                                                                                                               8


in Singapore16 and Turkey, and in 1995 in Taiwan. In France, both auctions and fixed price
public offers had been used for decades, but book building was first introduced in the 1990s,
while unrestricted book building was only allowed beginning in 1999.
        As can be seen from Figure 1 for the three countries in which the IPO auction method
was newly introduced, auctions captured their greatest market share early on, with two-thirds or
more of issuers choosing to use auctions when they were relatively new. As issuers became
more familiar with the method over time, a lower proportion of them chose to use the auction
method. Hence, it is hard to argue that, in these countries, the disappearance of IPO auctions
was due to lack of familiarity or to an unwillingness of issuers to try a new method.
        One obvious question is whether issuers in these countries were truly allowed to choose
freely between IPO methods. Although there were no regulatory restrictions that prevented
issuers from using auctions, strong differences between the groups of issuers using different
methods might imply some other sort of barrier, such as underwriter reluctance to underwrite
auctions for some issuers. Therefore, in Tables 2 and 3, we compare fixed price public offers
and auctions in Singapore, Turkey and on the French Free Market based on both industry and
amount of funds raised17.

             II.A.1 Singapore
        Table 2.A presents data from the Singapore Exchange (SGX; formerly the Stock
Exchange of Singapore or SES) for both Main Board and Sesdaq offerings. Sesdaq was
established to attract smaller, younger companies, and had more relaxed listing requirements.18
The fixed price public offers on Sesdaq were substantially smaller than any of the Main Board
IPOs, but the two Sesdaq auctions were much larger than other Sesdaq IPOs and raised more
than the median amount raised by Main Board auctions or fixed price public offers. Hence the
two Sesdaq auctions are comparable to Main Board offerings, in terms of size. It is possible
that most Sesdaq listings were too small to be able to use the auction method, so much of our
later analysis will be reported both including and excluding Sesdaq offers.


16
    The graph shows only uniform price auctions for Singapore. Singapore also had one discriminatory auction in
1991 and one in 1992. Uniform price auctions were first allowed in 1993.
17
     Comparisons of French Second and Nouveau offerings can be found in Derrien and Womack (2003) and
Degeorge, Derrien and Womack (2006). Hsu and Hung (2005) compare Taiwan IPOs by method.
18
     Requirements for a Main Board listing included five years of operating experience and three successive years
of profits, as well as S$15 million in paid-up capital, which was approximately US$9.4 million in early 1994. All
further dollar amounts for Singapore data are expressed in Singapore dollars, denoted only by $, not S$.
                                                                                                                   9


         For Main Board IPOs, the mean and median funds raised are smaller for fixed price
public offers than for auctions, even when the Singapore Telecom (SingTel) auction, an outlier
in terms of size, is excluded. However the smallest auction was on the Main Board and raised
only $15.7 million, slightly less than the smallest Main Board fixed price public offer. The
median funds raised was $48 million for auctions ($44 million excluding SingTel) and $38
million for fixed price public offers. Six of the 18 Main Board auctions raised less than the
median for fixed price public offers. Sunright, the last company to do an auction, raised $37.5
million, which was slightly below the median fixed price public offer. Their management later
told us that they were given the choice of auction or fixed price, by the underwriter, fairly late
in the process after the offer price and fees had been set.19

             II.A.2 France
         Table 2.B presents French Free Market (Marche Libre) data from the Euronext website.
In terms of offering size, the Free Market auctions were in the middle, attempting to raise only
about half as much, on average, as book building IPOs but substantially more than fixed price
public offers. The largest auctions hoped to raise quite a bit more than the average for
bookbuilds, while the smallest were smaller than the mean (but not the median) for fixed price
public offers. The amounts reported are based on the number of shares for sale, not the shares
actually purchased.        French Free Market offerings during this period were often heavily
undersubscribed, as we will discuss later in the paper.
         Of the four countries whose usage patterns are shown in Figure 1, France differs from
the others in several ways. First, the auction method had been allowed for several decades in
France. Second, a form of book building was in use during the period shown, in addition to
auctions and fixed price. Last, the disappearance of auctions from the regulated exchanges
seems to have been driven by a regulatory shift.
         Derrien and Womack (2003) found that sequential hybrid book building was less
efficient than auctions in France. While interpreting this finding it is important to keep in mind
that before 1999, the only form of hybrid book building that was allowed in France was a

19
    It should be noted that these auctions were open to all Singapore citizens, and that participation was relatively
easy. Orders were taken through ATMs (automated teller machines) beginning in 1993, so investors could place
bids in most of the Singapore auctions studied in this paper by simply stopping by the closest ATM. Some IPO
auction supporters have claimed that past track records for the IPO auction method are inapplicable, because they
did not include ‘new technology’ (i.e. the internet). But countries around the world managed to open up their IPO
processes to large numbers of potential investors long before online ordering was a possibility, as with Singapore’s
                                                                                                         10


sequential hybrid, where the price must be set many days in advance, to allow time for the
public to place their orders. As the modeling in Chowdhry and Sherman (1996a) demonstrates,
requiring that prices be set far in advance adds risk, leading to higher levels of underpricing.
Once the more modern, simultaneous hybrid book building method was allowed in France in
1999, auctions quickly vanished from the regulated exchanges20. The 1999 regulatory change
seems to explain the timing of auctions drying up on the French regulated exchanges, although
it does not explain why they were still used for several more years on the unregulated over-the-
counter Free Market (Marche Libré).

            II.A.3 Turkey
        Table 2.C gives data on IPOs in Turkey, from the Istanbul Stock Exchange (ISE)
website. Auctions and fixed price IPOs were extremely similar in terms of size, while issues
using the third method, Sales on the ISE were substantially smaller. In this last method, the
issuer registers an opening price and then is allowed to simply begin normal trading on the
exchange at that price. Sales on the ISE are typically preceded by private placements.

            II.A.4 Categorization by Industry
        Table 3 gives breakdowns of IPOs by industry, for these same three countries, showing
that auctions were used in a broad range of industries. The overall industry pattern is similar
for auction and non-auction methods. We also looked at the timing of the IPOs, to see whether
they were spread out or clustered, and did not find excessive clustering of IPOs in one time
period for any of the three countries.21 These findings indicate that issuers in Singapore,
France and Turkey were free to choose their auction method.
        It is clear, in all four of the countries shown in Figure 1, that the disappearance of
auctions was not due to issuers'lack of familiarity with the auction method. Similarly in Japan,
issuers were forced to use auctions from 1989 to 1997. In spite of the long period during which
IPOs in Japan were accomplished exclusively through auctions, the method was abandoned as
soon as issuers were given the option of instead using book building.

system to take bids through ATMs.
20
   With the exception of the two IPO auctions in 2005 that were mentioned in Section I.
21
    The importance of this has been shown by Schultz (2003). For Singapore, the mean number of days between
auctions was 27 days, with a median of 24 and a standard deviation of 18 days. There were 6 separate months
with no IPOs, 4 months with only one, 6 months with 2 IPOs and only one month with 3 IPOs in the same month
(February, 1994, with a Main Board IPO on February 2 and the only two Sesdaq IPOs on February 15 and 21).
The longest gaps between IPOs were 57 days in 1993 and 54 days in 1994, both around the month of August (the
Ghost Month, when IPOs are considered unlucky).
                                                                                                                 11


         Of course, there is not enough evidence to conclusively reject the ‘lack of familiarity’
argument for each and every country. It may explain why auctions never caught on in some
countries with very limited usage, such as Germany, Australia or the US, or in countries that
have never tried auctions at all. It may also explain why corporate debt and seasoned equity
auctions never caught on, even though there was a race between three investment banks to
introduce online corporate bond auction platforms in 200022, and WR Hambrecht convinced an
issuer to try its OpenFollowon online seasoned equity auction method23. But the overall IPO
evidence is that issuers in many countries have been willing to experiment with both auctions
and book building, and that issuers became less likely to choose auctions as they gained
familiarity with the method.

         II.B. Underwriter Pressure for Using the Bookbuilding Method

         Another explanation suggested by Ausubel (2002) for the failure of issuers to use IPO
auctions is that investment banks have pressured issuers to use book building rather than
auctions because the fees, and hence profits, are higher for book building. This argument is
somewhat inconsistent – it assumes that underwriters have sufficient market power to keep
book building fees artificially high, and sufficient power to force issuers to use the book
building method in spite of the high fees, but that they do not have sufficient power to demand
artificially high fees for auctions24.
         Regardless, this argument cannot explain the disappearance of auctions in most
countries, because auctions have usually been replaced by fixed price public offers, and public
offer fees are typically as low as, or even lower than, the fees for auctions. Ljungqvist,
Jenkinson and Wilhelm (2003) show that average fees tend to be quite low for fixed price
public offers across most countries, substantially below those for book building25.


22
    On August 10, Deutsche Bank and Bear Stearns each auctioned off their own debt on their newly-developed
platforms, while WR Hambrecht held its first OpenBook debt auction, for Dow, on August 15, 2000. WR
Hambrecht handled a second OpenBook auction, for Ford Motor Credit, in March, 2001. It reportedly also
attempted an auction for Dayton Hudson, but the bid-taking system crashed during the auction.
23
    Overstock, a company that also went public through an OpenIPO, used the OpenFollowon method in May of
2004 but chose a traditional marketed offering for its next follow-on in November, 2004.
24
     A perhaps related argument is given by Degeorge, Derrien and Womack (2006), who show a correlation in
France between greater publicity/analyst attention for IPOs and the use of book building rather than an auction
(they do not analyze the fixed price public offers in their sample). They argue that underwriters induced issuers to
use book building by convincing them of the value of other services (more analyst attention) but do not explain
why such services would be bundled only with book building, rather than with all three methods in use at the time.
25
      Similarly, Chahine (2001), examining French data from 1996 to 2000, found that the mean, median and
                                                                                                                   12


         A third alternative explanation to consider is that underwriters might be pressuring
issuers to use methods that lead to higher initial returns, so that the underwriters can allocate
the underpriced shares to their favored clients. This explanation is often heard in the US but
cannot explain the choice between auctions and fixed price public offers, since neither method
allows the underwriter to control allocations26.

         II.C. Do Issuers Prefer the Method that Minimizes Expected Underpricing?

         Much analysis of IPOs either implicitly or explicitly assumes that issuers always prefer
the offering method that leads to the lowest expected initial return, regardless of risk or other
considerations27. There are, however, many reasons to believe that issuers care about other
aspects of the process beyond just the expected initial return. An IPO is an expensive way to
raise capital and is seldom worthwhile if the company’s one and only goal is a one-time
fundraising, particularly since the costs of being public are on-going.
         An IPO opens the way to future fundraising in the public markets and establishes a
market price for the company’s stock. The stock price is used as a benchmark by employees,
customers, suppliers and competitors. It affects employee morale as well as the company’s
bargaining position in various types of negotiations. Thus, an issuer benefits from establishing
an accurate, sustainable long-term price, which may require a core of institutional investors that
will be interested in following the company long term28.
         Another reason to go public is to give current stockholders such as the founders, venture
capitalists and angel investors a chance to diversify by liquidating at least part of their holdings.
Such investors usually cannot sell until the end of the lock up period and thus care about the
eventual stock price, and not just either the offer price or the first day’s trading price. If a deep,
liquid market is not established, those investors may be unable to sell their shares at a
reasonable price, even after the time and expense of an IPO.




standard deviation of gross spreads were slightly lower for fixed price than for auctions. In most countries, when
auctions were first used, the fees were the same for auctions as for fixed price public offers.
26
   Many countries allow orders in fixed price public offers to be favored on the basis of order size, but this usually
involves favoring small over large orders. Chowdhry and Sherman (1996b) show that favoring small orders may
reduce the Rock (1986) winner’s curse. Parlour and Rajan (2005) also examine rationing in IPOs.
27
    See, for example, Kaneko and Pettway (2003).
28
    although, during the internet bubble, many companies seemed more focused on short term hype than on a
sustainable, long term equilibrium. One could argue that this strategy turned out to be sub-optimal in most cases.
                                                                                                              13


        Companies that go public but do not attract a following may end up being ignored and
stuck in the so-called Orphanage29. If they do not attract an institutional investor following,
they will not be followed by analysts and will not be monitored closely enough to be accurately
priced. This means that they will be unable to do follow-on equity offerings and will tend to
trade at a substantial discount, due to their illiquidity and added risk. In order to minimize this
possibility, firms may be willing to pay, through underpricing, to attract the attention of serious
investors in the IPO. This may explain the importance of analyst coverage found in Loughran
and Ritter (2004) and Cliff and Denis (2004)30.
        Thus there are many reasons why issuers may care about more than maximizing the
proceeds of a one-time security sale. Those who nevertheless maintain that issuers should
focus only on minimizing underpricing will find that they are unable to explain the failure of
auctions, since auctions have most often been driven out by fixed price public offers, long
before book building appeared. Fixed price public offers have generally led to initial returns
that are substantially above the average for either auctions or book building31.
        Table 4 shows the initial returns for Singapore IPOs in 1993-1994, comparing auction
and fixed price public offer first day returns. Singapore allowed only hybrid auctions, with the
fixed price and auction tranches occurring simultaneously. The minimum auction price (i.e. the
reservation price) could not be less than the price for the public offer tranche, and in practice,
they were always the same. Table 4.A gives figures for all IPOs, while 4.B looks at only Main
Board IPOs, since Sesdaq fixed price public offers were substantially smaller (see II.A.1 for the
differences in listing requirements between the Mainboard and Sesdaq).
        Since Singapore’s auctions were hybrids, we consider underpricing from the issuer’s
standpoint. The weighted average initial return is the average of the auction and fixed price
initial returns, weighted by the number of shares offered in each tranche. As Table 4.A shows,
the weighted average underpricing for all auctions was 16.1%, substantially lower than the
36.9% for pure fixed price public offers. The difference is significant using a one tailed test,
with a t-statistic of 2.41.

29
   Orphan stocks are also known as wallflowers. See Barron’s Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms.
30
   See Sherman and Titman (2002) for a list of additional reasons why issuers may prefer more accurate pricing.
31
    See, for example, Ljungqvist, Jenkinson and Wilhelm (2003) and Loughran, Ritter and Rydqvist (1994). A
key exception to this may be France. Derrien and Womack (2003) found lower initial returns for fixed price
public offers than for auctions in France, while Chahine (2001) found a lower median but higher mean, relative to
auctions. Thus, perhaps the only country in which auctions led to at least as much underpricing as fixed price
public offers was also the only country in which auctions held their own against fixed price public offers.
                                                                                                            14


        This brings up the question of why issuers did not sell more shares through the auction
rather than the fixed price tranche, given that the auction clearing price could never be below,
and was generally substantially above, the price in the fixed price public offer tranche. Issuers
were required by law to sell a minimum proportion of shares through a fixed price tranche32, so
one might guess that this choice was driven by a binding regulatory constraint. However, most
issuers were required to sell only 30% of their shares through the fixed price tranche, yet the
mean was 48% and the median was 50%. All but one of the twenty companies that used an
auction substantially exceeded the minimum required shares for the fixed price tranche, while
even that last company slightly exceeded the requirement.
        Thus, many companies in Singapore chose a pure fixed price public offer even though
average initial returns were lower for auctions, and nearly all companies that used an auction
chose to sell more shares than necessary through the public offer tranche, even though this
seemed to increase total underpricing. We can find no evidence in the Singapore data that
issuer choices were driven primarily by a desire to minimize underpricing. All else being
equal, however, it is likely that companies would prefer less underpricing to more. Thus, it
seems likely that the decision to avoid auctions is being driven by some other factor that more
than offsets the higher apparent underpricing.


III. Why IPO Auctions May Fail

        In this section, we discuss what we believe to be the main explanations for the failure of
IPO auctions: the winner’s curse with endogenous entry, and the free rider problem. We next
describe why these problems may be especially difficult to overcome in an IPO auction setting.
Last, we outline the predictions of theory regarding large multi-unit sealed bid auctions.
        When we discuss IPO auctions in this paper, we generally mean standard sealed bid
auctions, either uniform price or discriminatory (pay what you bid). If the term “auction” was
defined in a sufficiently broad sense to include an optimally designed mechanism, such an




32
   Shares offered in the fixed price public offer tranche had to be a minimum of 40% or $3 million, whichever
was larger, for offerings below $12.5 million; 35% or $5 million, whichever was larger, for offerings between
$12.5 million and $25 million; and 30% or $8.75 million, whichever was larger, for offerings above $25 million.
                                                                                                               15


optimal IPO auction would be more likely to resemble book building, rather than the simple,
rigid, standard sealed bid auctions that people normally think of33.

        III. A. The Winner’s Curse

        There is an adverse selection and consequent winner’s curse problem for both uniform
price and discriminatory auctions – those who get an allocation may have bid too high.34 When
the number of participants in an auction is unpredictable, the problem of adjusting for the
winner’s curse is particularly difficult, adding risk to the process. Oil lease auctions suggest
that even experts face this risk.
        The winner’s curse problem in common value auctions stems from the fact that, even if
each investor has a valuable estimate of the value of the shares, each individual signal is less
accurate than the aggregation of all of the signals. Since the signal has a “noise” component to
it, if a bidder were to bid the value indicated by her signal and win in the auction, in part it
would be because the bid was “too high” – the bidder probably bid much more than the value
indicated by the signals received by all the bidders. Thus, observing the consensus estimate of
all bidders will cause each bidder to revise her original estimate. Since the winning bidders are,
by definition, the highest bidders, they are most likely to revise their estimates downward. If
unwary bidders bid their full valuation without adjusting for this, they will tend to overbid.
        The solution to the winner’s curse is for all entrants to shave their bids accordingly, to
adjust for the upward bias in unadjusted winning bids. This adjustment must take into account
both the expected number of other bidders and the nature of the information sets of those other
bidders. Optimal bid shaving works on average, although there will still be some variations in
realized returns. Clearly, even when information gathering is costless (endowed information),
a high level of sophistication and computational capability is required to figure out how to bid
in an auction taking winner’s curse into account.
        In practice, bidders apparently find it difficult to adequately adjust their bids for the
winner’s curse. Bazerman and Samuelson (1983), using experiments with MBA students,
showed that winning bidders were subject to the winner’s curse. Kagel and Levin (1986)

33
   For example, the optimal auction in Spatt and Srivastava (1991) incorporates both pre-play communication and
participation restrictions. Jagannathan and Sherman (2005) offer several suggestions for a method that combines
aspects of book building and standard auctions to make the process more transparent and less vulnerable to
conflicts of interest while retaining many of the advantages of book building.
34
    Those ordering shares in a fixed price public offer also face a winner’s curse, as modeled by Rock (1986). But
                                                                                                         16


showed that even moderately experienced bidders tended to bid aggressively, compared to what
they would bid under a risk neutral Nash equilibrium. Engelbrecht-Wiggins and Katok (2005)
showed that bidders had an even harder time calculating their bids in experimental auctions
with endogenous entry. Hendricks, Porter, and Boudreau (1987) examined the return to bidders
in outer continental shelf oil lease auctions in the Gulf of Mexico for the period 1954-1969.
They found that returns were a decreasing function of the number of bidders and that returns
were negative with sufficiently large participation, thus illustrating the risks that even
professional bidders face due to endogenous entry.
         For an auction that is open to huge numbers of potential entrants but can profitably
absorb only a small fraction of that potential, there will be no pure strategy equilibrium that
leads to a successful auction. Thus we must consider mixed strategy equilibria, but these
require an even higher level of computational sophistication among bidders. Moreover, even if
all potential entrants correctly calculate the optimal entry probability, there is still the risk that a
large number of investors may unexpectedly enter all at once, since there is no coordination of
ex post realized entry. Unexpectedly high entry may lead to the auction clearing price being
substantially above the intrinsic value of the issue.
         The following example illustrates this potentially large increase in the winner’s curse
risk due to uncertainty in the number of bidders.                  For expositional convenience, we assume
that each investor observes the value of the stock being auctioned with noise. Each investor’s
observation is independent of the observation of other investors and is normally distributed
with a mean of $20 (the true value of the stock) and a standard deviation of $6. There are 100
shares being sold, and each investor bids for only one share. The market clearing price will
thus be the 101st-highest bid.
         Suppose each bidder bids her estimate of the value of a share based on her observation.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of bids and the auction clearing price for N bidders, with N
fixed at 120, 200, 500, and 1000 for one randomly chosen auction for each value of N. In each
auction shown, the average of all bids gives a fairly good estimate of the value of the shares,
but the clearing price usually does not. The clearing prices in the auctions shown range from
27% below true value (winner’s virtue) with only 120 bidders to almost 45% above the true
value (winner’s curse) with 1,000 bidders.


for fixed price public offers, only the probability of getting shares is affected, not the price paid.
                                                                                                 17


       Figure 2 shows only one outcome for each value of N, the number of participants. We
also examined 100 randomly generated auctions for each N, to examine the variations in the
auction clearing price. The average of all the bids in 100 auctions was very close to $20, the
true value, for all five levels of N. The auction clearing price, however, showed variation
across 100 auctions: the clearing price had a range of $3.93 around a mean of $14.07 for N =
120; a range of $2.95 around $19.92 for N = 200; a range of $2.14 around $24.96 for N = 500;
and a range of $1.83 around $27.74 for N = 1000.
       An investor who had observed the results for 100 auctions with the number of bidders,
N, fixed at 200 might conclude that the auction clearing price was on average $19.92, and that
the average of all auction bids (a measure of the true value of the stock) was $19.96. The
winner’s curse would be rather small (-$0.08, or -0.16% of the true value of the stock being
auctioned) for this case of 200 bidders for 100 units, since that is the one case in which we
would expect the mean bid and the clearing price to be similar, without bid-shaving. An
investor who is willing to tolerate a maximum loss of, say $2, may be content to bid his
observed value of the stock without any adjustment for risk. In the 100 auctions we observed
with N fixed at 200, the auction clearing price ranged from $18.32 to $21.27, and such a bidder
would have lost at most $1.27.
       Suppose investors participate in such an auction under the assumption that the number
of bidders is exactly 200. If the actual number of bidders unexpectedly turned out to be 1000
(i.e., 10 times oversubscribed, which is not unusual), the likely loss would be substantial,
averaging about $7.65 (38% of the true value of the stock being auctioned).       An investor who
was willing to tolerate a maximum loss of $2 would be subject to a large unpleasant surprise –
she could have experienced a loss that was more than 3.8 times larger than expected –
illustrating the potentially severe nature of the risk due to the winner’s curse when there is large
and unexpected variation in the number of participants in a uniform price auction. The risks
increase further when the precision of the information available to other participants in the
auction is not known, or when it is possible that at least some bidders may not be sophisticated
enough to calculate the optimal bid.
       One might argue that variation in the number of bidders, from 120 to 1,000, is
excessive, but this must be put in the context of the number of potential bidders.               In
Singapore’s IPO auctions, out of a population of roughly 2.5 million, the number of auction
                                                                                                                18


bidders varied from 1,128 for Eng Wah to 67,524 for STIC and 162,492 for Singapore
Telecom. The quantity bid varied from a low of 0.18 times the number of shares offered to a
maximum of 14 times, with the median being 2.63 times (see Table 6).
        Unlike in auctions for US Treasury securities, the shares being auctioned in an IPO are
difficult to value and differ greatly from one auction to the next. The number of investors who
have the necessary ability to value the shares of any one offering, and the nature of the
information they possess, would vary substantially, in an unpredictable manner, across different
IPOs. This makes it even more difficult for a potential bidder to perform the complicated
optimal bid-shaving calculation that is necessary for an auction to succeed.                   Sherman (2005)
observes that the uncertainty regarding the number of bidders in an auction adds risk35.
        One reason for the failure of auctions, therefore, would be the risk of unpredictably
large fluctuations in the number of participants, since, in a sealed bid IPO auction, participants
do not know in advance how many other bidders will choose to enter36. In situations where the
winner’s curse is extreme, bidders must optimally shave their bids so much in a sealed bid
auction that expected proceeds may be higher through a posted price mechanism (see Campbell
and Levin, 2006, Bulow and Klemperer, 2002, and Viswanathan and Wang, 2000). Issuers
may therefore prefer bookbuilding or fixed price public offer methods that help minimize the
risks due to variations in the number of participants, and to differences in the quality of the
information they possess, thereby increasing the probability of a successful IPO.

        III.B. The Free Rider Problem

        In uniform price auctions, the expense of producing a reasonable bid may also lead to a
moral hazard problem. When information collection is costly, and when other bidders have
done the analysis needed to value an issue, the incentive is there for a new bidder to enter and

35
    French and McCormick (1984) show that auction bidders may recover fixed evaluation costs in an auction with
endogenous entry, but they assume that entry is coordinated so that the ex post number of entrants is always
optimal and known in advance by each bidder, which greatly reduces the risk each bidder faces. Other auction
models that include endogenous entry and information production in a common value setting include Hausch and
Li (1993) and Harstad (1990), both of which consider only the single unit case. Levin and Smith (1994) and
Bajari and Hortacsu (2003) model endogenous entry in a single-unit, endowed information setting. Matthews
(1987) considers information production in single-unit auctions with risk-averse buyers. Habib and Ziegler (2003)
show that posted-price selling of corporate debt could be superior to an auction, if there is a cost to evaluation.
36
     One of the unique aspects of the Google auction in the US in August, 2004, could potentially have helped to
alleviate this problem. Google’s was the only IPO auction that we know of in which bidders were required to get a
unique bidder ID from the issuer in advance, if they wanted to bid in the auction. This meant that the issuer knew
the maximum number of potential bidders and could have announced this information before the auction. Google
                                                                                                                   19


bid high without collecting any information at all, since the auction clearing price will
hopefully be set by those who have already done the necessary analysis. This will break any
pure strategy equilibrium; the auction will be a failure37.
         There may be a mixed strategy equilibrium in which each bidder balances the
probability of free riding and getting underpriced shares without investing in information
gathering against the risk that too many free riders might enter all at once, driving the price to
excessive levels. The optimal number of free riders would be well below X+1 in an X+1st
price auction.       Informed investors would adjust their entry and information acquisition
decisions for the expected entry of free riders. On average, the effect of free riders would be to
reduce the incentive of other investors to produce information, thus making the auction pricing
process less efficient and on average more noisy. Sherman (2005) shows that each investor
optimally collects less information in a uniform price than in a discriminatory auction, because
of the moral hazard problem in uniform price auctions38.
         The fact that less information would be produced in an equilibrium with free riders
means that less underpricing would be needed to compensate informed investors.
Unfortunately, however, there will also be positive expected returns for the uninformed free
riders, and so total underpricing may not decrease at all and might even increase. In addition,
some auctions will be overpriced. Since the only cost that free riders face in the mixed strategy
equilibrium is this possibility of overpricing, free riders will choose their probability of entry
such that there is a significant risk of such an outcome. The expected or average number of
free riders would be low enough to prevent them from overpricing most auctions, of course.
But, without coordination of entry, the ex post actual number of bidders in some auctions
would be high enough to cause the shares to be substantially overpriced.39



did not, however, choose to make the information public.
37
   Kyle (1989) points out that under certain conditions, no one may invest in gathering information in equilibrium.
38
    The model predicts that there will be a moral hazard or free rider problem with uniform price auctions but does
not incorporate excessively high bids by totally uninformed bidders. This was left to future research.
39
     Bortolotti, Megginson and Smart (2006) show that auctions, in the form of block trades, have increased
dramatically in the last decade and have become quite common around the world for seasoned equity offerings.
The success of these SEO auctions fits well with our findings for IPOs, since the block trade auctions are single-
unit auctions among a small group of sophisticated buyers – investment banks. The investment bank that wins the
auction buys all of the shares at the winning bid price and then resells them on the market. With only one buyer,
there is no room for free riders. Because the shares are relatively easy to value (since they are already trading) and
the number of potential bidders is relatively small, these auctions are closer to Treasury bill auctions than to the
types of auctions that have been used for IPOs.
                                                                                                           20


        Excessively high bids are probably the best way to distinguish the free rider problem
from the more commonly recognized winner’s curse problem that was discussed in the
previous subsection. The key difference between the winner’s curse and the free rider problem
is that the winner’s curse does not lead people to bid more than they genuinely believe the
shares to be worth. If they are optimally adjusting, they will shave their bids. If they are naïve
and do not adjust, they will still bid no more than the expected value. With the free rider
problem, however, bidders may deliberately bid an excessive amount, since the whole point is
to blindly bid high enough to be “first in line” for the shares, rather than devoting time and
resources to coming up with a reasonable bid. Thus, bids which are too high to reflect any
reasonable valuation are good indications of free riders40.

        III.C. Difficulties Reaching a Robust, Stable Equilibrium

        We have now laid out two problems with auctions – the winner’s curse and the free
rider problem – both of which can be solved, in a sense, through sufficient bid-shaving. If all
bidders are sophisticated and are bidding optimally, then they will lower their entry
probabilities and shave their bids to allow a return for their time and effort evaluating the stock
and preparing a bid, and then will further adjust their entry probabilities and bids in response to
the risks of free riders and the winner’s curse. That would lead to substantial underpricing on
average – perhaps more than would be needed for a posted price mechanism such as a fixed
price public offer – even when a stable equilibrium may be possible.
        But a stable equilibrium may require that investors have extensive computational
capabilities, which may not be feasible even for sophisticated investors. Moreover, it is
important that all potential investors, and not just a substantial portion of them, are able to
calculate and implement the strategy correctly.             Uninformed entry imposes a cost on the
sophisticated investors that are devoting time and resources to correctly valuing the shares, thus
making them less willing to enter, yet the uninformed are relying on these sophisticated
investors to set an appropriate price.         For the equilibrium to work, the uninformed must
carefully calculate their entry probabilities so that they do not drive out the investors that they
are relying on in the price-setting process.

40
    An example of this was the IPO auction of Global Securities (Global Menkul Degerler A.S.), one of Turkey’s
leading investment banks and brokerages, in May, 1995. The minimum bid in the auction was 6,000 Turkish Lira,
but bids went as high as 100,000 Turkish Lira, a 1,567% premium over the minimum. During the first three
                                                                                                                   21


         The analysis in Viswanathan and Wang (2000) supports this view. They show that
there may not be a linear equilibrium when adverse selection is severe. With book building the
investment bank coordinates entry, while with a fixed price public offer at least the price is not
subject to entry fluctuations. Thus either method may be more robust than an IPO auction open
to large numbers of unsophisticated investors, although this has not yet been fully modeled.
We illustrate the possibility of such instability using Singapore IPO auctions.
         Our earlier discussion of a free rider was of someone who chose not to invest time and
resources evaluating the current issuer – i.e. chose not to do due diligence on the current
offering – but who still understood auction theory and how to calculate the optimal entry and
bidding strategies, given the expected strategies and information sets of all other potential
bidders. In addition, there may be a more general type of free rider – we will call them return-
chasers – that do not understand the system but are simply attracted to any investment that has
a good recent track record41. If some investors are more likely to enter the current auction
when the last few have led to high returns, and if they also have a tendency to overbid, then it is
very hard to imagine a stable equilibrium with auctions.
         From the issuer’s standpoint, such potential instability of the IPO auction method may
be a serious deterrent. As discussed in II.C, issuers have many goals in mind during an IPO,
including the ability to do future fund-raising in the market or to have a stock price that serves
as a benchmark for employees, suppliers and customers who want to track the condition of the
company. Thus companies would tend to prefer a more accurate aftermarket valuation of their
shares, which requires attracting a following among analysts and informed investors. In order
to guarantee that a stock develops a following and does not get overlooked, the issuer somehow
needs to compensate investors for their time and effort evaluating the new security. Book
building can perform this role42.




months of aftermarket trading, Global Securities’ stock price fell by 56.1% (a 60.5% market-adjusted drop).
41
    One can think of such an investor either as a type of irrational noise trader or as one who rationally chooses not
to become ‘informed’ regarding optimal bidding strategies, given the substantial cost of learning auction theory.
42
   Underpricing as a way of inducing costly evaluation has been modeled in Sherman (1992), Chemmanur (1993),
Sherman (2000), Sherman and Titman (2002) and Busaba and Chang (2003). Yung (2005) models costly
evaluation by both investors and the underwriter. Cornelli and Goldreich (2001), Jenkinson and Jones (2004) and
Cornelli and Goldreich (2003) offer evidence on whether or not bookbuilding performs this role in practice.
Cornelli, Goldreich and Ljungqvist (2005) offer evidence that grey market trading reflects information from retail
investors, and that institutional investors respond to this information in a sophisticated way. Aussenegg, Pichler
and Stomper (2005) also explore grey market trading for IPOs.
                                                                                                                22


        Issuers may also be concerned that there may not be sufficient interest from investors,
leading to a failed IPO. Going public is an important and very public step in the life of a
company, and the cost of a failed IPO is large. In the words of Martin Manley, Chairman and
CEO of Alibris43, "Taking a company public is like getting a heart transplant: you only do it
once and you need it to be done very, very well. It is not a decision driven by price." With
book building, an underwriter cannot make investors like an offering but can ensure that a
sufficient number of investors attend the road show and seriously consider it. With fixed price
public offers, the issuer can at least price the offering low enough to make success more
likely44. Issuers and underwriters have little control in standard sealed bid auction, since they
do not choose either the offer price or allocations.
        Sherman (2005) shows that book building, by providing a superior trade-off between
information production and proceeds maximization, has the potential to dominate both uniform
price and discriminatory auctions. When information gathering is costly, Sherman (1992) and
Chemmanur and Liu (2003) show that even fixed price public offers allow underwriters to
induce more accurate valuations, compared to auctions45.

        III.D. Summary of Predictions from Auction Theory Models

        Table 5 presents the predictions of theory regarding the underpricing and aftermarket
performance of standard auctions. The auction method should be relatively successful when
information gathering is not an issue, and when auctions for the same type of securities are held
at regular intervals so that the pool of participants in the auction is stable46. Auctions will be
less reliable when a reward for information gathering and price discovery is important, when
the number of bidders varies significantly over time in an unpredictable manner, or when a
large number of bidders may try to free ride on the information gathering efforts of others.


43
     See Mr. Manley'   s blog, Jam Side Down, at http://www.martinmanley.com/ipo_diaries/. Alibris held an IPO
auction through WR Hambrecht in May, 2004, but cancelled it after observing the bids.
44
   This may explain the high average initial returns for fixed price public offers relative to other methods. See
Chowdhry and Sherman (1996a) for a model of underpricing of public offers as insurance against failure.
45
    Sherman (1992) models only fixed price (best efforts) IPOs, showing that costly evaluation may be induced
even in a fixed price public offer. Chemmanur and Liu (2003) compare such an offering to a uniform price
auction. Sherman (2005) also shows that, when information acquisition is costly, increasing the number of
potential bidders in an auction (beyond the minimum sufficient number) either lowers the mean or increases the
variance, or both, in both the number of bidders and the accuracy of the auction price.
46
    Note that, with a relatively small numbers of potential bidders in a regular series of auctions, collusion is a
problem and hence has been the subject of much academic research. For IPOs, however, where millions of shares
are being auctioned to millions of potential bidders, collusion is unlikely to be a major concern.
                                                                                                 23


       To summarize our conclusions regarding IPO methods: (a) Auctions have a large risk
of failure due to uncertainty about the number of bidders and the consequent large winner'
                                                                                         s
curse and free rider problems. Auction participation rates may be unstable unless virtually all
potential bidders, including inexperienced uninformed investors, are able to implement
complicated optimal entry and bidding strategies. (b) Fixed price public offers may dominate
auctions when it comes to maximizing proceeds, inducing information gathering, and the
transparency and the ease with which the method can be implemented. (c) When information
gathering is relatively more important, book building may be preferred, as it may lead to better
price discovery and lower underpricing. However, book building requires a relatively efficient
market where underwriters compete with each other and thus is more likely to replace fixed
price public offers in more developed economies with well-regulated, transparent markets.


IV. Evidence of Uncertainty in IPO Auctions

       As discussed in III.C, auctions may not always lead to stable, robust equilibria, given
the uncertainty and the incentives they impose on investors. In this section we show evidence
of participation fluctuations (IV.A) and undersubscription (IV.B), both of which might occur
periodically even in a stable equilibrium. In IV.C, we show evidence that the winner’s curse
and free riders, particularly return-chasers, may have lead to instability and ultimately to issuers
rejecting the auction method.

       IV.A. Evidence of Participation Fluctuations

       There are many indications of fluctuations in participation levels for IPO auctions.
When Japan auctioned off parts of its railway system, the 1993 auction of Japan Railway (JR)
East drew 18,670 bidders, while the 1996 auction of JR West drew only 3,395 bidders, a
decrease of more than 80%. 335,000 JR West shares (20%) were left unsold. When Argentina
auctioned off its first telecommunications company, Telefonica, in December, 1991, it hoped
for at least 80,000 bids from local investors but received more than 100,000.              When it
auctioned off its other telecommunications company, Telecom, just a few months later, the
auction drew more than 270,000 applications from local investors.
       Amihud, Hauser and Kirsch (2002) found large fluctuations in the number of bidders
for IPO auctions in Israel. Similarly, Kandel, Sarig and Wohl (1999) looked at 28 auctions
                                                                                                                  24


over 3 years in Israel and found that orders ranged from 1,388 to 13,51847. Lin, Lee and Liu
(2003) and Hsu and Shiu (2004) report wide fluctuations in bidder numbers for Taiwan'
                                                                                    s IPO
auctions. There is also evidence of variation in the demand for Singapore auctions, as is shown
in Table 6. Subscription levels ranged from the Vickers Ballas auction, which was 1,300%
oversubscribed (at the minimum bid), to Sunright, which was 82% undersubscribed. The
number of bids ranged from 1,128 for Eng Wah to 162,492 for Singapore Telecom48.

         IV.B. Evidence of Undersubscription

         Many IPO auctions have been undersubscribed, when too few bidders chose to enter.
IPOs may of course be undersubscribed under any method, because investors scrutinized the
offering and did not like it. But auctions (and fixed price public offers) carry an additional risk
– that offerings may be undersubscribed simply because too many investors did not happen to
consider them. This is not a risk for book building where the underwriter manages the process,
making sure that enough investors attend the road show and consider the shares. With fixed
price public offers, the shares may at least be substantially underpriced to reduce this risk.
Thus auctions carry an additional risk of undersubscription, although suggestive evidence from
small samples cannot prove that the increase in risk was significant in practice.
         Jenkinson and Mayer (1988) report that 3 out of 6 UK privatization auctions between
1982 and 1987 were undersubscribed, while one was 500% oversubscribed.                                          The
undersubscribed offerings included Britoil, which was 73% undersubscribed (i.e. bids were
received for only 27% of the shares being offered) and Enterprise Oil, which was 74%
undersubscribed. The auction tranche of Sunright, the last IPO auction in Singapore, was 82%
undersubscribed, even though the public offer tranche, which was held at the same time as the
auction, was oversubscribed.
         Two of the most-respected Asian telecoms, Korea Telecom and Singapore Telecom,
were auctioned off in October of 1993, at a time when Asian telecom stocks were hot. The
Singapore Telecom auction was heavily oversubscribed and priced far above expectations, but
the Korea Telecom auction was vastly undersubscribed, receiving bids for only 10% of
available shares. Given the strong reputation of Korea Telecom and the popularity of Asian

47
   Multiple orders were allowed, so the number of orders might overestimate the number of bidders.
48
    Table 6 also shows substantial variation in demand for fixed price shares in the same offerings, so participation
variation is not unique to the auction tranche. However, participation variation does not lead to greater return risk
                                                                                                              25


telecoms at the time, this offering is a reminder that no company is so well established that
investor participation in an auction is assured. In August of 2000, the Chunghwa Telecom IPO
auction in Taiwan was only 72% subscribed, leaving 80.8 million shares unsold49.
        Most of these examples – Britoil, Enterprise Oil, Korea Telecom and Chunghwa
Telecom – were very large, well known companies. At the other extreme in terms of size were
the French IPO auctions on the unregulated over the counter Marche Libré or Free Market. All
26 of these French auctions50 in 2002-2004 were greatly undersubscribed, with the mean and
median subscription rates both below 20% (i.e. more than 80% undersubscribed). While other
IPO methods also led to undersubscription during this period, as shown in Table 7, subscription
rates were dramatically higher for the other methods. In 2002, the mean subscription rates were
19% for the 14 auctions and 69% for the 8 bookbuilds. In 2003, the mean subscription rates
were 19% for the 10 auctions and 143% for the 3 bookbuilds. In 2004, the mean subscription
rates were 15% for the 3 auctions, more than 200% for the 3 bookbuilds, and 141% for the 12
fixed price public offers.
        An example of the extreme undersubscription of these auctions is Leon Gas, which tried
to sell 30,000 shares in its December, 2003 auction but received bids for only 210 shares. Of
the more than two dozen auctions in those three years, even the most successful sold fewer than
half the shares (41.6%). It is possible that the extreme undersubscription of these French
auctions led to the return of fixed price public offers for Free Market IPOs.
        As we saw in Table 2.B, the French Free Market auctions were small, with the average
auction hoping to raise less than          1 million51. Such offerings may seem too small to be of
interest, but they add to the overall evidence. IPO auctions have been used for a wide range of
issues, from small ones on France’s Free Market to large privatization offerings raising $1
billion or more, such as Singapore Telecom, Argentina Telefonica, JR East or Japan Tobacco.
Undersubscription has occurred for both the biggest and the smallest IPO auctions.
        Data on the actual number of failed offerings may sometimes be difficult to obtain, for
either auctions or fixed price public offers, since underwriters have an incentive to place their

for investors in a fixed price public offer, since it will not affect the price.
49
   For Chung Hwa Telecom in Taiwan, many argued afterwards that the reservation price had been set too high.
This cannot explain Korea Telecom, which is one of the few IPO auctions that did not set a reservation price.
50
    This excludes a 27th IPO auction, for Parfex, because the details are not available on the Euronext website.
51
     The bookbuilt IPOs during this period were larger but still small by most standards, while the fixed price
public offers were even smaller than the auctions (although the amounts actually raised were similar for auctions
and fixed price public offers, since the auctions were so heavily undersubscribed).
                                                                                                            26


own orders in an offering that is underwritten. After all, if the underwriter will be forced to buy
the shares either way, why not make the offering appear successful? For IPO auctions in Israel,
the Securities Authority found that many auctions that had been reported as having been strictly
oversubscribed had, in fact, been undersubscribed, after adjusting for bids by the underwriter52.

         IV.C. Evidence of Instability

         Stable auctions may not be achievable when return-chasing free riders are present.
Figure 1 suggests that some sort of updating of expectations occurs over time in countries that
use IPO auctions. Perhaps initially, investors participate in auctions based on the expectation
that free riders will not be an issue. Sooner or later, however, underpricing attracts more and
more return-chasers, eventually leading to poor returns for winning bidders. As IPO auctions
fail to provide reasonable returns because of high entry and over-bidding, investors update their
priors regarding IPO auction risk and expected return, becoming less willing to participate, and
so the probability of an undersubscribed auction increases. If issuers persist in using the
method, the reduced number of bidders may eventually lead to higher initial returns, restarting
the cycle. However, after observing such volatility, issuers may instead turn to a more robust
method, even if that method on average leads to greater underpricing.

             IV.C.1 Argentina’s Experience

         Argentina’s short experiment with IPO auctions illustrates how the success of one
auction may lead to problems with the next. Argentina began a massive privatization program
with the auction of shares in Telefonica de Argentina in December, 1991. Institutional demand
was lower than expected, since many professional investors thought that the minimum bid price
was too high. However, massive interest by retail investors drove the auction clearing price to
45% above the minimum bid. The stock rose another 20% during aftermarket trading, and the
auction was described as a “smashing success”.

         The next privatization, for Argentina Telecom, came less than four months later.
Because the Telefonica auction had been such a success, many were eager to cash in on the
Telecom auction. In fact, bankers were so eager that they “set up booths in the streets of
downtown Buenos Aires offering to lend investors 80 percent of the purchase price of Telecom

52
     “Issues over subscribed due to underwriters” by Dafna Zucker and Golan Fridenfeld , Israel Business Arena,
                                                                                                            27


shares”.53 Up to one-fourth of the shares purchased in the Telecom IPO were financed through
90 day loans of between 80% and 100% of the purchase price. Bids totaled almost 6 billion
pesos, although the government had only hoped to raise 1 billion pesos. The auction price was
bid up to almost twice the reservation price, due to the strong demand from local investors.
The initial return on Telecom’s IPO (based on the first day’s closing price) was 3.6%, which
means that the stock would be considered fairly accurately priced in most academic studies.

         But the auction price was unsustainable. By the time the 90 day margin loans were due,
the stock price had fallen far enough that many discouraged investors chose not to meet margin
calls on their Telecom shares, while others sold other shares to meet their Telecom margin
calls. Brokerages had to dump more and more shares onto the market because of missed
margin calls, causing a general market crash and the cancellation of up to 20 other planned
IPOs in Argentina. Telecom was later described as “viciously overpriced”. The reason for this,
according to a banker at Banco de Galicia, was that “Everyone had seen how well Telefonica
(the other telephone privatization) had gone, and their total analysis was ‘if Telefonica was a
sell-out then Telecom will be too’. What happened was that the Dutch-auction system
exacerbated things because people pushed up their price to make sure they would get shares.”54


             IV.C.2 Singapore’s Experience

                 IV.C.2.a Evidence of Free Riders
         In Singapore, there were several examples of extremely high bids, a strong indication of
the presence of free riders (as discussed in III.B):
     •   Singapore Technologies Industrial Corporation (STIC), May 1993: the reservation price
         was $0.85, the clearing price was $1.20, but bids went up to $9.80, a 1,053% premium
         (all premia are relative to the reservation price);
     •   Hwa Tat Lee (HTL), September 1993: the reservation price was $0.60, the clearing
         price was $1.02, but bids went up to $10.20, a 1,600% premium;
     •   Singapore Telecom, October 1993: the reservation price was $2.00, the market-clearing
         price was $3.60 but bids went as high as $100.00 per share, a 4,900% premium;
     •   Eng Wah, July 1994: the reservation price was $0.65, the clearing price was $0.66, but
         bids went as high as $7.80, a 1,100% premium.


Globes (Online), August 11, 2004. A similar practice has been used in Hong Kong, for fixed price public offers.
53
    “Argentina's Stock Regulator Faces Daunting Task”, The New York Times; August 24, 1992, Section D, p. 3.
54
   “YPF sets equity standards”, by Danielle Robinson, Euromoney; London; Jul 1993, p. 19.
                                                                                                          28


        In the case of Singapore Telecom, the reservation price of $2.00 translated to a
prospective price-earnings (PE) multiple of 27 times. Many analysts considered this excessive
for a well run but mature company, and thus many banks put caps of $2.00 or $3.00 per share
on the bids of those who borrowed to pay for their orders. In the end, the highest bid was 50
times the reservation price, implying a prospective PE of 1,350 times – hardly a reasonable
valuation estimate for a mature company in an established industry. Even so, the stock price
rose another 15% the first day to close at $4.14, “after which it was downhill all the way”.55
Although there was no dramatic crash, the stock price drifted steadily downward for more than
a year, while the market as a whole was slightly up during the same period.
        In 2001, the outgoing chairman of Singapore Telcom called the auction price
“exuberant”      and “too expensive”, making it “'
                                                 difficult for the stock to see meaningful
movement upwards, despite the company chalking up sterling profit growth which exceeded
analysts'expectations every year for the first five to six years after the launch”. At the time that
the outgoing chairman made these remarks, the stock price was $1.90, far below the $3.60
auction price, even though “in terms of fundamentals, the company has done well”.56

                 IV.C.2.b Initial and One-Month Returns – Low and Declining Over Time
        IPO auctions in Singapore offered positive returns on average, at least for investors that
flipped (stagged) by selling on the first possible day. The mean (median) return was 4.6%
(2.8%), or 2.8% (0.6%) on a market-adjusted basis. The standard deviation of returns was
8.7% (9.1%, market-adjusted), and fully half of the auctions led to negative market-adjusted
initial returns, so auctions were not without risk even for flippers.
        For those that did not sell their shares on the first day possible, returns were lower.
More than half of the auctions (13 out of 20) led to negative returns for investors that sold one
month after the shares began to trade, using either adjusted or raw returns. The raw (market-
adjusted) one month returns had a mean of -0.5% (-3.7%), a median of -2% (-1.7%), and a
standard deviation of 12.4% (11.5%).
        Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 3.A which shows one month raw auction returns
ordered chronologically, returns got worse over time. Investors would have made money on
five of the first six uniform price auctions in Singapore, if they had bought at the auction strike

55
   “Half-million SingTel shares change hands at $ 3.60”, by Goh Soo May, The Straits Times (Singapore),
January 26, 1996, Money Section, pg. 72.
56
   “SingTel' s IPO priced '
                          too high'
                                  ”. by Tammy Tan , Straits Times (Singapore), 27 Aug 2001.
                                                                                                           29


price and sold after the shares had traded for one month. The average raw return on the first
five offerings was 10.4%, for this holding period. However, the returns were negative for six
of the last seven auctions done in Singapore, with an average one-month return of -5.5% for
these auctions, which were known as tenders.                  People noticed the poor performance,
complaining that auctioned IPO shares were falling below their auction strike price on the
aftermarket and joking that they must be catching a new disease called “tenderitis”57.
        A similar pattern is shown in Figure 3.B, which gives one month excess returns for
Main Board auctions only58, relative to the All-Sing Index, a capitalization-weighted index of
all stocks listed on the Stock Exchange of Singapore. The results are similar if we calculate the
one month returns relative to the Straits Times Index (blue chips) or Sesdaq Index (smaller,
younger companies), or if we use two month returns. For investors that were learning and
updating their priors over time, auctions were becoming less attractive.
        Aftermarket performance among fixed price public offers was similar to that of
auctions, if both are measured from the first day of trading. The poor aftermarket performance
did not lead to negative returns for investors that participated in fixed price IPOs, however,
since initial returns were substantially higher for public offers. Investors that regularly received
shares in fixed price public offers and held those shares for at least a month or two did well on
average, while investors that regularly received shares in IPO auctions saw declining and
eventually negative returns. Thus auctions were a questionable investment, given the risk, even
for those that flipped the first day, and they were clearly a poor investment for anyone that
planned to hold their shares for a month or more. And in equilibrium, it is not a feasible
strategy for everyone to sell (and for no one to buy) on the first day of trading.
        The incentive for free riders to enter should have been lower in Singapore'
                                                                                  s IPO
auctions, given their use of simultaneous hybrids with fixed price tranches. Such hybrids are
better than pure auctions at reducing the effect of free riders on the pricing process, since they
offer uninformed investors a way to participate without distorting the price, just as non-
competitive bids in US Treasury auctions allow smaller buyers to participate '
                                                                             safely'
                                                                                   . Buyers in
the fixed price tranche never end up paying more, and frequently pay less, on the shares that
they are allocated. However, since there is a limit to the size of the fixed price tranche,

57
   “New strategies needed for future IPOs”, Ven Sreenivasan, Singapore Straits Times, p. 13, February 3, 1995.
58
    This excludes the two Sesdaq auctions, Aztech and Datapulse, which both occurred in February, 1994. The
Aztech and Datapulse auction raw one-month returns can be seen in Figure 3.A, roughly in the middle of the
                                                                                                 30


investors may be allocated very few shares, particularly in hot offerings. Thus, expected
rationing of fixed price shares may still lead some free riders to bid in the auction.

                 IV.C.2.c Lower Participation Rates Over Time, and Undersubscription
        In the long run, an offering method that does not provide good returns for investors may
not be able to continue to attract them.            For Singapore, there is evidence that investors
eventually became discouraged with auctions, although they were still relatively interested in
public offers. For Liang Huat Aluminum (the 5th-to-last), the auction reservation price was
$0.57. The fixed price tranche, also at $0.57, was 750% oversubscribed, yet the auction was
38% undersubscribed. For the next three auctions - Eng Wah, Superbowl and Pokka - the
number of applicants for fixed price shares was lower than for previous fixed price tranches but
still around 29,000. However, the number of bidders for the auction tranche, which had
averaged around 49,000 for the first 9 auctions, averaged only 1,300 (a 97% reduction) for
these three auctions near the end of the cycle.
        Although demand was substantially lower for these later auctions, there was still
evidence of extremely high bids, indicating that at least some free riders persisted while other
investors were dropping out.            In the Liang Huat Aluminum auction which was 38%
undersubscribed, bids went as high as $2.00, a 251% premium over the minimum. In the next
auction, for Eng Wah, the reservation price was $0.65 and the market-clearing price was only
one cent higher, but bids went as high as $7.80, a 1,082% premium over the minimum.
        We talked to the management of Sunright, the last company to do an IPO auction in
Singapore, about why they chose an auction. They explained that they were offered a choice
by their underwriters - they could either do a pure fixed price public offer at $0.75 per share, or
else sell part of the shares through an auction tranche with a reservation price of $0.75 per
share. Since the offering was fully underwritten (meaning that the underwriter would buy any
unpurchased shares at $0.75 per share), and the fees were the same, the reservation price of
$0.75 meant that a hybrid auction could not possibly result in lower proceeds than a pure fixed
price public offer. There was “only one way up from the fixed price”59.
        However, the results of the Sunright auction may have made underwriters hesitant to
offer such deals in the future, while the negative publicity surrounding the auction results could


auctions when ordered chronologically.
59
   E-mail from Kenneth Tan, Director of Sunright Ltd., Dec. 21, 2001.
                                                                                                                        31


not have been appreciated by the issuer. Sunright’s fixed price tranche of 30 million shares
was 22% oversubscribed, but the 20 million share auction tranche was only 18% subscribed
(i.e. 82% undersubscribed), leaving the offering 20% undersubscribed overall. More than ten
times as many shares were ordered in the fixed price tranche as in the auction, even though
investors could have bid for shares in the auction at $0.75.
           Although only two out of twenty uniform price IPO auctions in Singapore were
undersubscribed, it must be remembered that the sample size, in this case, was endogenous.
Regarding the first of the two undersubscribed auctions, Liang Huat Aluminum, a Straits Times
article from June 27, 1994 claimed that the undersubscription of the auction was “an accident
waiting to happen” and said that it should be taken not as a thumbs down for the company or its
prospects but as a sign that investors were becoming “disenchanted” with the IPO auction
(a.k.a. tender) system60. The article noted that “Of the seven issues with tender tranches this
year, only Aztech is trading above its strike price”, and that “With Liang Huat, it seems many
investors had become so disillusioned with the IPO system that they did not bother tendering”.
           The decline in the number of bidders in IPO auctions over time, combined with the
declining returns to auction bidders and the fact that the two undersubscribed offerings came
near the end of the experiment with auctions, all suggest that it was no coincidence that issuers
never chose to do another IPO auction after the Sunright auction was substantially
undersubscribed.
           To summarize, we have shown evidence of bidders placing unreasonably high bids in
IPO auctions (IV.C.2.a); deteriorating and eventually negative returns over time to bidders in
Singapore’s IPO auctions (IV.C.2.b); and lower average bidder numbers over time, eventually
leading to some undersubscribed offerings (IV.C.2.c). The evidence is consistent with return-
chasers overbidding and driving out serious investors.

               IV.C.3 A Quantitative Analysis of the Singapore Experience

           The available data on auctions is sparse and not easily amenable to rigorous quantitative
analysis using statistical methods, since most countries that have tried IPO auctions gave up on
them after a few years, leading to small samples. For the IPO auctions that have been done,
data on participation levels are often unavailable61. We have data on the full sample of uniform

60
     “Investors start casting jaundiced eye over IPOs” by Russell Baker, Straits Times , June 27, 1994, p. 38.
61
      In the US for example, even the clearing price in the auction, much less the overall subscription level, is not
                                                                                                                     32


price IPO auctions done in Singapore, all 20 of them, and will attempt a quantitative
characterization of that data in this section. This is albeit a bit brave, given our sample size.
         We argued in Section III.A that a high subscription rate (a large number of bids) in an
auction may lead to overpricing of the auction, while a low subscription rate may lead to
underpricing, due to the winner'
                               s curse. We further argued in III.B and III.C that free riders,
including return-chasers, may disrupt the bidding process. We examine the data in three steps
to see whether there is support for our conjectures.
         First, we look for return chasing behavior to test whether high returns to participating in
the preceding auction leads to a higher participation rate, using the following regression
         S Ai = α + α S + α 2 ri ,lag 30 d + u                                 (1)
                 0   1 Fi                      i
where
        SAi is the subscription rate in the ith auction;
        SF is the subscription rate in the fixed price tranche;
        ri,lag30d is the return that would have been obtained by buying in the ( i-2)nd auction and
selling one month after trading begins.

For the return from a previous auction, ri,lag30d, we use the return from 2 auctions ago because
the one month return on the (i-1)st auction is in general not available by the time the ith auction
is open for bidding62. We also considered the following variation of equation (1) above:


         N Ai = α + α N + α 2 ri ,lag 30 d + u                                 (1’)
                 0   1 Fi                      i
where
        NAi is the number of persons bidding in the ith auction divided by the dollar value of
shares offered in the auction tranche, at the reservation price;
        NFi is the number of persons bidding in the ith auction’s fixed price tranche divided by
the dollar value of shares offered in the fixed price tranche.

         Our conjecture is that some investors are return chasers, and that such investors tend to
bid too high in auctions. In other words, return chasers are less likely to shave their bids
optimally and may even attempt to free ride. However, the number of participants in an issue
may also vary due to variation in the underlying demand for the stock, unrelated to the presence


generally available.
62
   In two cases we had to use the 30 day return on the (i-3)rd auction since the return on the (i-2)nd auction was
not available when the i’th auction opened.
                                                                                                   33


of return-chasing investors. Thus we use SFi. fixed price tranche orders, as a proxy for the
underlying demand for the stock, to control for such variation. In Singapore, the auction and
fixed price tranches occurred simultaneously, rather than sequentially as in many other
countries, making fixed price tranche demand a good proxy of overall demand.
        The estimated coefficients (t-values in parentheses) for equation (1) are, respectively:
0.74 (0.85), 0.18 (4.27), and 14.18 (3.50). The adjusted R-Squared is 60%. The corresponding
figures for equation (1’) are: 0.00 (0.77), 0.03 (3.29), and (0.001) (2.26) with an adjusted R-
Squared of 39%. Thus, both higher underlying demand and a higher return to participating in a
recent auction led to higher participation in the current auction. In fact, unreported regressions
showed that past returns and subscription rates were also significantly positively related for the
fixed price tranches of auctions and for pure fixed price public offers.
        Second, we examine whether the subscription rate in the auction affects the auction
clearing price using the following regression:


 P −P
  A   F = α +α S +α S +u                                         (2)
   P       0  1 Ai 2 Fi  i
    F   i
where
        PA is the auction clearing price.
        PF is the price for the fixed price tranche (and the reservation price in the auction).

        As in the case of equation (1), we also consider the following variation of equation (2)


 P −P
  A   F = α +α N +α N + u                                        (2’)
   P       0  1 Ai 2 Fi   i
    F   i


        The assumption is that some of the variation in the subscription rate was due to return-
chasing investors who did not adequately adjust their bids for the winner’s curse, or perhaps
even attempted to free ride, and thus bid too high. As before, we use SFi. as a proxy for the
variation in underlying demand for the stock for reasons other than the presence of return-
chasing investors. The coefficients (t-values) for equation (2) are: 0.0163 (0.12); 0.0769 (2.88);
and 0.0079 (1.08); the adjusted R-Squared is 44%. The corresponding numbers for equation
                                                                                                                34


(2’) are: 0.10 (0.74), 313.97 (3.30), and 15.15 (-0.13), with an adjusted R-Squared of 39%.
Thus we found that the clearing price in the auction tends to be higher when more bidders enter
and order more shares, even after adjusting for underlying demand for the stock itself.
        While a higher participation rate in the auction is positively related to a higher auction
clearing price, the higher price may be “rational,” reflecting a higher intrinsic value of the issue
over and above that reflected in the fixed price (and over and above the higher value reflected
in fixed price tranche demand). To rule out this possibility, in the third step, we therefore
examine whether a higher auction clearing price is related to a lower return following the
auction using the following regression:

                           P −P
r             = α +α        A   F +u                             (3)
 30d , au , i    0  1        P       i
                              F   i
where
        r30d,au,i denotes the 30 day aftermarket return, starting from the auction clearing price.

The estimated parameters (t-values) are: 0.04 (1.25) and -0.10 (-1.74) with an adjusted R-
Squared of 10%. The evidence supports the view that high auction prices in general are
associated with lower returns to auction investors, although auction theory would predict that,
if investors are bidding optimally and are fully anticipating increased entry, then higher bids
would tend to lead to higher expected returns (see Sherman, 2005).
        To summarize, these findings are consistent with our story, which is that poorly
informed investors (both free riders, and bidders who did not adequately shave their bids)
disrupted the bidding process, and that this along with the added risk due to endogenous entry
eventually drove investors and issuers away from the auction method. This is another way to
summarize the evidence in IV.C.2 that some potential bidders in Singapore did not understand
the auction method and were influenced by past returns63. Chiang, Qian and Sherman (2006)
examine Taiwan’s discriminatory IPO auctions and also find evidence of return-chasing,
particularly among retail bidders64.

63
   The conclusions do not change if we use excess returns over the Singapore stock market index instead of raw
returns in the regressions.
64
    The Taiwan dataset is important because it is a relatively large sample of discriminatory auctions, and because
data is available on all bids, as opposed to only summary statistics. With discriminatory auctions, returns vary
even among winning bidders in the same auction, since some investors pay more than others. Nevertheless for
some countries, such as Japan, data is available only on weighted average bidder returns rather than on all bidder
                                                                                                                  35




V. Conclusion

         In this paper, we first established a surprising empirical regularity – that IPO auctions
have been tried in more than 20 countries, and have been rejected in favor of other methods for
bringing new equity issues to the market. IPO auctions have been used for issues of all sizes,
from very small to very large. The auction methods used have varied, yet the outcomes have
been surprisingly consistent: When issuers have been given a choice, they have generally
chosen not to use auctions once they became familiar with the method.
         We did not find support for the common explanations offered for the unpopularity of
IPO auctions in the US – that issuers were reluctant to use a new, experimental method, or that
underwriters pressured issuers to use methods for which they charged higher fees or were able
to allocate underpriced shares. We also did not find that issuers consistently preferred the
offering method that led to the lowest initial returns. There is little, if any, support for the
popular view that auctions lead to highly accurate pricing and hence to a very low mean and
variance of initial returns.
         In Singapore and in other countries, we found evidence suggesting the presence of
return chasing free riders who placed unrealistically high bids, apparently relying on other
bidders to perform due diligence and engage in price discovery. Eventually, investors began to
lose money on IPO auctions in Singapore, leading to lower participation levels and
undersubscribed offerings. The number of orders was still relatively high for public offer
tranches but was substantially lower for auctions of the same shares. Finally, issuers and
underwriters gave up on the auction method and returned to fixed price public offers, a method
that had traditionally been more stable, although also more costly in terms of underpricing.
         We have shown that auctions have led to undersubscription and to extreme mispricing
in practice, but it must be noted that other IPO methods have also led to withdrawn offerings
and to mispricing. Thus the evidence of problems with standard auctions may, on its own, be
insufficient to establish which IPO method is superior. At the very least, however, the data tell
us something about which auction models best fit the existing evidence. The observed track
record of IPO auctions appear consistent with costly evaluation/endogenous entry models but
not with endowed information/full entry models, as shown in Table 5. Given that people have

initial returns. Liu, Wei and Liaw (2001) were the first to examine data on all bids for Taiwan’s IPO auctions.
                                                                                                    36


used the latter models to argue the superiority of the auction method, it is important to note that
they do not fit the data. Moreover, the very non-existence of large, stable samples of IPO
auctions, despite the fact that more than 20 countries have experimented with standard sealed
bid IPO auctions, is consistent with models that predict that IPO auctions may be problematic.
       We found that participation variations have been a major source of problems for IPO
auctions.   There is a trade-off with auctions in terms of the optimal participation level.
Drawing too much attention may mean insufficient adjustment for the winner’s curse or the
entrance of too many free riders, while too little attention makes it more likely that the offering
might fail. Even at the optimal number of entrants, there may be too many free riders and not
enough serious investors in the mix, since the issuer/underwriter cannot control who enters.
       With book building, the underwriter can act as a gatekeeper, coordinating the number
and type of entrants. With an auction, on the other hand, someone who invests time and money
evaluating an offering can easily be squeezed out by a thousand free riders. Although the
relationships between investment banks and investors can lead to abuse under book building, a
key problem with auctions is that they cannot guarantee serious consideration, particularly for
smaller, less important offerings. Without some way to screen out free riders and ensure the
participation of serious investors, IPO auctions are highly risky for both issuers and investors.
       Our findings are consistent with our expectations: that fixed price public offers should
replace auctions in most or all economies, because fixed price public offers can control risk and
limit some of the problems with auctions that we have discussed; and book building should
replace fixed price public offers in more developed markets that have good institutions and an
activity level sufficient to sustain a competitive investment banking industry.
                                                                                           37


                                         References
Amihud, Yakov, Shmuel Hauser, and Amir Kirsh (2003) “Allocations, adverse selection, and
cascades in IPOs: Evidence from the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange,” Journal of Financial Economics
68, 137-158.

Aussenegg, Wolfgang, Pegaret Pichler and Alex Stomper, 2005, IPO Pricing with Bookbuilding
and a When-Issued Market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis forthcoming.

Arosio, Roberto, Giancarlo Giudici and Stefano Paleari, 2000, Underpricing and Money “Left on
the Table” in Italian IPOs, Unpublished paper, Politecnico di Milano.

Ausubel, L. M., 2002, Implications of Auction Theory for New Issues Markets, Unpublished
paper, University of Maryland.

Back, K., and J. Zender, 1993, Auctions of Divisible Goods, The Review of Financial Studies 6,
733-764

Bajari, P. and A. Hortacsu, 2003, The winner’s curse, reserve prices, and endogenous entry:
empirical insights from eBay auctions, Rand Journal of Economics 34, 329-355.

Bazerman, M.H., and W.F. Samuelson, 1983, I Won the Auction But Don’t Want the Prize,
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 27, 618-634.

Benveniste, Lawrence and Paul Spindt, 1989, How Investment Bankers Determine the Offer Price
and Allocation of New Issues, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 343-361.

Benveniste, Lawrence and William Wilhelm, 1990, A Comparative Analysis of IPO Proceeds
under Alternative Regulatory Regimes, Journal of Financial Economics 28, 173-207.

Biais, Bruno and Anne Marie Faugeron-Crouzet, 2002, IPO Auctions:                    English,
Dutch,…French and Internet, Journal of Financial Intermediation 11, 9-36.

Biais, Bruno, Peter Bossaerts and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2002, An Optimal IPO Mechanism,
Review of Economic Studies 69, 117-146.

Bierbaum, Juergen and Veronika Grimm, 2002, Selling Shares to Retail Investors: Auction vs.
Fixed Price, Unpublished paper, Humboldt University of Berlin.

Bortolotti, Bernardo, William Megginson and Scott Smart, 2006, The Rise of Accelerated
Seasoned Equity Underwritings, Unpublished paper, University of Oklahoma.

Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, 2002, Prices and the Winner’s Curse, Rand Journal of
Economics 33 (1), 1-21.

Busaba, Walid and Chun Chang, 2002, Bookbuilding vs. Fixed Price Revisited: The Effect of
Aftermarket Trading, Unpublished paper, University of Western Ontario.
                                                                                              38




Camp, Grame and Robert Munro, 2000, Underpricing in New Zealand: A comparison of the fixed
price and book-building methods, Unpublished paper, University of Auckland.

Campbell, Colin and Dan Levin, 2006, When and Why Not to Auction, Economic Theory 27, 583-
596.

Chahine, Salim, 2001, Mispricing in IPO Methods and the Predictive Ability of Investors’ Interest
for New Issues, Unpublished paper, Audencia-Nantes School of Management.

Chemmanur, Thomas, 1993, The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: A Dynamic Model with
Information Production, Journal of Finance 48, 285-304

Chemmanur, Thomas and Huanliang Mark Liu, 2003, How Should A Firm Go Public? A
Dynamic Model of the Choice Between Fixed Price Offerings and Auctions in IPOs
Privatizations, Unpublished paper, Boston College.

Chen, Zhaohui and William Wilhelm, 2005, A Theory of the Transition to Secondary Market
Trading of IPOs, Unpublished paper, University of Virginia.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan and Ann Sherman, 1996a, International Differences in Oversubscription and
Underpricing of Initial Public Offerings, Journal of Corporate Finance 2, 359-381.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan and Ann Sherman, 1996b, The Winner’s Curse and International Methods of
Allocating Initial Public Offerings, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 4, 15-30.

Chiang, Yao-Min, Yiming Qian and Ann Sherman, 2006, Partial Adjustment, the Winner'    s
Curse and the Effects of Entry on Taiwan'
                                        s IPO Auctions, Unpublished paper, University of
Notre Dame.

Cliff, Michael and David Denis, 2004, Do Initial Public Offering Firms Purchase Analyst
Coverage with Underpricing? Journal of Finance 59, 2871-2901.

Cornelli, Francesca and David Goldreich, 2001, Book Building and Strategic Allocation, Journal
of Finance 56, 2337 - 2369.

Cornelli, Francesca and David Goldreich, 2003, Book Building: How Informative is the Order
Book? Journal of Finance 58, 1415-1444.

Cornelli, Francesca, Goldreich, David and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2005, Investor Sentiment and
Pre-IPO Markets, Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Degeorge, François, François Derrien and Kent Womack, 2006, Analyst Hype in IPOs:
Explaining the Popularity of Bookbuilding, Unpublished paper, Tuck School of Business,
Dartmouth College.

Derrien, Francois and Kent Womack, 2003, Auctions vs. Book-Building and the Control of
Underpricing in Hot IPO Markets, Review of Financial Studies 16, 31-61.
                                                                                           39


Engelbrecht-Wiggans, Ricahrd and Elena Katok, 2005, Experiments on auction valuation and
endogenous entry. In Morgan, J. (Ed.), Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 171-196.
Stamford, CT: Elsevier Science Ltd.

French, Kenneth and Robert McCormick, 1984, Sealed Bids, Sunk Costs and the Process of
Competition, Journal of Business 57, 417-441.

Goergen, Marc G.J., 1997, The Transfer of Control in British and German IPOs, Unpublished
paper, University of Manchester.

Goldreich, David, 2005, Underpricing in Discriminatory and Uniform-Price Treasury Auctions,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis forthcoming.

Habib, Michel and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2001, Underpricing and Entrepreneurial Wealth Losses
in IPOs: Theory and Evidence, Review of Financial Studies 14, No. 2, 433-458.

Habib, M. and A. Ziegler, 2003, Why government bonds are sold by auction and corporate bonds
by posted-price selling. Research paper 78. Foundation for the Advancement of Monetary
Education, New York.

Harstad, R. M., 1990, Alternative common-value auction procedures: revenue comparisons with
free entry, Journal of Political Economy 98, 421-429.

Hausch, Donald and Lode Li, 1993, A common value auction model with endogenous entry and
information acquisition, Economic Theory 3, 315-334.

Hendricks, K.R., R.H.Porter, and C.A. Wilson, 1994, Auctions for Oil and Gas Leases with an
Informed Bidder and a Random Reservation Price, Econometrica, 62, 1415-1444.

Hsu, Yenshan and Cheng-yi Shiu, 2004, Information Content of Investors’ Bids in IPO Auctions:
Evidence from Taiwan, Journal of Financial Studies 12, No. 1, 27-50.

Hsu, Yenshan and Chung-Wen Hung, 2005, Why Have IPO Auctions Lost Market Share to
Fixed-price Offers? : Evidence from Taiwan, Unpublished paper, National Chengchi University.

Jagannathan, Ravi and Ann Sherman, 2005, Reforming the Bookbuilding Process for IPOs,
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 17, 67-72.

Jenkinson, T. and H. Jones, 2004, Bids and allocations in European IPO book building.
Journal of Finance 59, 2309-2338.

Jenkinson, Tim and Colin Mayer, 1988, The Privatization Process in France and the U.K.,
European Economic Review 32, 482-490.

Jenkinson, Tim, Morrison, Alan D., and William J. Wilhelm, 2005, Why are European IPOs so
rarely priced outside the indicative price range?, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Kagel, J.H., and D. Levin, 1986, The Winner’s Curse and Public Information in Common
                                                                                                40


Value Auctions, American Economic Review, 76, 894-920.

Kandel, Shmuel, Oded Sarig and Avi Wohl, 1999, The Demand for Stock: An Analysis of IPO
Auctions, Review of Financial Studies 12, 227-247.

Kaneko, Takashi and Richard Pettway, 2003, Auctions versus Book Building of Japanese IPOs,
Pacific Basin Finance Journal 11 (September), 439-462.

Kerins, Francis, Kenji Kutsuna and Richard Smith, 2003, Why Are IPOs Underpriced?
Evidence from Japan’s Hybrid Auction-Method Offerings, Unpublished paper, Claremont
Graduate University.

Kutsuna, Kenji and Richard Smith, 2004, Why Does Book Building Drive Out Auction
Methods of IPO Issuance? Evidence from Japan, Review of Financial Studies 17, # 4, 1129-
1166.

Kyle, Albert S., 1989, “Informed speculation with imperfect competition,” Review of Economic
Studies 56, 317-356.

Levin, D. and J. L. Smith, 1994, Equilibrium in auctions with entry, American Economic
Review 84, 585-599.

Lin, Ji-Chai, Yi-Tsung Lee, and Yu-Jane Liu, 2003, Why have auctions been losing market shares
to bookbuilding in IPO markets?, Unpublished paper, Louisiana State University.

Liu, Y.-J., Wei, K. C. J., Liaw, G., 2001. On the demand elasticity of initial public offerings: an
analysis of discriminatory auctions. International Review of Finance 2, 151-178.
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 2004, Why has IPO underpricing changed over time?, Financial
Management 33, #3, 5-37
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, 2002, Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the
table in IPOs? Review of Financial Studies 15, 413-444.

Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter and Kristian Rydqvist, 1994, Initial Public Offerings:
International Insights, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 2, 165-199.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, Jenkinson, Tim, and William J. Wilhelm, 2003, Global integration in
primary equity markets: The role of U.S. banks and U.S. investors. Review of Financial Studies
16, 63-99.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William J. Wilhelm, 2002. IPO Allocations: Discriminatory or
Discretionary? Journal of Financial Economics 65, 167-201.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, 2004, "IPO Underpricing: A Survey". Handbook In Corporate Finance:
Empirical Corporate Finance, B. Espen Eckbo, ed.

Matthews, S., 1987, Comparing auctions for risk averse buyers: A buyer’s point of view,
                                                                                             41


Econometrica 55, 633-646.

Parlour, Christine and Uday Rajan, 2005, Rationing in IPOs, Review of Finance 9, 33-63.

Ritter, Jay and Ivo Welch, 2002, Review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. Journal of
Finance 57(4), 1795-1829.

Rock, K. (1986). Why New Issues are Underpriced? Journal of Financial Economics 15, 187-212.

Schultz, Paul, 2003. Pseudo Market Timing and the Long-Run Underperformance of IPOs,
Journal of Finance 58, 483–517.

Sherman, Ann, 1992, The Pricing of Best Efforts New Issues, Journal of Finance 47, 781-790

Sherman, Ann, 2000, IPOs and Long Term Relationships: An Advantage of Book Building,
Review of Financial Studies 13, 697-714.

Sherman, Ann, 2005, Global Trends in IPO Methods: Book Building versus Auctions With
Endogenous Entry, Journal of Financial Economics 78 (3), 615-649.

Sherman, A., Titman, S., 2002. Building the IPO order book: underpricing and participation
limits with costly information, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 3-29.

Spatt, C. and S. Srivastava, 1991, Preplay communication, participation restrictions, and
efficiency in initial public offerings, Review of Financial Studies 4, 709-726.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijin and Laura Veldkamp, 2006, Information Acquisition and Portfolio
Under-Diversification, Manuscript, New York University.

Veldkamp, Laura, 2006, Information Markets and the Comovement of Asset Prices, Review of
Economic Studies 73, 823-845.

Viswanathan, S. and James J.D. Wang, 2000, Auctions with When-Issued Trading: A Model of
the U.S. Treasury Markets, Manuscript, Duke University.

Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential Sales, Learning and Cascades, Journal of Finance 47, 695-732.

Wessels, R.E., 1989, The Market for Initial Public Offerings: An Analysis of the Amsterdam
Stock Exchange, in: A Reappraisal of the Efficiency of Financial Markets, NATO ASI Series,
F54, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 323-348.

Wilhelm, William, 2005, Bookbuilding, Auctions, and the Future of the IPO Process. Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 17, 2-13.

Yung, Chris, 2005, IPOs with Buy- and Sell-Side Information Production: The Dark Side of Open
Sales, Review of Financial Studies 18, 327-347.
                                                                                                            42



                                                Appendices

Appendix A. More information on the types of auctions used for IPOs.
        Several types of IPO auctions have been used. Brazil, Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Taiwan and the UK have used discriminatory auctions, while Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Finland, France, Israel, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Portugal, Singapore, Turkey, the UK and the US have used uniform price auctions. Dirty
(priced below market clearing) auctions have been used in Australia, Belgium, Finland, France
Hungary, Malaysia, New Zealand, Turkey, the UK and the US.
        Not long after WR Hambrecht’s introduction of online IPO auctions to the US, Ord
Minnett’s eCapital65 distributed shares in two Australian online IPO auctions.                           Both
underwriters used uniform price, sealed bid, dirty auctions66, although eCapital called its
process a “book build”. For the eCapital auctions, the updated weighted average bid price was
posted online twice a day during the auction period and bidders were allowed to change their
bids, thus making them somewhat similar to the type of open auctions advocated by Ausubel
(2002). In South Korea, several Direct Public Offerings have used Internet auctions, although
this method cannot legally be used if the company wants to list on the KSE or KOSDAQ.


Appendix B. Do auctions price shares accurately?
        There is a popular misconception, perpetuated in part by journalists, that auctions in
theory lead to highly accurate prices. The general idea is that an auction reveals the true
demand curve, since each person bids what he or she is willing to pay. In Subsection III.D and
Table 5, we showed that this is not true in theory, except under some extremely unrealistic
assumptions. In practice, there are many examples of highly inaccurate IPO auction prices
(assuming that the first day'
                            s closing price is a good estimate of the ‘true’ value).
        Of course, book built and fixed price public offer IPOs have also frequently led to offer
prices that were far from the first day'
                                       s aftermarket price. Table 4 showed that, at least for our

65
     The two auctions, for Health Communications Network (HCN) and ChaosMusic, occurred in 1999. Since
then, Ord Minnett merged with Chase and J.P. Morgan, and eCapital appears to be closed, reportedly because both
auctions led to overpricing, thanks to free riders.
66
    Hambrecht allows dirty auctions, at the discretion of the issuer. There has also been one hybrid book
building/auction in the US, for Instinet, priced on May 23, 2001. The price was set and most of the shares were
allocated through book building, but bidders in the auction portion, managed by WR Hambrecht, each received
about 13.4% of their bid, provided that their bid was at or above the issue price of $14.50.
                                                                                            43


Singapore sample, auctions seemed to price IPO shares more accurately than fixed price public
offers. Nevertheless, Table 4 also showed that the variance in auction initial returns was far
from zero. We will now give examples to demonstrate that IPO auctions, in practice, have
sometimes led to very large positive or negative initial returns. Some examples of large
positive initial returns from IPO auctions include:
   •   Tenaga Nasional, Malaysia, May 1992, 34%: Malaysia’s first auction was a hybrid
       discriminatory auction/public offer. Initial returns for winning bids ranged from 23% to
       34%, even though the market-clearing price in the auction was almost 46% above the
       4.50 ringgit reservation price. The initial return for the public offer was 94%.
   •   DDI (an affiliate of Kyocera), Japan, September 1993, 49%: Bids went as high as ¥6.02
       million/share. The offer price was set at ¥3.7 million, because most successful bids
       were concentrated at that price. The first day'
                                                     s close was at ¥5.5 million.
   •   East Japan Railway, Japan, October 1993, 58%: JR East soared 70% above the market-
       clearing price the first day, only to drop back down to around the ¥370,000/share offer
       price within two days. Winning bids ranged from ¥352,000 to ¥623,000, so the highest
       bidders were still out of the money when the stock closed at ¥600,000 the first day.
   •   Petron, the Philippines, Sept. 1994, 63%: Hybrid discriminatory auction/public offer.
       The first day’s closing price was 63% above the lowest winning bid, 23% above even
       the highest bid, 39% above the highest foreign bid and 136% above the reservation
       price. The fixed price tranche drew 459,133 subscribers.
   •   Andover.net, US, December, 1999, 252.1%: The offering was priced at $18 even
       though the clearing price was $24, reportedly to avoid any delay. The first day'
                                                                                      s closing
       price was 164% above even the auction clearing price.
   •   Peet'
           s Coffee and Tea, US, January, 2001, 63.3%: Since this was a US auction, we
       know little about the bids that were placed. It is possible that the clearing price was
       above the $8.00 offer price.
   •   El Al, Israel, June 2003, 40%: Demand was low in the auction – they sold fewer shares
       than expected, all priced at the minimum bid. The shares began trading on the Tel Aviv
       Stock Exchange just two days later, closing up 40% the first day and up a total of 112%
       by the end of the second trading day.

       Some examples of negative initial returns from IPO auctions are:
   •   Japan Telecom, September 1994, down 14.5% from the weighted average bid price of
       ¥5.44 million/share on the first day, and down another 10% by the end of the week:
       The lowest successful bid was ¥5.22 million, but the public offer price (set after the
       auction) was ¥4.7 million, showing that the auction bids were considered unrealistic.
       The weighted average bid price gave the company a P/E of 219 times prospective
       earnings, in a mature telecom market. Bids went as high as ¥6.0 million. The stock
       closed its first day down 22.5% from the highest winning bid price.
                                                                                                   44


   •   Japan Tobacco, October 1994, down 23.5% the first day, and it kept falling from there:
       The auction had been unusually enthusiastic, with a weighted average winning bid of
       ¥1.438 million/share for shares that institutional investors valued at no more than
       ¥800,000. Successful bids ranged from ¥1.362 million to ¥2.11 million. It closed the
       first day at ¥1.10 million, and the second day at ¥1.06 million (down more than 26%
       from weighted average bid price). The highest bidders lost almost 48% the first
       day.41% of the shares were never sold. After 2 weeks of trading, it was at ¥956,000,
       down 33.5% from the weighted average winning bid.
   •   Global Securities (Global Menkul Degerler A.S.), Turkey, May 1995, down 11% the
       first hour: The minimum or reservation price was set at TL6,000 per share, but bids
       went as high as TL100,000. The auction price was set at TL9,750, a 62.5% premium.
       The price fell by 56.1% (giving a market-adjusted return of -60.5%) over the first three
       months of trading.

       Thus, there are many examples of extreme initial returns resulting from IPO auctions.
These clearly do not prove that auctions are inferior to other issue methods, but they show that
the pricing accuracy of the sealed bid IPO auction method should not be taken for granted.


Appendix C. Do auctions lead to less underpricing, relative to book building?
       The overall evidence on this question is surprisingly weak, since virtually the only
relevant samples are from France and Japan, plus perhaps Germany and Australia (which did
only two auctions each) or eventually Israel (where legislation to allow bookbuilding is
pending, after ten years of mandated auctions).
   •   France: A unique, theoretically sound version of auctions co-existed with a restricted,
       sub-optimal form of book building and with fixed price public offers, for several years;
       once the restrictions on book building were lifted, auctions dried up; during the overlap
       period, initial returns were lower for auctions than for sequential hybrid book building.
   •   Japan: Auctions and book building did not overlap in Japan, but they were used in
       close succession. Kutsuna and Smith (2004) found a small but statistically significant
       increase in initial returns under book building, and also found that a wider range of
       companies, including younger start-ups, were able to go public under book building.

The evidence hints that auctions may lead to less underpricing, but it is inconclusive.

Appendix D. More country-specific detail on which IPO methods are allowed and used

       This appendix is posted separately on the Social Science Research Network at the
address: http://ssrn.com/abstract=892026. The appendix is also available directly from either author.
                                                                                                                                                               45

Table 1. Summary of IPO Methods Used in Various Countries. A blank in any column means that, to the best of our knowledge, the method
was not used. The “first introduced” years are the earliest years that we were able to find but may be later than the actual year of first use. On
whether the book building method is now dominant or gaining in popularity, the answer is in the judgment of the main source listed in the last
column, or our best estimate if no other source was available. News article sources for any country are available upon request.
PANEL A
                                       Auctions                       Book Building
               Traditional     First        Apparently     First      Now dominant Hybrid with                           Main Sources
               method(s)     introduced     abandoned    Introduced    or gaining?   Fixed Price
Europe
Austria        Fixed price                                 1992           yes           yes        Letter - Wiener Borse(Vienna Stock Exchange), 14 June 1996
Belgium                        1980s          1991         1993           yes                      News articles; Ljungqvist, Jenkinson and Wilhelm (2003)
Czech Rep.     Fixed price                                                                         E-mail, the Czech Securities Commission, 10/26/99
Denmark        Fixed price                                 1992           yes           yes         News articles
                                                                                                   E-mail, Financial Supervision Authority of Finland, 11/29/99;
Finland        Fixed price                                 1993           yes           yes        ^Letter - Mandatum & Co., 30 May 1996; www.rata.bof.fi
               Auctions,                                                                           E-mail - Listing Division, Paris Bourse SBF SA, 7/28/2000,
France         fixed price     1960s          1999?        1993           yes           yes        ^Derrien and Womack (1999)
                                                                                                   E-mail- BAWe(Bundesaufsichtsamt fur den Wertpapierhandl)
Germany        Fixed price     only 2                      1995           yes           yes        2/2/2000, www.bawe.de; ^E-mail - DGBank, 11/18/99
Greece         Fixed price                                 1994           yes           yes         News articles.
Hungary        Fixed price                                 1995           yes           yes        E-mail-Hungary Banking & Capital Mkt Supervision11/30/99
Ireland        Fixed price                                 1992                         yes        E-mail, Irish Stock Exchange, 9/15/ 99
                                                                                                   E-mail, Borsa Italiana S.p.A. 11/24/99; ^Italian Stock
Italy          Fixed price     1980s          1986         1992           yes           yes        Exchange Commission (CONSOB) web page, www.consob.it
Luxembourg                                                 1996           yes                      Ljungqvist, Jenkinson and Wilhelm (2003)
                                                                                                   E-mail, Stichting Toezicht Effectenverkeer (Securities Board
Netherlands    Fixed price     1980s          1989         1994           yes           yes        Of The Netherlands), Oct. 1999
                                                                                                   E-mail - Banking, Insurance and Securities Commission of
Norway         Fixed price                                 1995           yes           yes        Norway, Sep. 99; ^Letter - Oslo Bors, 14 June 1996
Poland         Fixed price     1993?                       1995           yes           yes         News articles.
                                                                                                   E-mail, Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários
Portugal       Fixed price     1987           1992         1995           yes           yes        (www.cmvm.pt), 11/11/99.
                                                                                                   E-mails, Bolsa de Bilbao 11/16/99; *Comisiãn Nacional Del
Spain                         Only 2          1998         1993           yes           yes        Mercado De Valores 9/23/99, 10/18/99.
                                                                                                   Letter Finansinspektionen (Financial Supervisory Authority),
Sweden         Fixed price     1980s          1980s        1993           yes           yes        12/18/1996; E-mail OM Stockholm Exchange 7/25/2000.
                                                                                                   E-mail - Switzerland Stock Exchange, 11/24/99; ^Letter -
Switzerland    Fixed price     1980s          1980s        1995           yes           yes        Zurcher Borse (Zurich Stock Exchange), 4 June 1996
U. K.          Fixed price     1960s          1987         1992           yes           yes          General sources; Brennan and Franks (1997); Levis (1990)
                                                                                                                                                                  46

PANEL B
                                       Auctions                       Book Building
               Traditional     First        Apparently     First      Now dominant Hybrid with                           Main Sources
              method(s)      introduced     abandoned    Introduced    or gaining?   Fixed Price
North & South America
Argentina                      1991           1992         1993           yes           yes        E-mail - Comisiãn Nacional De Valores 1/29/99
Barbados     Fixed price                                                                           Letter - Securities Exchange of Barbados, 8/28/97
                                                                                                   E-mail, Comissãƒo de Valores Mobiliãrios 9/20/99;
Brazil         Fixed price      yes                                       yes           yes        ^www.bndes.gov.br.; *Letter - Bolsa Do Rio, 26 Aug. 1996
Canada         Bookbuild                                                  yes           yes        E-mail Com. des Valeurs Mobilières du Québec, 10/29/99
Chile                                                                     yes                      E-mail Sup. de Valores y Seguros 10/99; Santiago SE 11/99
Mexico         Fixed price                                                                         E-mail, Bolsa Mexicana de Valores Sept. & Nov. 1999
Paraguay       Fixed price                                                                         E-mail - Comision Nacional de Valores, Oct 99
Peru           Fixed price      yes                        1996           yes           yes        E-mail - Lima Stock Exchange, 10/20/99
U. S.          Bookbuild       1999             --                        yes           yes        General sources
Asia/Pacific
Australia      Fixed price     1999           1999         1992           yes           yes        Letter - Australian Stock Exchange, 23 April 1996
Bangladesh     Fixed price                                                                         News articles.
China          Fixed price                                                yes           yes        News articles.
Hong Kong      Fixed price                                 1993           yes           yes        News articles, general sources.
                                                                                                   SEBI web page, Dec. 99;*Bombay Stock Exchange, 4/13/96;
India          Fixed price                                 1993           yes           yes        ^Assoc. of Merchant Bankers of India, 5/27/96.
Indonesia      Fixed price                                                yes           yes        Indo. Cap Mkt Supervisory Agency(BAPEPAM) 9/24/99
Japan          Fixed price     1989           1997         1997           yes           yes        Pettway (1999); News articles.
                                                                                                   E-mail, Korea Securities Research Institute 10/26/99; ^Korea
Korea        Fixed price       1993?                                      yes           yes        Stock Exchange fax, International Relations, April 13, 1996
Malaysia     Fixed price       1992           1994         1995           yes           yes        E-mail, Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, 1996; web page.
New                                                                                                E-mail 10/15/99 Sec. & Exchange Commission of New
Zealand      Fixed price                                                  yes           yes        Zealand; ^Fax - Cavill White Securities Ltd., 21 May 1996
Philippines  Fixed price       1994           1994                        yes           yes        News articles.
Singapore    Fixed price       1991           1994                        yes           yes        E-mail - Stock Exchange of Singapore, 10/11/99; web page.
Sri Lanka    Fixed price                                                                           Letter - Colombo Stock Exchange, 26 May, 1997
Taiwan       Fixed price       1995             ?                                                  E-mail Chinese Securities Association, 11/2/99
Thailand     Fixed price                                                  yes           yes        Letter - Securities and Exchange Commission, 14 May 1996;
Africa/MidEast
Kenya        Fixed price                                                                           Fax, Capital Markets Authority, 4/3/00
             Auctions,                                                                             e-mails - Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, Feb., Sept. and Oct. 1999
Israel       fixed price      < 1993            ?
Jordan       Fixed price                                                                           E-mail, Amman Stock Exchange, 24 June, 1997; web page.
Pakistan     Fixed price                                   1995            no                      E-mail, SEC of Pakistan, 12/01/99; ^web page - Karachi SE
South Africa Fixed price                                                                yes        Web page, e-mail - Johannesburg Stock Exchange, 10/99.
Turkey       Fixed price       1993           1997                        yes           yes        Istanbul Stock Exchange: Email, 3/99; Fax, 17 June 1996
                                                                                             47


Table 2. Comparison of offering sizes for auctions and other IPOs

2.A Offering sizes for IPOs in Singapore (in millions of Singapore Dollars), 1993-1994.
The Singapore Telecom IPO was more than 12 times as large as the next-largest Singapore
auction and was perhaps the largest IPO auction ever (raising more in total proceeds than, for
example, the US IPO of the popular search engine company Google, which occurred more than
a decade later). Since this was clearly an outlier in terms of offering size, we also report the
proceeds for Main Board auctions excluding SingTel.
                                                      Standard
                                          Mean Median Deviation Maximum Minimum
 Main Board Auctions                      337.6  48.4    1,002     4,332      16
 Main Board Auctions, Excluding
       Singapore Telecom                  102.7       44.8          99         338          16
 Main Board Fixed Price                    56.5       37.7          54         200          17
 Sesdaq Auctions                           67.2       67.2          33          90          44
 Sesdaq Fixed Price                        11.6        9.3           7          30           4


2.B Offering sizes for French Free Market IPOs (in thousands of Euros), 2002-2004.
                                                             Standard
                                          Mean Median        Deviation Maximum Minimum
Fixed Price                                517.1    35             685    1,875     7.9
Auctions                                   739.5   600             554    2,291   150.0
Bookbuilding                             1,493.6 1,050             954    4,200   818.9


2.C Offering sizes for IPOs in Turkey (in billions of Turkish Lira), 1994-1995. "Sale on
the ISE" is a method in which shares begin trading directly on the Istanbul Stock Exchange.
                                                             Standard
                                          Mean Median        Deviation Maximum Minimum
 Fixed Price                              387.8 240.0             455      1950    50.0
 Auctions                                 378.7 304.8             288      1121    11.3
 Sale on ISE                               96.5 108.7               40      143    10.6
                                                                                          48


Table 3. Industry comparison, auctions and other IPOs, based on ICB classifications

3.A Singapore IPOs by Industry, 1993-1994.
                                                                           Total IPOs
                            Fixed price        Auctions       % Auctions   in Industry
 Basic Materials                 2                2              50%             4
 Industrials                    15                5              25%            20
 Consumer Goods                  3                3              50%             6
 Consumer Services               4                1              20%             5
 Telecommunications                               1             100%             1
 Financials                                       4             100%             4
 Technology                       7               4              36%            11
                   Total:        31              20             39%             51


3.B France Free Market IPOs by Industry, 2002-2004.
                                                               %            Total IPOs
                       Fixed Price    Auctions Bookbuilding Auctions        in Industry
Basic Materials                          1                   100%                 1
Industrials                 3            7          4         50%                14
Consumer Goods              3            3          2         38%                 8
Health Care                 1            2          1         50%                 4
Consumer Services           1            3          4         38%                 8
Telecommunications          1            1          1         33%                 3
Utilities                   1            1          1         33%                 3
Financials                               2          2         50%                 4
Technology                   3           7                    70%                10
              Total:        13          27         15        49%                 55


3.C Turkey IPOs by Industry, 1994-1995.
                                                              %            Total IPOs
                       Fixed Price    Auctions Sale on ISE Auctions        in Industry
 Basic Materials            3            5          3       45%                 11
 Industrials                3            4          1       50%                  8
 Consumer Goods             6           10          1       59%                 17
 Consumer Services          1                                0%                  1
 Financials                 8            6          3       35%                 17

             Total:         21            25              8        46%         54
                                                                                                49


Table 4. Initial returns for Singapore IPOs, 1993-1994 The average initial return for an
auction is the weighted average of the initial return on the auction tranche and the initial return
on the public offer tranche. The T-stats are for the difference between the means of pure fixed
price public offers and one or both tranches of the auctions, in a one-tailed test.

4.A. Initial returns for all IPOs. There were 51 IPOs in 1993-1994 in Singapore, including
31 pure fixed price public offers and 20 hybrid auctions.
                                                   Standard
                                 Mean Median deviation Maximum Minimum T-stat
Auction tranche                     4.6%     2.8%       8.7%  22.5%     -6.0%     3.90
Fixed price tranche, auctions      51.3% 33.2%         49.1% 188.9%      2.0% -1.06
Pure fixed price                   36.9% 18.2%         44.9% 131.1%    -11.0%         -
Average for hybrid auctions        16.1% 11.7%         13.9%  47.9%      0.4%     2.41


4.B. Initial returns for only Main Board IPOs, 1993-1994. There were 29 Mainboard IPOs
in 1993-1994 in Singapore, including 11 pure fixed price public offers and 18 hybrid auctions.
                                                  Standard
                                Mean Median deviation Maximum Minimum T-stat
Auction tranche                   3.3%      2.4%      8.2%       22.5%        -6.0% 1.74
Fixed price tranche, auctions    49.0% 28.0% 51.3% 188.9%                      2.0% -0.94
Pure fixed price                 30.5%      2.2% 51.6% 131.1%                -11.0%        -
Average for hybrid auctions      14.4%      9.9% 13.5%           47.9%         0.4% 1.02



Table 5. Predictions of various models for the results of a sealed bid uniform price
auction open to a large number of potential investors (high N)
                          Average       Variance       Aftermarket   Varying       Free
                           initial       in initial       price    participation   rider
 Models                    return         returns       accurate?     levels?    problem?
 Independent private
 values                      Zero          Low or zero         Yes             No            No
 Endowed signals;
 full entry                  Zero         Low or zero          Yes             No            No
 Endowed signals;         Positive (if      Positive,
 endogenous entry         entry costs)    possibly high        Yes             Yes           No
                            Positive
 Costly evaluation;      (evaluation &      Positive,          Not
 endogenous entry         entry costs)    possibly high     necessarily        Yes           Yes
                                                                                             50


Table 6. Participation variations for Singapore IPO auctions, 1993-1994. Data include all
20 auctions except for the number of applications, which is based on only 19 of the 20 IPO
auctions in Singapore during this time period. The missing application numbers are for
Sunright, the last auction, which was heavily undersubscribed and chose not to release the
number of bidders. The subscription rate is the ratio of shares applied for to shares available,
so a subscription rate below one means that the offering was undersubscribed, while a
subscription rate of 11 means that the offering was 1,000% (ten times) oversubscribed. Shares
applied for and available are in 1,000s.
                                                          Standard
                                     Mean      Median     deviation Maximum         Minimum
 Subscription rate, fixed price       15.63      12.40        12.39     41.00            1.22
 Subscription rate, auction            3.99       2.63         3.44     14.00            0.18
 # Applications, fixed price        176,446    159,848     167,386   795,272           28,036
 # Applications, auction             25,046      7,765      39,513   162,492            1,128
 Shares applied for, fixed price    426,161    322,034     384,333 1,672,000           32,042
 Shares applied for, auction        325,950    113,577     626,730 2,800,000            3,600
 Shares available, fixed price       52,409     24,700     117,908   550,000            9,737
 Shares available, auction           71,071     29,400     119,625   550,000           12,000



Table 7. French Marche Libre IPOs, 2002-2004. Subscription rates for 49 of 54 IPOs
during 2002, 2003 and 2004. We are missing the data on one auction (Parfex) in 2003 and four
fixed price public offers in 2004. A subscription rate below 100% means that the offering was
undersubscribed, while a subscription rate of 120% means that the offering was 1.2 times
subscribed, or 20% oversubscribed. Source: the Euronext website.

                                      Standard                    % of IPOs
                      Mean     Median Deviation Maximum Minimum Undersubscribed
Auctions              18%       20%     12%       42%    0.7%       100%
Bookbuilding          120%      88%     86%      348%    1.2%        60%
Fixed Price           141%      85%    212%      658%    2.2%        75%
                                                                                                                                           51



Figure 1. How auction use evolved over time in four countries. In each graph, the X’s
(right axis; connected by dashed lines) give the number of total IPOs per year in that country,
while the diamonds (left axis; connected by solid lines) are the percentages of IPO auctions out
of all IPOs.

                       A. Singapore                                                               B. Taiwan
 60%                                                           40      70%                                                            250
 50%                                                           35      60%
                                                               30                                                                     200
 40%                                                                   50%
                                                               25                                                                     150
                                                                       40%
 30%                                                           20
                                                               15      30%                                                            100
 20%                                                                   20%
                                                               10                                                                     50
 10%                                                           5       10%
 0%                                                            0        0%                                                            0
   1992       1993     1994      1995      1996     1997    1998         1996       1997   1998    1999   2000   2001   2002   2003



                         C. Turkey                                             D. France (Second & Nouveau Marches)
                                                                       70%                                                        120
 80%                                                          35
                                                                       60%                                                        100
                                                              30
 60%                                                          25       50%                                                        80
                                                              20       40%
 40%                                                                                                                              60
                                                              15       30%
                                                                                                                                  40
 20%                                                          10       20%
                                                              5        10%                                                        20
  0%                                                          0         0%                                                        0
       1993     1994      1995          1996      1997     1998              1993   1994   1995    1996   1997   1998   1999   2000



               E. France (Marche Libre)
 100%                                                             25
  80%                                                             20
  60%                                                             15

  40%                                                             10
  20%                                                             5

  0%                                                              0
       2002            2003                2004            2005




Sources for Figure 2: A. Singapore – E-mail from the Stock Exchange of Singapore, October,
1999. B. Taiwan – The data was given to us by K.C. John Wei. See Liu, Wei and Liaw
(2001) and, for 2002-2003 data, Hsu and Hung (2005). C. Turkey – E-mail from the Istanbul
Stock Exchange, March, 1999. D. France Second and Nouveau Marches – From Derrien and
Womack (2003) and Chahine (2001). E. France Marche Libre – Euronext website
(www.Euronext.com, in IPO Archives).
                                                                                                                                               52


Figure 2. Distribution of simulated bids for various entry levels. Bids were generated from
a normal distribution with a mean of $20 and standard deviation of $6. There are 100 shares
being sold, so the clearing price is the price of the 101st-highest bid, shown by the dark line.

          A. 120 Bidders Average Bid = $19.81                                    B. 200 Bidders Average Bid = $19.23
                Clearing Price = $14.52                                                 Clearing Price = $19.08

 9                                                                      14
 8                                                                      12
 7                                                                      10
 6
 5                                                                      8
 4                                                                      6
 3                                                                      4
 2
 1                                                                      2
 0                                                                      0




                                                                             0
                                                                                 3
                                                                                     6
                                                                                         9
                                                                                             12
                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                            21
                                                                                                                 24
                                                                                                                      27
                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                33
                                                                                                                                     36
                                                                                                                                          39
     0
          3
              6
                  9
                      12
                           15
                                18
                                     21
                                          24
                                               27
                                                    30
                                                         33
                                                              36
                                                                   39

          C. 500 Bidders Average Bid = $20.05                                D. 1,000 Bidders Average Bid = $19.90
                 Clearing Price = $24.96                                             Clearing Price = $28.20

 30                                                                     60

 25                                                                     50

 20                                                                     40

 15                                                                     30
 10                                                                     20
  5                                                                     10
  0                                                                     0
                                                                             0
                                                                                 3
                                                                                     6
                                                                                         9
                                                                                             12
                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                       18
                                                                                                            21
                                                                                                                 24
                                                                                                                      27
                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                33
                                                                                                                                     36
                                                                                                                                          39
      0
          3
              6
                  9
                      12
                           15
                                18
                                     21
                                          24
                                               27
                                                    30
                                                         33
                                                              36
                                                                   39
                                                                                            53


Figure 3.       One month buy-and-hold returns for Singapore auctions, ordered
chronologically. Singapore’s auctions are ordered by date to show how the returns to bidding
evolved over time. 3.A. gives raw one month returns for all 20 auctions. 3.B. shows only the
18 Main Board auctions (excluding Datapulse and Aztech on Sesdaq in February, 1994), giving
one month returns relative to the All-Sing Index, a capitalization-weighted index of all listed
stocks. The 4-offering moving average is the average return on the last 4 offerings (or all
previous, if fewer than 4).


                    Figure 3.A. One Month Raw Returns on Singapore
                                  Auctions Over Time
   30%
   25%
   20%
   15%                                                                   4-offering
   10%                                                                   moving
    5%                                                                   average
    0%                                                                   raw 1-
   -5%                                                                   month
  -10%                                                                   returns
  -15%
  -20%
          Rotary Engineering ..




         Berger International ..
         Singapore Telecom ..
           IPC International ..




                                                                         One month
              Vickers Ballas .




            Aztech Systems ..
             Hup Seng Huat .
             Datapulse Tech. .
                      l Factor .




                Sunright Ltd. .
             Nippecraft Ltd. .

             Comfort Group .
                  Liang Huat .
              Eng Wah Org. .
             Pan United Co. .
               Hwa Tat Lee .




                  Superbowl .
               Keppel Bank .




                 Pokka Corp.
                         STIC




                                                                         raw
                                                                         returns
              Internt'




                                Figure 3.B One Month Excess Returns on
                                Singapore Mainboard Auctions Over Time
   25%
   20%
   15%
   10%                                                                   4-offering
    5%                                                                   moving
    0%                                                                   average
   -5%                                                                   excess 1-
  -10%                                                                   month
  -15%                                                                   return
  -20%
  -25%
                                 Rotary Engineering ..




                                Berger International ..
                                Singapore Telecom ..
         IPC International ..




                                                                         1 month
                                    Vickers Ballas .

                                    Hup Seng Huat .




                                       Sunright Ltd. .
                                            l Factor .




                                         Liang Huat .
                                    Comfort Group .

                                     Eng Wah Org. .
                                    Nippecraft Ltd. .
                                    Pan United Co. .
                                      Hwa Tat Lee .
                                      Keppel Bank .




                                         Superbowl .
                                        Pokka Corp.
                                               STIC




                                                                         excess
                                                                         return,
                                     Internt'




                                                                         relative to
                                                                         All-Sing
