NBEE WORKING PAPER SERIES

STICKY PRICES, MONEY AND
BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

Robert

G. King

Joseph G. Haubrich

Working Paper No. 1216

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1983

Support from the National Science Foundation is acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBEP.ts research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1216
October 1983

Sticky

Prices, Money, and Business Fluctuations
Abstract

Can nominal contracts make a difference for the neutrality of money if
these arise endogenously in general equilibrium?

This paper utilizes a

version of Lucas's seminal equilibrium business cycle theory to address this

question. However, we depart from Lucas in assuming that (1) agents have
complete information about the money stock; (ii) fundamental shocks to the

system are purely redistributive and private information; and (iii) moral

hazard precludes conventional

insurance markets.

With an exogenous

restriction on contracts, money is fully neutral. But, when this restriction
is lifted, efficient risk-sharing between suppliers and demanders leads to a
potential nonneutralitv of money.

In particular, if an increase in the money

growth rate signals a rise in the dispersion of shocks to demanders' wealth,

then prices adjust only partially to monetary shocks and there is a positive
association between money and output.

Robert 6. King
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
(716) 275-3895

Joseph G. Haubrich
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
(716) 275-2255

1

Most macroeconomists believe that some form of price stickiness underlies
the observed positive association of high money growth and high real activity.

Not infrequently, this price stickiness is asserted to arise from explicit or
implicit contracts. Consequently, model economies that do not include nominal

contracts are vie'ed as omitting the basic cause of monetary nonneutrality.
For example, Lucas's (1972) pathbreaking general equilibrium model of business

fluctuations--which employs imperfect aggregate information to generate
monetary nonneutrality- -has been widely criticized for omitting nominal

contracts, even though no economic forces would lead these to arise
endogenously. Yet, in the past decade, no similarly explicit model economy
has been produced that derives a role for nominal contracts from underlying
assumptions about the economic environment and explains the implications of
contract arrangements for money and business cycles.'

The present paper provides a simple rational expectations general
equilibrium model in which endogenously generated contracts make a difference.

That is, under one fiscal-monetary regime, contracts simultaneously make
prices sticky- -responding less than proportionately to changes in the quantity

of money--and lead to a causal positive relationship between contemporaneously

observed money and production/effort. Further, our model economy is a variant

of Lucas's (1972) setup, so that monetary changes are neutral in the absence
of contracts because economic agents accurately perceive these changes.

1 In a modification of Lucas's (1972) setup that incorporates entrepreneurs
and relatively risk averse workers, Azariadis (1980) demonstrates that
endogenous labor market risk allocating arrangements--which require an
contract- -may enhance the real effects
enforceable contingent
of
imperfectly perceived nominal disturbances. Efficient ex ante arrangements
in Azariadis's (1980) setup do not permit real quantities--hours worked or
total compensation--to depend on contemporaneously perceived monetary
disturbances.

2

These results derive from the following underlying assumptions about the
preferences, technology and information structure of a stochastic consumption

loans model that is in most other ways identical to the full information
version of Lucas's (1972) setup.
subject

to idiosyncratic

First, risk averse demanders of money are

individual disturbances,

that

are private2

information. That is, there is a demand for insurance against idiosyncratic

disturbances but moral hazard rules out operation of conventional insurance
markets. Second, the growth rate of money is positively associated with the

dispersion of individual disturbances. Third, prior to the realization of
money growth or individual shocks, suppliers of goods can compete by offering

alternative contracts that specify a relationship between money growth and
price adjustments.

Fourth, the technology of exchange dictates that an

individual visit only one supplier after realization of aggregate and
individual disturbances.

Efficient competitive contracts embody a shifting of risk, with resources

being transferred from suppliers to demanders in contingencies that involve

high individual uncertainty and vice versa. That is, as money growth is an

indicator of the extent of individual uncertainty, prices rise less than
proportionately and production/effort expands when money growth is high.
Symmetrically, prices fall less than proportionately and production/effort
contracts when money growth is low.3

In our formal model, we view these as random transfers of real goods from a
central government hut these might alternatively arise from a varicty of
environmental sources.

Our model economy thus illustrates a general principle, discussed in more
detail by Haubrich (1963), concerning price movements in model economies

that have (i) incomplete insurance due to moral hazard and (ii)
contractural exchange contingent on aggregate variables.
The general
principle is that aggregate disturbances may have different qualitative
effects on near-representative agent economies with and without contracts
if these aggregate shocks alter the dispersion of individual circumstances.

3

The rganizatiOn of the remainder of the paper is as follows. In section

II, the basic structure of the model is outlined.

Competitive equilibrium

without contracts is discussed in section II and that with contracts is
developed in section III. Section IV is a summary and conclusions.

I. The Structure of the Economy

In this section, we outline a stochastic consumption loans model that
draws heavily on Lucas (1972). Each period, N identical individuals are born,

each of whom lives for two periods. In the initial period of the life cycle,
ef fort is supplied in amount n and goods are consumed in amount c.

In the

latter period, goods are consumed in amount c'. Each individual's preferences
for consumption and leisure are given by utility function:

(1)

u(c,l—n) +

v(c')

Following Lucas, we assume that (i) u is increasing in consumption and
leisure, strictly concave and twice continuously differentiable; (ii) v is
increasing, strictly concave and twice differentiable; (iii) u is restricted

so that current consumption and leisure are not inferior goods; and (iv)

agents' preferences are the expected value of (1) under situations of
uncertainty. In addition to Lucas's preference assumptions, we require that
old age marginal utility is convex, which implies a particular behavior toward
uncertainty discussed in detail below.

Grossman, Hart, and Haskin (1982) also discuss the role of aggregate
shocks as signals about unobservable individual disturbances which we focus

on here. However, they focus on economies where asymmetric information
between firms and workers is key and do not explore the neturality of money
to any important degree.

4

Production takes place according to the simple scheme utilized by Lucas

(1972). That is, one unit of effort yields one unit of output within the
period but goods are not storable.

There are a large number of islands (indexed by k

productive activity takes place.
structure (indexed by t

1,2

)

in

which

In each period of the discrete time

0,1...), it is physically possible to transact

(produce or consume) in only one of these market places.

In each period, J

N/K agents of each generation are presumed to transact in each market (in
equilibrium). In contrast to Lucas, there are no exogenous shifts in demand

across markets (caused by a random distribution of traders) and agents are

fully cognizant of the terms of trade in other markets (although this
information has no value in our setup). We discuss the importance of market
structure further below.

The basic source of uncertainty in our model is a random old-age transfer
payment. That is, each old agent receives a transfer that has commodity value

.

Within

each island, we require that transfers aggregate to zero,

J

Z . = 0,
.1=0

in each period so that transfers are purely individual uncertainty. We assume
that

realizations are private information, so that moral hazard precludes

conventional insurance arrangements. This source of uncertainty is absent in
Lucas (1972) and is a key ingredient of our model.

Money serves as an intergenerational store of value in the consumption
loans model. As in Lucas (1972), we assume that money is governed by
(2)

m'mx.

That is, over a period, the money stock (m) grows at a stochastic rate (given

by x-l), which is distributed as proportionate transfers to the holders of

money (the elder generation) and, hence, is spent.
serially independent with mean x.

We assume that x is

During the period, in contrast to Lucas,

all agents are prsumed to know the values of x and m, which are the aggregate
state variables of the model.

Table 1 should make clear the time structure of activities within each
period. At the beginning of the period, prior to realization of shocks, old
agents make locational decisions.

In the contractural version of our model,

this is the interval in which young agents in a specific market offer
contracts with the aim of attracting of demanders. Subsequently, realization
of x and

takes place followed by production and consumption.

Table 1
Sequence of Activities within Time Period
(1)

location decision;
contracts offered

(ii)

realizations
of shocks

(iii)
production;
consumption

(x,c)
J

L

II. Competitive Equilibrium without Contracts

In this section, the nature of competitive equilibrium without contracts
is analyzed. Since this analysis is close to a special case of Lucas (1972),

our treatment will be brief and focus on developing material useful for
subsequent discussion.

6

Supply and demand for goods versus money will determine the price level in

our economy.

The market-clearing value of this price (in any of the K

identical islands) may be written as a function of the state of the economy
(x,m).

(3)

p4i(x,m)

Our analysis follows Lucas (1972) in investigating the nature of this
equilibrium price function.4 Only young agents face a nontrivial decision

problem, i.e., the old simply spend their accumulated cash balances. The
young must pick levels of consumption (c), effort (n), and money demand/saving
(X) so as to maximize expected utility, i.e.,

max (u(c,1-n) +

(4)

Ev(c')Jx,m}

s.t. p(n-c)-X

Xx' +

'p'

0

-

c'p'

0,

where E( )Ix,m denotes an expectation of a variable conditional on x and m; X
is nominal money demand; Pt is the future price level,etc.

It is useful solve this maximization problem in two stages.

First,

consider picking efficient quantities of leisure and current consumption so as

to maximize utility given a specific pattern of saving behavior. The result
of this maximization process is an indirect utility function and conditional
demands for goods and leisure (or, equivalently, a supply of effort).

(5)

'

%e

w(l-) = max fu(c,l-n)} s.t. h-c-A/p

0.

follow Lucas(1972) in restricting attention to stationary price

functions.

7
x

c(l-—) and n(l-—).

(6)

Previous assumptions imply that w is twice continuously differentiable and
and

that

are continuously differentiable.

The assumption that

consumption and leisure are normal goods implies that Di > 0 and that D <

Second, consider selecting an efficient savings plan (k/p) so as to
maximize

w(l-) + Ev(±'R' + E')Ix,m.
where R'=px'/p' is the real return on money. The intertemporal efficiency
condition for this plan is simply

(7)

-Dw +

E{DvR']jx,m = 0,

which states equality between current utility foregone with a unit of saving
(X/p) and future utility received.

Individual income uncertainty (s') will plausibly raise the demand for
saving as a 'hedge', under conditions on v discussed by Sandmo (l97O) Such
behavior is ensured if old age marginal utility is convex (D3v >

0),

which is

implied by absolute risk aversion that diminishes with c. That is, savings
will rise with greater second period income uncertainty so long as the premium

an individual must be paid to accept a fixed actuarially fair bet declines
with the level of future consumption (c').

Thus, in comparison to Lucas's

setup--which involves no idiosyncratic income shocks--there will be more

desired saving (X/p) at any rate of return R'(px'/p').

In competitive

equilibrium, money supply (xm) must equal money demand (X). Requiring (7) to

We use the symbol "D" to denote a partial derivative, with a subscript i
indicating the derivative of a function with respect to its ith argument
arid a superscript j indicating the jth partial derivative.

8

hold with X = xm,

it is direct that the price level is proportional tc the

money stock in competitive equilibrium, i.e., p = Pxm.

Dw(l-

(8)

=E[Dv(

Equilibrium is unique, following Lucas (1972, pp. 112-113), because the left-

hand side of (8) is decreasing in

and the right-hand side in increasing in

The competitive equilibrium without contracts involves a neutrality of
money as in Lucas (1972) because agents have accurate information on the money
stock.

Prices adjust proportionately to money shocks.' The micro level

uncertainty leads to greater saving than that in Lucas (1972). under our
(plausible) assumption, so that the price level is lower, reflecting a greater

demand for money as a hedge against future income uncertainty.

But,

realizations of these micro disturbances have no effect on the price ievel,

although they do reallocate consumption across members of the elder
generation.

III.

Competitive

Equilibrium with Contracts

At the beginning of each period, prior to the realization of aggregate and
individual shocks, we now permit the representative young agent in each market

to offer a contingent contract (it is best to view suppliers as bundled

together into a firm so that no idiosyncratic demand risk is present).
Specifically, we consider contracts that permit a demander to buy any uantity
at the price

6

IcCallum (1983) notes that this result derives from two facts: (1

money
growth is permanent and (ii) the proportionate distribution of new money
effectively gives money a positive nominal return.

9

(9)

pir(x)m

where the ttprice contractt? i.e., the function ir(x), is chosen by suppliers so

as to maximize their lifetime expected utility subject to competition. That

is, by deciding to attend the market in question, demanders must achieve a
level of expected utility at least equal to that achievable elsewhere (v).
Since a demander decides on a market prior to realization of x and ,

the

relevant constraint is thus

E(v(-+ ))

V.

The presence of a large number of markets permits us to reasonably treat

as

not influenced by the contract offered by the market in question.

Given the setup of the model, per capita demand takes the same simple form

under a contracts regime that it did previously, i.e., m'/p = xm/1T(x)m =

x/1T(x), except that ir(x) is now viewed as an object of choice by the supplier.
We continue, however, to view suppliers as treating the distribution of future

prices as invariant tc their current actions, i.e., taking the form p'
r'(x')m', where iT'

is not an object of choice.

Irrespective of the

realization of x and choice of ir(x), the representative young agent will
receive m' units of money, which will be held over until next period, yielding
expected utility,

(10)

Ev(ct)lx,m =

Ev?)+E')Ixm)

where the second equality derives from using c' =
(x' )m'.

(m!xt/pT) + t' and p' =

10

Thus, optimal contract choice is separate from optimal savings in our
model economy.

An efficient contract may be found by maximizing expected

young agent utility (11) with respect to 1T(x), subject to the demand
constraint.

(11)

max E{w(1__))}

x)

s.t. Ev(—---+)

It

.

is possible to express this maximization problem as a control problem with

an integral constraint so long as x is continuously distributed (see the
The key necessary condition for an optimal price

appendix for details).

policy is our modelts version of Borch's (1962) rule for efficient risk
sharing. That is, it must be that

(12)

at

Dw(l---) =

E[Dv

+

each point on range of x, where e is the value of the multiplier attached

to the constraint in (11) above.

This expression states equality (in each

aggregate state x) of the costs and benefits of transfers between the
contracting parties.

To examine how contract prices move in response to

c.hanges in x (i.e., as one moves along the range of x realizations), we
totally differentiate (12) and rearrange terms, yielding

(13)

dlog(x) = (1- a )

dlogx

2

2

where a{rx)JDvD.)g(r;x)dE}/-D w-aE[D v}!x}>0.
conditional distribution of

Note first that if the

is independent of x, then the neutrality of

money prevails in our contract equilibrium because a = 0.

That is. prices

adjust proportionately to changes in money and there are consequently no real

11

effects. We focus on the case where an increase in money growth (x) induces a

mean preserving spread on the distribution of individual shifts (sae
Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) and Diamond and Stiglitz (1974)).

long as Dv

is

Then, so

convex- -as was required to insure that saving rises with

increased income variability--it follows that E[DvI Ix rises with x. That is,

prices respond less than proportionately to a change in money growth because

old agents wish to purchase insurance against such aggregate states (i.e.,
a > 0 in (13) above).7

Figures la,b show the relationship between money gro'th, contract prices
and effort/production in our economy.

Extensions and Modifications

We now briefly consider several variations on the main theme of this
paper, which are presently in the form of detailed conjectures.

First, suppose that we introduce two components of money growth,

where x1 is correlated with the dispersion of individual shocks as above and
x2 is not.

If agents know the separate realizations of x1 and x2 ,

then the

latter would be neutral, yielding proportionate changes in contract prices and

no output effects. By contrast, if agents observe total money growth (x) but

not its individual components, then more interesting results should arise.
That is, contract prices should continue to respond less than proportionately
to changes in money growth, although more elastically than above because x is

only an imperfect indicator of x1.

Output would respond to total money

In Haubrich (1983), changes in an aggregate state variable alter the level
of efficient risk pooling in the banking developed by Haubrich and King
(1983). Here, by contrast, the aggregate state variable alters the extent
of efficient risk shifting.
In both cases, it is central that the

aggregate shock have implications for the dispersion of individual
circumstances.

12

Figure la:
Money and Prices under Contracting

price
level
growth
(p/rn)

ir(x)

money growth (x)

Figure ib:
Money and Output under Contracting

output
level
(y)

Y=fl(1-r())

money growth (x)

13

growth, although less elastically than above.

If, as in King and Trehan

(1983), one considers x9 to be the policy component of money growth, then it

follows that monetary policy actions will be nonneutral so long as agents
cannot distinguish these from other monetary changes.8 However, the model
should display a variant of Lucas's (1973) hypothesis on the Phillips curve
slope because greater variability in the policy component (x2) should reduce
the responsiveness of output to monetary shocks.

Second, suppose that we alter the form of our fiscal regime so that
individual transfer payments are made in fixed nominal rather than real terms

(e.g., transfers take the form cxm, so that old age consumption becomes
c'

[x'X + 'x'm']/p'. Then, a higher price level reduces the variability of

real individual circumstances.

Under this specification, it appears that

efficient contracts would make prices more than proportionately responsive to

money growth if higher x continues to increase the spread of the c'
distribution.

Consequently, the money-real activity relationship would

involve the opposite sign to that described above. The sensitivity of results
suggests further study of alternative 'fiscal regimes' is warranted.

IV.

Summary and Conclusions

This theoretical investigation has been conducted under two guiding
principles. First, the analysis of 'sticky prices' must he conducted in a
general equilibrium setting. so as to assure consistent behavioral responses
and to lay the groundwork for examination of policy alternatives in accordance

with the Lucas (1976) critique. Typical sticky nominal price stories such as
S

Nevertheless, it should be the case that it will be desirable--as asserted
by Barro (1976) in analysis of one of the classic imperfect information
models--for the monetary authority to release information about
to the
private sector, which ouid render it neutral.

14

Fischer (1977) postulate nominal contracts, exogenouslv imposing a pattern of

arrangements on the labor market of an otherwise neoclassical model.

There

are no specific gains from nominal contracting at the private or social level

identified by the models of Fischer (1977) et. al.

Without an explicit

framework that generates contracts endogenously, it is possible that such
'sticky price' models are internally inconsistent, since factors motivating a

demand for a specified wage contract may also restrict employment or
consumption decisions.9 Further, these results are devoid of predictions about

how contracts will change in the face of variations in the economic
environment.

Second, in our view, the analysis of sticky nominal prices

requires explicit consideration of a monetary economy.

Further, there must

be elements of real uncertainty that are associated with monetary movements,

if nominal price stickiness is to be explained as a result of contractural
arrangements that arise for risk allocating reasons.

With these guiding principles, we opted to study a stochastic consumption

loans model that is a minor variation on Lucas (1972).

In this setup,

monetary growth was assumed to be positively related to the dispersion of
individual transfer paYments.

Although money was fully neutral with an

exogenous restriction on contracts, neutrality did not continue to prevail

when the restriction was lifted.

Rather, competitive contracts specified

price stickiness--in the sense of less than proportionate adjustment in
prices--and consequently a positive relationship between production and money

growth. Thus, our model economy provides a counter-example to Barro's (1977)

Wallace (1977 and e1sethere) makes a general statement of the limitations
of specification of behavior on an equation by equation basis, which he
terms the 'macroeconomic approach'.
10 By
traditional
casual
of
contrast,
many
explanations
price
stickiness--such as those outlined by Okun (1980) and Gordon .l98l)--are
microeconomic, applying to relative rather than absolute prices.

15

conjecture that efficient competitive contracts necessarily reduce the
dependence of output on nominal money growth.

Finally, our model economy matches up with some of the features that
NcCallum (1962)
fluctuations.

identifies as central empirical elements of business

Suppliers set prices (contingency plans) in advance of the

realization of demand.11 High money growth does lead to high output, with one

being able to argue that this occurs because prices don't adjust enough. At
the same time, our model is not obviously Keynesian. That is, there are not
important social costs of nominal contracting left uncontemplated in private
arrangements.

But our prices are not predetermined. For one attempt at rationalizing
that extreme form of stickiness, see Azariadis and Cooper (1983).

16

References

Azariadis,

C., "Escalator Clauses and the Cyclical Allocation of Risks,"

Journal of Economic Theory, 18 (June 1976): 119-155.

____________ and R. Cooper, "Predetermined Prices and the Allocation of Social
Risks," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper, No. 660, January 1983.
Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2 (January 1976):1-32.

Borch, K., "Equilibrium in a Reinsurance Market," Econometrica, 30 (July
1962) :424-444.

Diamond, P. and J.E. Stiglitz, TIncreases in Risk and in Risk Aversion,"
Journal of Economic Theory, 8 (July 1974): 337-360.

Gordon, R.J., "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price Adjustment," Journal of
Economic Literature, 19 (June 1981): 493-530.

Grossman, S.J., 0. Hart, and E. Maskin, "Observable Aggregate Shocks with
Unobservable Consecuences," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper no. 975, September 1982.

Haubrich, J.G., "Sluggish Deposit Rates," University of Rochester, September
1983.

____________ and R.G. King, "Banking and Insurance," University of Rochester
working paper 83-10, July 1983.
King, R.G. and B. Treham. "The Implications of an Endogenous Money Supply for
Monetary Neutrality," University of Rochester working paper 83-12, July
1983.

Lucas, Robert E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of
Economic Theory, 4 Apri1 1972): 103-24.
"Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
____________
American Economic Review, 63 (June 1973): 326-34.
V

"Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in K. Brunner and
A.H. Meltzer (eds.), The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, CarnegieRochester Conference Series no. 1, Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1976:
7-30.

____________

"Methods

and Problems in Business Cycle Theory," Journal of

Money, Credit and 3anking, 12 (November 1980, part 2): 696-715.

McCallum, B.T. . "Macroeconomics After a Decade of

Critical

Rational

Expectations: Some

Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review

November/December 1962: 3-12.

17

"A Linearized Version of Lucas's Neutrality Model," National
____________
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1160, June 1963.

Okun,

Prices and Quantities:
A.M. ,
Brookings Institution: 1980.

A Macroeconomic Analysis, Washington:

Rothschild, N. and J.E. Stiglitz, "Increasing Risk I:
of Economic Theory, 2 (
1970): 225-243.

A Definition," Journal

Sandmo, A., "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions," Review of
Economic Studies, 37 (July 1970): 353-360.

Takayama, A., Mathematical Economics, Hinsdale, Illinois: The Drydon Press:
1974.

Townsend, R.M., "Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents," in J.H.
Karaken and N. Wallace (eds.), Models of Monetary Economics, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

Wallace, N. "Microeconomic Theories of Macroeconomic Phenomena and Their
Implications for Monetary Policy," in A Prescription for Monetary
Proceedings from a Seminar Series, Federal Reserve Bank of
Policy:
Minneapolis, 1976.

18

Appendix

In this appendix, we obtain the optimal contract for our model economy by
solving an integral-constraint control problem. More specifically, we rely on

methods provided by Takayama [1974, Sc.b] in his discussion of Hestene's
theorem

Recall that the island's problem is to maximize young agent utility
subject to the demand constraint that requires old agent utility to at least
equal that achievable elsewhere. The problem is to choose the price function
or, in particular, ir(x) so as to

max E{w(l-

subject to

x
)}
Tr(x)
+

E(v(
1T(x)

c))

V.

Letting h(x) be the density function of x and letting g( x) be the
conditional density function of , the objective and constraint each take the
form of an integral. Specifically, the constraint may be written as

(Al)

i

f1(—

]g(e;x)d}h(x)dx

0.

Forming the Hamiltonian according to Takayama's methods, we get

(1A2)

H((x),x)

=

pw(l-

12

)h(x)

ef [v(

r(x)

+

-

]g( ;x)d}h(x)

If x had a discrete distribution, p and e would be a series of Lagrange
multipliers, one pair for each point in the x distribution. However, a
continuous x distribution permits us to more readily discuss marginal
changes, although it necessitates the control problem.

19

where p and a are multipliers.12 Since our problem is a variable righthand
endpoint problem (i.e., n(x) is not specified in advance), we can set p=l in

(A2) without loss of generality. Naximizing the Hamiltonian with respect to
the control, 1r(x), we obtain the necessary condition

—=
alT

Dw(l

-

x
Tr(x)

)h(X)

x
2
iT (x)

-

c.{J[Dv(

X

+

2Jg(E;x)d)h

r(x)

=0
which implies the key condition (Borch's rule).

(A3)

Dw(1 -

) = aE[Dv(

+
ir(x)

that is equation (12) in the main text.

12

If

x had a discrete distribution, p and a would be a series of Lagrange
multipliers, one pair for each point in the x distribution. However, a
Continuous x distribution permits us to more readily discuss marginal
changes, although it necessitates the control problem.

