NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXCHANGE RATES
AND INFLATION TARGETING REVISITED
Sebastian Edwards
Working Paper 12163
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12163
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Banco Central de Chile Annual Research Conference,
held in Santiago, Chile in October, 2005. I have benefited from discussions with John Taylor and Ed
Leamer. I thank Roberto Alvarez for his help and support. I am grateful to Andrea Tokman and Edi
Hochreiter for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

The Relationship Between Exchange Rates and Inflation Targeting Revisited
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 12163
April 2006
JEL No. F-02, F-43
ABSTRACT
This paper deals with the relationship between inflation targeting and exchange rates. I address three
specific issues: first, I analyze the effectiveness of nominal exchange rates as shock absorbers in
countries with inflation targeting. This issue is closely related to the magnitude of the "pass-through"
coefficient. Second, I investigate whether exchange rate volatility is different in countries with an
inflation targeting regime than in countries with alternative monetary policy arrangements. And third,
I discuss whether the exchange rate should play a role in determining the monetary policy stance
under inflation targeting. An alternative way of posing this question is whether the exchange rate
should have an independent role in an open economy Taylor rule.

Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Business
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

1
I.

Introduction
For decades the exchange rate was at the center of macroeconomic policy debates

in the emerging markets. In many countries the nominal exchange rate was often used as
a way of bringing down inflation; in other countries -- mostly in Latin America -- the
exchange rate was used as a way of (implicitly) taxing the export sector.1 Currency crises
were common and were usually the result of acute (real) exchange rate overvaluation.
During the 1990s academics and policy makers debated the merits of alternative
exchange rate regimes for the emerging economies. Based on credibility-based theories
many authors argued that developing and transition countries should have hard peg
regimes – preferably currency boards or dollarization. One of the main arguments for
favoring rigid exchange rate regimes was that emerging economies exhibited a “fear to
float.”2 After the currency crashes of the late 1990s and early 2000, however, a growing
number of emerging economies moved away from exchange rate rigidity and adopted a
combination of flexible exchange rates and “inflation targeting.” Because of this move
the exchange rate has become less central in economic policy debate in most emerging
markets. This, however, does not mean that the exchange rate has disappeared from
policy discussions. Indeed, with the adoption of inflation targeting a number of
important exchange rate-related questions – many of them new – have emerged. In this
paper I address three broad policy issues related to inflation targeting (IT) and exchange
rates that have become increasingly important in analyses on monetary policy in
emerging countries.3
•

First, I deal with the effectiveness of the nominal exchange rate as a shock
absorber in IT regimes. This issue is related to the extent of the “pass-

1

Argentina is, possibly, the best example where, through time, the nominal exchange rate has been used in
an effort to achieve alternative policy objectives. For a long time during the 1960s and 1970s the real
exchange rate was deliberately kept at an overvalued level, as a way to (implicitly) tax the agriculture
sector (Diaz Alejandro, 1970). In the early 1980s the exchange rate was devalued at a slow pre-defined
rate as a way to bring down inflation – this was the so-called “tablita” episode. During the 1990s
Argentina had a fixed exchange rate and a currency board. For a historical view of Argentina’s exchange
rate policies see Della Paolera and Taylor (2003).
2
See Calvo (1999), Calvo and Reinhart (2002).
3
On inflation targeting see Bernanke et al (2001), Bernanke (2004), Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001),
Mishkin and Jonas (2003), Mishkin and Savastano (2001), Corbo and Schmidt-Hebbel (2003), and
Schmidt-Hebbel and Werner (2002).

2
through” from the exchange to domestic prices. I argue that much of the
literature on pass through has missed the important connection between
“pass-through” and exchange rate effectiveness as a shock absorber.
•

Second, I analyze whether the adoption of IT has had an impact on
exchange rate volatility. Many authors have pointed out that since IT
requires (some degree of) exchange rate flexibility, it necessarily results in
higher exchange rate volatility.4 This, however, is not a very interesting
statement. A more useful analysis would separate the effects of IT, on the
one hand, and of a more flexible exchange rate regime, on the other, on
exchange rate volatility. This is what I do in section III of the paper.

•

And third, I discuss whether in an inflation targeting regime the exchange
rate should affect the monetary policy rule. I point out that, from an
analytical perspective, this is still an unresolved issue. At the policy level,
very few IT central banks openly recognize using the exchange rate as a
(separate) term in their policy rules (i.e. Taylor rules). However, existing
empirical evidence suggests that almost every central bank does take
exchange rate behavior into account when undertaken monetary policy.5

Much has been written about these three topics. And yet, there continue to be
unresolved policy issues surrounding all of them. In this paper I take a new look at these
issues, and I argue that recent policy debates have missed some of the finer aspects of
these problems. In Sections II and III, on pass-through and volatility, I perform
comparative empirical analyses for a group of 7 countries – two advanced and five
emerging – that have adopted inflation targeting.6 In Section IV, on the other hand, I
discuss the possible role of the exchange rate in determining the monetary policy stance
in an IT system. Section V is the conclusions.

4

See Mishkin and Savastano (2001) for a discussion on the requirements for an IT regime to work.
See the discussion in Section IV.
6
These countries were selected for two reasons: first, I am interested in having countries representing
different regions and different stages of development. Second, I need fairly long time series in order to
perform the empirical analysis.
5

3
II.

The Effectiveness of the Nominal Exchange Rate as a Shock Absorber in
Inflation Targeting Regimes: An Analysis of Pass-Through in IT
Countries
For many years economists have been concerned with the effectiveness of

nominal exchange rate changes as shock absorbers. This issue has been related with the
traditional rejection of “structuralists” to devaluations, and with the historical skepticism
regarding the benefits of flexible exchange rates. From a policy point of view this issue
can be decomposed in three questions: (a) what are the effects of nominal exchange rate
changes on the real exchange rate? (b) What are the effects of real exchange rate changes
on the external position of a country? And (c) what are the collateral effects of nominal
exchange rate changes on balance sheets and aggregate economic activity.
In this section I deal with the first issue – the effects of nominal exchange rate
changes on real exchange rates – in inflation targeting regimes. This question is directly
related to the issue of the “pass-through” from exchange rates to domestic prices, an issue
that have been discussed in great detail in the last few years. Much of the recent
literature on pass-through, however, has ignored this “exchange rate effectiveness”
question, and has focused on the inflationary effects of exchange rate changes. If the
inflationary effects of exchange rate changes are large, the authorities will have to
implement monetary and fiscal policies that offset the inflationary consequences of
exchange rate changes. Historically, pass-through has tended to be large in emerging
countries and, in particular, in countries that experience a currency crises. Borensztein
and De Gregorio (1999), for example, used a 41 countries sample and found that after
one year 30% of a nominal devaluation has been passed through to inflation; after two
years the pass-through was a very high 60% on average. They also found that the degree
of pass-through was significantly smaller in advanced countries.
A number of recent papers have shown that the degree of pass-through has
declined substantially since the 1990s; particularly telling examples are the UK and
Sweden after their currency crises in the early 1990s, and Brazil after the 1999
devaluation of the real. In an influential paper Taylor (2000) has argued that this lower
pass-through has been the result of a decline in the level and volatility of inflation.
According to him, one of the positive consequences of a strong commitment towards

4
price stability is that the extent of pass-through declines significantly, and a virtuous
circle of sorts develops: lower inflation reduces pass-through, and this, in turn, helps
maintain low inflation. Campa and Goldberg (2002) used data on domestic prices of
imports for OECD countries to test Taylor’s proposition; their results suggest that
monetary conditions are only mildly related to the degree of pass-through. More
recently, Gagnon and Ihrig (2004) have used a sample of advanced nations to analyze this
issue, and have concluded that the decline in the pass-through has been related to changes
in monetary policy procedures and, in particular, to the adoption of inflation targeting.
II.1 Two Notions of Pass Through
Most authors have argued – either implicitly or explicitly – that a decline in the
degree of pass-through is a positive development; after all, a lower pass-through will
result in a decline in inflationary pressures coming from abroad. A limitation of this
inflation-centered view, however, is that it is too simplistic and tends to ignore the role of
relative prices, an in particular the fundamental role played by the real exchange rate.7
Once relative prices are introduced into the analysis, it is clear that the “passthrough problem” does not only affect inflation; it is also related to the effectiveness of
the nominal exchange rate as a shock absorber. In this context, it is important to make a
distinction between the pass-through of exchange rate changes into the price of
nontradabales and into the domestic price of tradables. While a high pass through for
nontradables will reduce the effectiveness of the nominal exchange rate, a high pass
through for tradables will enhance its effectiveness.
To illustrate this point, consider the standard definition of the real exchange rate

ρ as the (domestic) relative price of tradable to non-tradable goods:

(1)

7

ρ=

PT
,
PN

Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2005) analyze the effectiveness of alternative exchange rate regimes to
accommodate external shocks. In order for the exchange rate to act as a shock absorber, it is necessary for
nominal changes in the nominal exchange rate to be translated into real exchange rate changes. See also
Hochreiter and Siklos (2002).

5
where PT is the domestic price of tradables and PN is the price of nontradables. For the
nominal exchange rate to be an effective shock absorber – either under an adjustable or
under a flexible exchange rate regime –, a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate (E)
will have to generate an increase in ρ ; if this happens, the change in ρ will help generate
an expenditure switching effect. In traditional models this result is assured by three
assumptions: (1) the “law of one price” holds for tradables;8 (2) PN is the result of the
clearing conditions in the nontradables market; and (3) economic authorities pursue
‘tight” monetary and fiscal policies and nominal wages do not adjust automatically as a
result of the nominal depreciation.. The first two assumptions are summarized in
equations (2a) and (2b):
(2a)

PT = EPT*

(2b)

NS

W
= N D (ρ , A).
PN

Where E is the nominal exchange rate (an increase in E is a nominal depreciation), PT* is
the international price of tradables; N S , N D ,W and A are the supply and demand for
nontradables, nominal wages and absorption. Absorption, in turn, is affected by fiscal
policy and monetary policy; both expansive fiscal and monetary will result in a higher A .
In this setting, and assuming that the international price of tradables does not change:

(3)

Where α1 =

d log ρ
d log W
d log A
= 1− α1 + α 2
+α3
.
d log E
d log E
d log E

η
η −ε

,α 2 =

−ε
φ
,α 3 =
, and η ≥ 0, ε ≤ 0, φ ≥ 0 are elasticities.
η −ε
η −ε

According to the traditional monetary model, the pass-through from the exchange rate to
the domestic price of tradables will be unitary, and the pass-through to the domestic price
of nontradables will depend on wage rate behavior and absorption policies. Under the

8

This assumption is often referred to as “producer-currency pricing.”

6
classical case, d log W = d log A = 0 , and the pass-through to PN will be equal to 0 <

(1 − α 1 ) ≤ 1. In this case, a nominal depreciation will result in a real exchange rate
depreciation -- that is,

d log ρ
>0 --, and the nominal exchange rate will play a role as a
d log E

shock absorber.
There is no need, however, for the assumptions of the traditional monetarist
model to hold in the real world. Indeed, it is possible to show that if there is an automatic
backward looking wage indexation mechanism, the pass-through to the price of
nontradables will be equal to one, and that

d log ρ
= 0 . Moreover, as shown in Edwards
d log E

(1998), if the monetary authorities have low credibility and labor unions expect
inflationary pressures in the future,

d log W
>0, the effectiveness of the nominal
d log E

exchange rate as a shock absorber will decline.
A number of analysts have questioned the validity of the law of one price for
tradables (equation 2a), even in small economies. If export firms have some
monopolistic power, they will set prices in a way that maximize profits. In this case, they
will “price to market” and will not alter their domestic prices in a particular market in
proportion to exchange rate changes (see Atkenson and Burstein 2005, for a recent survey
and results). The easiest way to visualize this is to consider the optimal pricing strategy
for a monopoly operating in country j. In this case, instead of equation (2a) for the
domestic price of tradables, we have (2c):
(2c)

PT j = µMC j .

µ is the markup; MC is the marginal cost of operating in country j (in domestic
currency) and will depend on production costs, the cost of transportation and distribution
costs. The markup, will depend on the price elasticity of demand for T in country j ( ϑ )
and is given by: µ =

ϑ
, where ϑ <0. The elasticity, in turn, will depend on a number
1+ϑ

of variables, including income growth and the degree of price instability in the economy.

7
It is clear from (2c) that under most circumstances a change in the nominal exchange rate
will not be translated into a one-to-one change in the domestic price of tradables. This is
for two reasons: first, MC needs not remain constant when E changes. And second, the
mark-up will not remain unchanged when the exchange rate depreciates; indeed, it is
likely to decline.9 This means that the magnitude of the pass-through from exchange rate
to the price of tradables is likely to be smaller than one. In the extreme case when the
pass-through into importable goods is zero we say that the market is characterized by
“local currency pricing.”
Although the framework developed here could be made more complex – by
assuming that nontradables use tradable inputs, for example --, the main points would
still be valid. In particular, once the role of the real exchange rate is explicitly introduced
into the analysis, it is important to distinguish between two notions of exchange rate passthrough: pass-through into nontradables, and pass-through into tradables. In this
context, and from a policy perspective, a desirable situation is one where pass-through
coefficients for tradables and nontradables are low and different, with the pass through
for tradable goods being higher than that for nontradables.
In this section I use data from seven countries that have adopted inflation
targeting to investigate whether the magnitude of the pass-through has been affected by
the adoption of this monetary policy; see Table 1 for a list of countries and the date when
IT was enacted. One of the main objectives of this analysis is to investigate whether the
adoption of IT has affected the effectiveness of nominal exchange rates as shock
absorbers. As pointed out above, this would be the case if the pass-through from
exchange rates to nontradable prices has declined and/or the pass-through to tradables
goods has increased (or, at least, has not declined).
II.2 Empirical Model

An empirical analysis of the pass-through that focuses on inflation and the real
exchange rate would consider the way in which changes in nominal exchange rates affect
the domestic prices of nontradable and tradable goods. In most countries, however, there
are important data limitations; in particular, very few countries have data on nontradables
prices. Data limitations are more severe in emerging countries, where long series of
9

This is the case under many forms of the demand curve.

8
domestic prices of importables are rarely available.10 For this reason, in the empirical
analysis that follows I have used the CPI index as a proxy for the domestic price of
nontradables ( PN ) and the PPI as a proxy for the domestic price of tradables ( PT ). This
means that I am using the ratio

PPI
CPI

as a proxy for the real exchange rate in equation

(1). As it turns out, and as is illustrated in Figure 1 for the case of Chile, in many
countries this is a fairly good proxy for the (effective) real exchange rate.
Most empirical studies on pass-through have estimated variants of the following
equation (Campa and Goldberg 2002; Gagnon and Ihrig 2004):

(4)

∆ log Pt = β 0 + β 1 ∆ log E t +

β 2i x it + β 3 ∆ log Pt * + β 4 ∆ log Pt −1 + ω t .

Where Pt is a price index -- either of importables, tradables or nontradables --, E is the
nominal exchange rate, P * is the an index of foreign prices, the βs are parameters to be
estimated, the x j s are other controls expected to capture changes in the markup, and ω j
is an error term with standard characteristics. The short run pass-through is given by β 1
and the long term pass-through is

β1
.11 Many analysts have imposed the
(1 − β 4 )

constraint β 1 = β 3 . In this paper, however, I consider the more general case, and I allow
for different coefficients for the nominal exchange rate and international prices.12
From an empirical point of view the question of interest is whether the
coefficients β 1 and β 4 have experienced a structural change at (approximately) the time
of the adoption of inflation targeting. I investigate this by adding two interactive terms to
equation (4). The equation that I actually estimated is:

10

In the IFS, unit import prices for industrialized countries are expressed in domestic currency. However,
for most emerging countries they are expressed in US dollars.
11
Campa and Goldberg (2002) used the sum of four lagged coefficients of the change in the exchange rate
to compute the long run pass-through. The distributed-lags approach used by Campa and Goldberg is also
followed by most other authors.
12
Some studies, such as Gagnon and Ihring (2004), have analyzed how different monetary regimes have
affected the extent of pass-through.

9
(4a)
∆ log Pjt = β 0 + β 1 ∆ log E t +

β 2i x i + β 3 ∆ log P * + β 4 ∆ log Pt −1 + β 5 ∆ log E t × DIT

+ β 6 ∆ log Pt −1 × DIT + ω t
Where DIT is a dummy variable that takes the value of one at (approximately) the time IT
is adopted, and zero otherwise. The short term pass-through in the post-IT period is

β 1 + β 5 . Notice that, in contrast with other studies, in (4a) I allow the coefficient of
lagged ∆ log P during the post-IT period to be different from the pre-IT coefficient. This
is important for two reasons: first, it allows investigating whether, as argued by Taylor
(2000), a more inflationary-focused policy reduces inflationary inertia. Second, it
provides an alternative channel through which the long run pass-through may decline.
Indeed, since the long run pass-through in the post-IT period is

β1 + β 5
, it may
1 − (β 4 + β 6 )

be lower than the pre-IT coefficient either because β 5 or β 6 are significantly negative in
equation (4a).
In spite of its simplicity, the estimation of equations of the type of (4a) presents
several challenges. The most important has to do with potential endogeneity problems.
Indeed, it is possible that ∆ log E in equation (4a) is not exogenous, and is correlated with
the error term. In principle, there are several ways to deal with this issue; none of them,
however, is particular satisfactory from a practical point of view. First, equation (4a)
could be estimated using simultaneous equations methods, such as two stage least squares
or generalized method of moments. The problem is that, as is well known, in the vast
majority of countries with floating exchange rates it is very difficult to find good
instruments for ∆ log E ; most exogenous variables are not highly correlated with changes
in the nominal exchange rate.13 Second, structural VARs could be estimated. However,
identification conditions require making assumptions about the timing of the effects of
exchange rate on prices that are not particularly convincing. For these reasons, most
recent studies on pass through, including Campa and Goldberg (2002) and Gagnon and
Ihrig (2004) have relied on least squares methods. An additional challenge in the
13

This difficulty was first pointed out by Meese and Rogoff (1983).

10
estimation of (4a) is that many countries don’t have data on the (possible) determinant of
the markup, or additional controls x in equation (4a).
II.3 Data and Empirical Results

In the estimation of equation (4a) I use quarterly data for the period 1985-2005 for
seven countries – two advanced and five emerging – that have adopted inflation targeting
at some point during the last 15 years (see Table 1).14 Some of these countries – Chile is
the premier example – adopted IT in an evolutionary fashion. For this reason, in Table 1
I provide two dates for the adoption of IT in Chile: 1991, when an inflation target range
was first announced, and 1994 when a specific inflation rate was adopted as a target .15
Unless I indicate otherwise, the results reported in this section were obtained when the
mid 1994 date was used as the launching date of IT in Chile. When the alternative
1991date was used, the results obtained were similar.
For each country I estimated two equations: one for the rate of change of the CPI
(which, as mentioned, is a proxy for nontradables inflation), and one for the rate of
change of the PPI (a proxy for domestic tradables inflation). All data are expressed as
quarterly percentage changes. The exchange rate is the effective (multilateral) exchange
rate, defined as the domestic price of a basket of currencies. Thus, an increase in E is a
(multilateral) nominal depreciation.16 To the extent that it takes some time for a new
policy regime to be understood by the public, we would expect that the structural change
in the pass-through coefficients would not be instantaneous; it is likely to take place some
quarters after the new policy is adopted. In the estimation of (4a) I considered alternative
lags for DIT; most of the results reported in Table 2 are for four lags. The rate of change
of the US producer price index was used as a proxy for world inflation. In the basic
results reported in Table 2, I follow Gagnon and Ihrig (2004) and I do not include
additional controls x . See, however, the discussion below.
Since, for each country, the errors in the CPI and PPI equations are likely to be
correlated, I estimated the two equations for each country simultaneously, using Zellner’s
14

In some countries the time period was slightly shorter.
Alternatively one could use March 2000, when a Monetary Report was first published, as the relevant
date.
16
For the majority of countries the multilateral effective exchange rate was taken from the IFS. For those
countries for which the IFS does not provide the effective rate, I constructed a multilateral exchange rate
index.
15

11

seemingly unrelated regressions (SURE) procedure.17 The results obtained are presented
in Table 2. In Table 3, on the other hand, I present a summary of the pass-through
coefficients in the pre-inflation targeting and post-inflation targeting periods. The main
results obtained may be summarized as follows:
•

In all countries the pre-IT short term pass-through coefficient in the CPI
equation is positive. It is significantly so in six out of the seven countries;
the only exception is Canada whose coefficient is positive but not
significant.18 However, the estimated coefficients show a significant
degree of variability across countries. The short-run, pre-IT pass-through
coefficient into nontradable prices (CPI) ranges from a low of 0.020 in
Korea, to a very high 0.719 in Brazil. A simple inspection at these
estimates suggests that, historically, the CPI pass-through coefficient has
been much higher in countries with a tradition of high and chronic
inflation (e.g. Brazil), than in countries with traditional price stability (e.g.
Korea).

•

Also, in six out of the seven countries the short term pass-through
coefficient in the PPI (or tradables) equation is significantly positive.
There is also a significant variability across countries.

•

For the pre-IT period, the point estimate of the short term pass-through
coefficient is higher for tradables (PPI) than for nontradables (CPI) in all
countries.

•

In most countries, and during the pre-IT period, the long-run point
estimate for the PPI pass-through is higher than for the CPI pass-through.

•

In every case, the estimated coefficient of (d log E × DIT ) is negative. It
is significantly so in the majority of cases. This indicates that the short
run pass-through has declined in every country in the sample in the postIT period. Moreover, in most cases the decline has been larger in the CPI
(or nontradable) equation than in the PPI equation, indicating that there

17

In all equations I also included a time trend and, in the case of Brazil, two dummy variables for the
1989 and 1999 currency crises.
18
In the analysis that follows I consider as “significant” coefficients with a p-value of 20% or lower. In
the majority of cases, however, the p-values are smaller than 5%.

12
has been an increase in the short run effectiveness of the nominal
exchange rate.
•

The decline in the short run CPI pass-through in the post-IT period has
been particularly dramatic in the case of Brazil, where the short run
coefficient declined from 0.719 to 0.056. Other cases of major reduction
in the pass-through coefficient are Chile, Israel and Mexico. At the other
extreme, the change in the degree of CPI (or nontradable) pass-through in
Korea is not statistically significant; in this country the CPI pass-through
was already very low (0.020).

•

The estimates in Table 2 show that in the pre-IT period inflation was
characterized by a considerable degree of inertia in most countries –
measured by the coefficient of lagged ∆ log P . Notice, however, that in
most cases, inertia was higher for CPI (or nontradable) inflation than for
PPI (or tradables) inflation.

•

The estimated coefficients of (∆ log P−1 × DIT ) are negative in the vast
majority of the countries – the exceptions are Brazil for both definitions of
inflation, and Israel for CPI. The estimated coefficient for

(∆ log P−1 × DIT ) is negative and statistically significant for Australia
(CPI), Canada (CPI), and Mexico (CPI and PPI), indicating that in those
countries inflationary inertia has significantly declined in the post-IT
period.
•

The post-IT long run pass-through depends both on the behavior of

(∆ log P−1 × DIT ) and (log E × DIT ) .

As Table 3 shows, for the majority

of countries in the sample the long run pass through coefficient has
declined in the post-IT period. This is the case both for the CPI (or
nontradable) and for the PPI (or tradable) pass-through coefficients.
An interesting question is whether the differences in the pass-through coefficients
for the CPI (nontradable) and PPI (tradable) equations reported in Tables 2 and 3 are
statistically significant. In order to address this issue I computed Wald χ 2 statistics to

13
test for cross equation restrictions. The results obtained are reported in Table 4 (p-values
in parentheses). The test statistics are χ 2 with one degree of freedom, and the null
hypothesis is that the pass-through coefficients in the CPI and PPI equations are equal in
each country. As may be seen, the null hypothesis is rejected at conventional levels in 4
of the seven countries.19 A particularly interesting case is that of Brazil, where the null
hypothesis was rejected both in the short and long run in the pre-IT period, and is only
rejected in the short run in the post-IT period. As a way of gaining further insights, I also
tested the joint hypothesis that the short and long run pass-through coefficients were
equal in both the pre and post-IT periods. The results – available on request – indicate
that the null hypothesis is rejected for Brazil, Canada and Mexico.
In the estimates reported in Table 2 I included a small number of controls. In
order to check for the robustness of the results – and, in particular, to check for possible
omitted variables bias – I also estimated equation (4a) including the following controls:
(a) deviations of GDP from a stochastic trend, lagged one or two periods (In some
regressions this variable was also interacted with the nominal depreciation); (b)
deviations of US GSP, lagged one and two periods; (c) the change in the degree of
volatility of inflation, lagged one or two periods. (In some regressions this variable was
also interacted with the nominal depreciation); and (d) a time trend. The results obtained
are very similar to those presented in Table 2 and confirm that in most countries there
have been breakpoints in the short run pass-through, the degree of inertia and the long
ruin pass-through coefficient.20
II.4 Further Results and Comments on Chile’s Experience

Chile has been a pioneering in the implementation of inflation targeting in
emerging countries. What makes this case particularly interesting is that for decades
Chile had a high and chronic inflation. Starting in the 1940s inflation increased
significantly and became a major political and economic problem; until the 1990s
repeated efforts to quell it proved to be unsuccessful (Meller 1996). In his celebrated
work on inflationary inertia, Pazos (1972) referred to Chile as the premier case of an
economy where inflation tended to perpetuate itself. Numerous scholars have analyzed
19
20

Although in most of them the rejection is not across all time-runs and time periods.
Results available on request.

14
the historical behavior of inflation in Chile, and have concluded that fiscal largesse, low
Central Bank credibility, and widespread indexation practices (both for wages and the
nominal exchange rate) were behind Chile’s historical high rates of inflation. In the
1990’s, however, there were important changes in Chile’s monetary policy: the Central
bank was granted independence and it formally adopted an inflation targeting approach
(Corbo 1998, Schmidt-Hebbel and Tapia (2002), and Morandé (2002)). Since then
inflation has declined significantly. During the last few years it has not been significantly
different from world inflation.
The results presented in Tables 2 and 3 of this paper tend to confirm this story:
after the adoption of inflation targeting in the early 1990s Chile experienced a decline in
the degree of pass-through, both in the case of CPI inflation as well as PPI inflation (Seealso De Gregorio and Tokman, 2004). In this section I provide additional results on
Chile’s case that provide further light on the relation between inflation and exchange
rates. In Table 5 I present new estimates for equation (4a) for CPI (or nontradable)
inflation and CPI (or tradable) inflation using three stages least squares, which deals with
the potential endogeneity of exchange rate changes.21 As may be seen, although the point
estimates are somewhat different, the overall results tend to confirm the conclusions
reached above. Generally speaking, the 3SLS estimations show that the degree of both
CPI and PPI pass-through has declined in the post-IT period. Interestingly, and in
contrast with the cases of Australia, Canada and Mexico, there is no evidence of a decline
of the degree of inflationary inertia in Chile in the post-IT period. Moreover, in Chile the
level of inertia is similar for CPI and PPI inflation. From a comparative perspective,
however, inflationary inertia in Chile is not higher than in countries with a long tradition
of price stability, such as Australia and Canada (See Table 2).
III.

Inflation Targeting and Exchange Rate Volatility: Some Empirical Tests

As a number of authors have pointed out, a floating exchange rate system is a
requirement for a well functioning inflation targeting regime (Mishkin and Savastano

21

The following instruments were used: lagged first-difference in the US CPI, commodity price index, and

first-difference of the US PPI.

15
2001).22 The reason for this is that in a world of capital mobility, independent monetary
policy cannot coexist with a pegged exchange rate regime – this is the so-called
“Impossibility of the Holy Trinity.” This connection between inflation targeting and
floating exchange rates has led some analysts to argue that one of the costs of IT is the
increase in exchange rate volatility. In a recent paper, De Gregorio, Tokman and Valdés
(2005) discuss this issue in the Chilean context, and show that in Chile (nominal)
exchange rate volatility has not been higher than in other countries with floating
exchange rates.
The way in which the adoption of IT affects exchange rate volatility is an
important policy issue. Yet, it is one that has not been dealt with appropriately in recent
debates. Indeed, many analysts have compared exchange rate volatility under IT with
volatility under a pegged or administered exchange rate regime. This is not an adequate
comparison. From a policy evaluation perspective it is important to separate the issue of
the selection of the exchange rate regime with the adoption of IT. The correct question is
whether the adoption of IT increases exchange rate volatility, controlling for the
exchange rate regime. Moreover, most volatility analyses have been based on
comparisons of unconditional volatility measures across countries, or across time for the
same country.
There are several possible ways of addressing these issues. First, one can analyze
whether the adoption of IT affects conditional exchange rate volatility in countries that
have had a floating exchange rate for a prolonged period of time, such as Australia and
Canada. Second, regressions that control for the exchange rate regime can be estimated.
In this section I use both of these approaches and monthly data to analyze this issue. The
analysis focuses on the seven countries in Table 1. From a conceptual perspective, once
one conditions for the exchange rate regime, it is possible to determine whether IT, by
itself, results in an increase in exchange rate volatility. For example, in the cases of
Australia and Canada – two countries with a long tradition with floating rates -- a
comparison of conditional volatility before and after the implementation of IT will
provide information on the effects of the new policy regime on exchange rate behavior.
22

There is no need, however, for the authorities to abstain completely from intervention in the foreign
exchange market. See the discussion in Section IV of this paper.

16
III.1 The Data and the Empirical Model

In Figure 2 I present data on exchange rate volatility, measured as the monthly
difference in the log of the nominal effective exchange rate for the countries in my
sample for 1988:01-2005:01. These figures capture clearly the degree of instability –
including the crises -- faced by some of the countries in the sample during the period
under study. This figure also shows that in most of the countries instability has
experienced important changes.
The changing degree of exchange rate volatility displayed in Figure 2 suggests
that, during this period, exchange rate volatility can be explained by models in the
generalized autoregressive conditionally heteroskedastic (GARCH) tradition. Most
GARCH-based empirical work on exchange rate volatility has tended to ignore, both in
the mean and conditional variance equations, the potential role of alternative monetary
regimes. Consider the following GARCH model of nominal exchange rates in a
particular country:
(5)

∆ log E t = θ +

φ j z t − j +ψ t

(6)

σ t2 = α 1 + α 2ψ t −1 +

γ i σ t2−i +

δ i yi

Where, as before, E is the nominal effective exchange rate; the z's are variables that
affect changes in the exchange rate, and may include lagged values of ∆ log E , as well as
other domestic or international variables; ψ t are innovations to exchange rate changes,
with zero mean and conditional variance σ t2 . The y t , in equation (6), are variables,
other than past squared innovations or lagged forecast variance, that help explain
exchange rate volatility.
In this section I report results obtained from the estimation of models based on
equations (5) and (6) using monthly data for the countries in Table 1. The time period is
1988:01 through 2005:01, with the exception of Brazil where I analyze the period
1994:06-2005:01.23 My main interest is to investigate whether the adoption of an IT
23

Approximately in mid-1994, when the real plan was adopted, inflation in Brazil experienced a structural
break.

17
operating procedure for monetary policy has affected exchange rate volatility. In
addition, I am interested in understanding whether the adoption of a floating exchange
rate regime had an effect on volatility. For this reason, I included two dummy variables
as y t in the conditional variance equation (6): DIT , which as before takes the value of
one if the country has implemented an IT regime, and FLOAT , which takes the value of
one if the country has a floating exchange rate regime. In creating the variable FLOAT I
used information from a number of sources, including Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger
(2003), Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and the IMF. In the means equation (5) I also
included a time trend and, for the cases of Mexico and Korea dummy variables for their
major currency crises.24
III.2 Results

In the first step of the analysis I estimated, by ordinary least squares, a number of
versions of equation (5) for the seven countries in the sample.25 The analysis of the
residuals clearly showed the presence of conditional heteroskedasticity. Engle’s LM test
rejected the null hypothesis of absence of ARCH for every country. In the second step I
identified the order of the GARCH process for each of the countries, and I verified
stability. Finally, I estimated the system (5) and (6); in all cases the dummy variables for
inflation targeting ( DIT ) and for floating regime ( FLOAT ) were lagged one period; the
results, however, are not affected in a significant way when alternative lag structures are
used (including no lags). If the adoption of inflation targeting has indeed resulted in
increased nominal effective exchange rate instability, as some critics have argued, the
estimated coefficient of DIT would be significantly positive. If floating rates increase
exchange rate volatility, as one would expect under most circumstances, the estimated
coefficient of FLOAT would be significantly positive. In the estimation of the
conditional variance equations for Australia and Canada I did not include the FLOAT
variable. The reason for this is that both of these countries have had a floating regime
since the mid 1970s.

24

In some of the estimates I also included in the means equation the floating regime dummy. Its inclusion
does not affect the results, however.
25
As is customary, a preliminary step consists of analyzing stationarity. I used both country-specific and
panel techniques.

18
The results obtained are in Table 6. I have only reported the order of the GARCH
process, and the estimated coefficients of DIT and FLOAT . The main results may be
summarized as follows:
•

The estimated coefficient of the inflation targeting dummy DIT is positive
and very small in three of the countries – Australia, Canada, and Korea.
However, in none of these cases it is significantly different from zero.
This indicates that (at least in this sample) there is no evidence that the
adoption of IT increases nominal multilateral exchange rate volatility.

•

The estimated coefficient of the inflation targeting dummy DIT is
significantly negative in three of the countries in the sample – Brazil,
Chile (for both equations), and Israel –, and negative (but not significant)
in Mexico. In the case of Chile, the degree of significance of DIT is
higher (in absolute terms) when 1994 is considered as the beginning of the
IT period. Interestingly, when the FLOAT variable is excluded, the
coefficient of DIT becomes positive (but insignificant) in the conditional
variance equations for Chile and Brazil. These results suggest that, after
controlling for the exchange rate regime, the adoption of IT has tended to
reduce conditional volatility in some countries. The most likely reason for
this is that IT is a transparent and predictable monetary framework that
tends to reduce unexpected shocks or “news.”

•

The estimated coefficient of the FLOAT variable is positive in the five
equations where it was included. Moreover, it is significantly positive in
three of the five equations – for Brazil, Chile, and Israel.

The results reported in Table 6 are for standard GARCH models. In this setting
the nominal exchange rate reacts in the same way to positive and negative shocks.
However, as a number of authors have argued, it is possible that the nominal exchange
rate reacts in an asymmetric fashion to positive and negative shocks. In order to analyze
whether this possibility would affect the main results discussed above I estimated a series
of TGARCH and EGARCH models for the seven countries in the sample. Although
there is some evidence of asymmetric responses, the main conclusions on the coefficients

19
of DIT and FLOAT discussed above still hold: there is no evidence that, once one
controls for exchange rate regime, the volatility of nominal (multilateral) exchange rates
increased with the adoption of IT.
The results presented above are for nominal multilateral exchange rates. An
interesting question is whether the adoption of IT has affected real effective exchange
rate volatility. In order to analyze this issue I estimated equations of the type of (5) and
(6) for the four countries with data on real effective exchange rates at the monthly
frequency – Australia, Canada, Chile and Israel. The results obtained are presented in
Table 7. As may be seen, they tend to confirm those obtained for nominal multilateral
exchange rate volatility. There is no evidence that the adoption of IT has increased real
effective exchange rate volatility. In fact, there is some evidence that the opposite has
happened in Chile and Israel; in both of these countries the coefficient of DIT is negative,
with a Z-statistic in excess (in absolute terms) of 1.2. As in Table 6, these estimates
suggest that the adoption of a floating regime increased RER volatility: the estimated
coefficients of the FLOAT dummy are significantly positive.
III.3 Extensions for the Case of Chile

The results reported above span a period where most – but not all – of the
countries in the sample experienced important changes in their exchange rate regime.
Chile is a case in point.26 During this period the country went from having an exchange
rate band of varying width to having a flexible exchange rate. It may be argued, thus,
that the extent of exchange rate volatility during the band period was limited by the
existence of the band itself, even if the actual exchange rate never hit the bands. If this is
the case, the results for the emerging countries – but not for Australia or Canada – in
Table 6 maybe misleading. In order to deal with this issue in this section I use data on
Chile’s shadow nominal exchange rate – or exchange rate that would have prevailed in
the absence of the bands – to analyze exchange rate volatility in the period 1991-2004.
The data on the shadow exchange rate were taken from Edwards and Rigobon (2005).
This shadow rate was computed using an iterative procedure based on the behavior of the
actual rate, the bands and the fundamentals. Figure 3 presents the evolution of the
26

This also applies to Mexico and Israel. Mexico had a band until late 1994; Israel had a widening
crawling band into the 2000s. Korea had a managed exchange rate until 1998; Brazil had a managed rate
until 1999.

20
monthly change of the nominal observed and nominal shadow exchange rate for the
Chilean peso relative to the U.S. dollar
The estimation of the conditional variance equation for the shadow exchange rate
yielded the following results: the point estimate for the inflation targeting dummy
DIT was -2.36E-05, with a z-statistic of -0.406. The point estimate for the floating

exchange rate dummy FLOAT was 0.00004, with a z-statistic of 1.62.27 These results,
then, confirm those reported in the preceding subsection. Even when a shadow exchange
rate is used, there is no evidence suggesting that the adoption of IT increased nominal
exchange rate volatility; there is, on the other hand, some evidence indicating that the
move from a band to a floating regime did have a small (positive effect) on volatility.
IV.

Central Bank Policy and the Exchange Rate under an IT Policy Regime

Should inflation targeting central banks intervene in the foreign exchange market?
And if so, how should this intervention take place? Should it be sterilized intervention,
where the resulting changes in monetary aggregates are sterilized through operations
involving domestic securities? Or should it be non-sterilized intervention, where
monetary aggregates are affected?28 These are complex questions that have moved to the
center of the policy debate in many IT countries, especially in Latin America. In this
section I discuss the issue of whether IT central banks should explicitly consider the
exchange rate in their monetary rule.29 This question is related to a number of important
(and controversial) policy issues, including the costs of (real) exchange rate misalignment
and “fear of floating.”30

27
28

In this estimation the

DIT1994 dummy was used.

Questions do not end here, however. Here are some additional ones: If intervention is sterilized, what
type of domestic securities should be used in the sterilization? Should the purchases/sales of forex be done
in the spot or in the forward market?
29
It is not my intention to provide a comprehensive survey on the topic of central bank intervention. The
literature is voluminous country-specific, and continues to grow every day; interested readers are directed
to, among others, Dominguez and Frankel (1993), Taylor (2004), Kearns and Rigobon (2005), Neely
(2001), Sarno and Taylor (2001). For an excellent analysis of different central bank policies, including
Chile’s case, see Tapia and Tokman (2004).
30
On fear of floating see Calvo and Reinhart (2002).

21
IV.2 The Issues

From a technical point of view the discussion of the relation between central bank
policy and the exchange rate may be framed in terms of the form of the Taylor rule in a
small open economy. Taylor himself has posed the problem as follows
“How should the instruments of monetary policy (the interest rate or a
monetary aggregate) react to the exchange rate?” (Taylor, 2001, p. 263.
Emphasis added)
In order to address this question more formally, consider the following equation:31
(7)

i t = fπ t + gy t + h0 et + h1 e t −1

Where i t is the short term interest rate used by the central bank as a policy tool, π t is the
deviation of the rate of inflation from its target level – possibly zero --, y t is the deviation
of real GDP from potential real GDP (often called the output gap), and e t is the log of the
real exchange rate in year t.32 f and g are the traditional Taylor rule coefficients; h0 and
h1 are the coefficients of the current and lagged log of the real exchange rates in the
expanded Taylor rule, and are the main interest of this discussion. If h0 = h1 = 0
exchange rate developments should not be incorporated in the policy rule, and the Taylor
rule reverts to its traditional form.
It is conceivable, in principle, that in a small open economy the optimal monetary
policy rule – that is the policy that maximizes the authorities’ objective function – is one
where both h0 and h1 are different from zero. Interestingly, if h0 > 0 and h0 = −h1 , then
the rule implies that monetary policy should react to changes in the (real) exchange rate.
Notice that the formulation in equation (7) does not imply, even when h0 and h1 are
different from zero, that the monetary authorities should defend a certain level of the
exchange rate. If the optimal policy calls for intervention – that is for h0 and h1 different
31
32

This is the precise equation presented by Taylor in his discussion on the subject.
In this formulation an increase in e denotes a real exchange rate appreciation.

22
than zero --, and if the monetary authorities do follow this policy, a casual observer may
conclude that the country in question is subject to “fear of floating.” This, however,
would be an incorrect inference, as the country in question would be practicing “optimal
flotation.”
In order to answer fully this question it is necessary to specify the policy maker’s
objective (or loss) function, and the model that best captures the functioning of the
economy. Most authors assume that the goal of policy makers is to minimize a loss
function that combines deviations of GDP (or GDP growth) from trend and deviations of
inflation from its target.33
(8)

L = (π t − π~ ) 2 + λ ( y t − ~
y ) 2 , and λ > 0 .

In equation (8) π̂ and ŷ are the inflation target and potential output; ( y t − yˆ ) is the output
gap. It is easy to show that in this case the only way in which the exchange rate could
play a role in the monetary policy rule would be one where changes in e (or, in some
models, changes in the nominal exchange rate) affect inflation and/or the output gap. To
the extent that the “pass-through” coefficient is different from zero, exchange rate
changes will affect actual inflation – that is,

∂π
> 0 . If (some) changes in the real
∂e

exchange rate reflect situations of misalignment they will affect the output gap. Under
these circumstances, the optimal policy will be one that takes into account the way in
which exchange rate developments affect the two components of the loss function. What
is unclear, however, is whether the exchange rate should have an independent role in the
monetary policy rule (8). If the authorities have modeled the economy correctly – and in
doing so, have incorporated the effects of e on

π and

y -- there is no need to include an

exchange rate term in equation (8). This point has been made forcefully by De Gregorio,
Tokman and Valdés (2005) in their discussion of Chile’s case. If, however, there is a
lagged response of both inflation and output to exchange rate changes, the central bank

33

Medina and Valdés (2002) develop a model where the authorities also target the current account. They
show that the optimal reaction function is significantly different from the traditional Taylor rules.

23
may want to preempt their effect by adjusting the policy stance when the exchange rate
change occurs, rather than when its effects on

π

and y are manifested.

Whether a pre-emptive strategy is preferred to one where the authorities actually
wait until π and y begin to reflect the actual effects of a change in e is, in the final
analysis, an empirical issue. Moreover, it is a country specific issue; the main
characteristics of a particular economy – including the dynamics of inflation, the size of
the pass-through coefficient, and of different elasticities – will determine the extent of
macroeconomic volatility – that is deviations of inflation and growth from targets and
trends – is lower when h0 and h1 are different from zero.
IV.2 A Selective Review of the Literature

Most analytical discussions on inflation targeting have implicitly assumed
that h0 = h1 = 0 , without actually inquiring the way in which the incorporation of e into
the policy rule will be affect welfare and/or macroeconomic performance. In fact, things
go even further: most discussions on IT in the mainstream literature have tended to ignore
open economy issues. In the important book The Inflation Targeting Debate edited by
Ben Bernanke and Mike Woodford, the index has no entry for “devaluation” or “passthrough”, and there is only one entry for “exchange rate.” This corresponds to the paper
by Jonas and Mishkin (2005) on IT in transition economies. Most of the other papers in
the volume – authored by influential economists such as Woodford, Bernanke, and Sims,
among others – do not include explicit discussions on exchange rate behavior when
dealing with monetary policy issues. There are, however, a few exceptions: in their
paper, Cecchetti and Kim (2005) have a section on an open economy, but do not ask
formally whether h0 and/or h1 should be equal to zero. In his contribution to the
Bernanke and Woodford volume, Mervyn King briefly notes that although the U.K.
experienced a sharp currency appreciation (in excess of 20%) this had not affected the
effectiveness of the IT-based policy. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005) develop a
model of an open economy where the exchange rate plays an important role during a
“sudden stop” episode. In their setting the exchange rate does play an important role in
determining optimal monetary policy.

24
The seminal book by Mike Woodford, Interest and Prices (2003), which provides
firm analytical underpinnings for interest rate-based monetary policy, does not deal
explicitly with exchange rates; the index has no entries for “exchange rate(s),”
“devaluation,” or “pass-through.” There is one entry for “open economy,” although no
open economy model is presented, and the discussions on optimal policy rule do not
consider the (potential) role of open economy variables. (To be fair, however, one could
interpret the discussion in section 2.1 of Chapter 7, on cost-push shocks, as including
shocks stemming from exchange rate depreciation.)
The pioneering book by Bernanke et al (1999) includes interesting discussions on
the role played by exchange rates in monetary policy implementation in a number of
countries. The discussion of the Canadian case – where a Monetary Conditions Index
(MCI) that includes the exchange rate has been used explicitly is particularly
interesting.34 However, the important chapter on “Design and Implementation,” (Chapter
3) does not discuss at the analytical level whether exchange rate considerations should be
explicitly incorporated into the policy rule in an inflation targeting setting. In the chapter
on Israel, Australia and Spain the authors discuss how Spain and Israel gradually relaxed
exchange rate bands when they adopted IT, and they explain that in both of these
countries the authorities decided “not to respond to short term exchange rate fluctuations”
when making monetary policy decisions (Bernanke et al, 1999, page 205).
Mishkin and Savastano (2001) provide one of the most complete discussions on
the issue. These authors convincingly argue that the discussion on macroeconomic
stability in Latin America is not related to the selection of the exchange rate regime. The
issue is one of creating an institutional framework for conducting monetary policy in a
credible way. According to them IT provides such a framework. Mishkin and Savastano
develop a model where optimality implies a Taylor rule of the following form:
(9)

34

i t = π t + b1 (π − π * ) + b2 y t + b3 e t .

New Zealand also adopted a MCI in the late 1990s.

25
et is the log of the real exchange rate, expressed as deviations from its equilibrium value.
The authors make a very important point:
“[I]n Latin America exchange rate fluctuations are likely to have a bigger
effect on aggregate demand and aggregate supply (because the passthrough may be larger)…indicates that the weight of the exchange rate in
the modified Taylor-rule, b3 , may be relatively large. However, this is in
no way inconsistent with inflation targeting) (Mishkin and Savastano,
2001, page 534).
Ball (1999), Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) and Svensson (2000) have argued that
adding the exchange rate as an additional variable in equations of the type of (7) will
result in more stable macroeconomic outcomes. According to a simulation exercise
undertaken by Svensson (1999, 2000) the optimal values of the exchange rate coefficients
are h0 = -0.45 and h1 = 0.45. Ball (1999) analysis suggests that macroeconomic
instability will be reduced if h0 = -0.37 and h1 = 0.17. These results, however, are
model-specific and they will change for different parameterizations.
In a paper presented at a Central Bank of Chile conference, Taylor (2002)
reviewed 19 recent models developed to analyze inflation and monetary issues. Of these,
only 5 assumed that the exchange rate affected aggregate demand, and only six assumed
that exchange rate changes was a factor in the process of price determination. This
illustrates quite starkly the fact that many influential researchers continue to think in
terms of closed economy monetary models.
At the end of the road, whether h0 and h1 should indeed be different from zero is
a country-specific empirical question, that should be dealt with by analyzing country
specific evidence – both historical and based on simulation exercises. After much
reflecting on this subject I find it difficult to disagree with Taylor (2001) when he
expresses some skepticism on the general merits of adding the exchange rate into the
interest rate equation. This is for, at least, two reasons. First, and as pointed out earlier,
in properly specified models, the exchange rate already plays an indirect role through its

26
effect on π t and y t ; second, adding the exchange rate (or any other asset price, for that
matter) into the Taylor rule is likely to add considerable volatility to monetary policy.
This conclusion is similar to that of Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001) who provide an
extensive discussion on the subject. According to them, when implementing policy,
central banks should consider the effects of exchange rate fluctuations on inflation and
the output gap, but should not consider an independent role for et . According to them,
“targeting on an exchange rate is likely to worsen the performance of monetary policy.”
IV.3 What do IT Central Banks Actually Do?

The discussion presented above clearly indicates that the issue of whether
monetary policy should react to the exchange rate is not fully resolved. At the analytical
level the answer is likely to be country specific and will depend on the structural
characteristics of the country, and the authorities’ loss function.
The vast majority of central banks, however, do not openly recognize that they
explicitly take into account exchange rate developments when conducting monetary
policy. Indeed, if pressed, most IT central bankers would go as far a saying that since
exchange rate changes tend to affect inflation, they play a role on monetary policy.
However, they would be reluctant to acknowledge that the exchange rate plays a direct
role of its own in the monetary policy rule itself. That is, in terms of equation (7), the
vast majority of IT central bankers would say that in their policy rules: h0 = h1 = 0 .
As every student of monetary policy knows, however, in most countries there are
divergences between what central banks say they do, and what central banks actually do.
In a recent paper, Mohanty and Klau (2005) estimated monetary policy reaction functions
(i.e. Taylor rules) for 13 emerging and transition economies, and found out that in eleven
of them the coefficient of real exchange rate was significant.35 This provides strong
indication that, contrary to what they state, most IT central banks do take central bank
developments into account when determining their monetary policy stance. In Table 8 I

35

Other authors that have estimated central bank reaction functions to analyze whether the exchange rate
plays a role include Hamermann (2005).

27
present a list of the countries with the estimated short and long term coefficients in the
estimated Taylor-rule reaction functions.36
The case of Chile is particularly interesting. According to Mohanty and Klau
(2005) base estimates, Chile’s Taylor rule may be expressed as follows (t-statistics in
parentheses):
i t = 0 . 32 + 0 .97 π t + 0 .32 y t + 0 . 35 ∆ xr t − 0 .35 ∆ xr t −1 + 0 .32 i t −1 ,
(0.25) (4.87)
(1.25)
(2.78)
(-2.40)
(4.03)
where ∆xr is the change in the real exchange rate. The data are quarterly and the time
period covered is from 1992 to 2002. What is particularly interesting about the Chilean
case is that the effect of (real) exchange rate changes on Central Bank policy appears to
last only one quarter. Indeed the sum of the coefficients for ∆xrt and ∆xrt −1 add up to zero.
As the results summarized in Table 8 show, there is a wide range of values for
both the short run and long run estimated coefficients of the real exchange rate in these
Taylor rule reaction functions. (The short run is defined as the sum of the coefficients of
∆xrt and ∆xrt −1 . The long run is the sum of these two coefficients divided by one minus
the coefficient of y t −1. ). Short run coefficients, for example, go from a relatively high
0.79 for Mexico, all the way to zero for Chile; long run coefficients show an even larger
dispersion.37 In order to understand why in some countries monetary policy appears to
have been more susceptible to exchange rate changes than I others, I estimated a number
of cross country regressions. The dependent variable is the short run exchange rate
coefficient reported in Table 8. The following controls were used: (a) average inflation
1990-1995; (b) standard deviation of quarterly inflation 1990-1995; (c) standard
deviation of the real exchange rate 1990-1995; (d) degree of openness of the economy
measured as imports plus exports over GDP; (e) length of period for which the country
has had floating rates; and (f) number of years since IT was adopted. The results
obtained for these six univariate regressions are presented in Table 9. Since I only have
36

The coefficients in Table 7 have positive signs, since in this paper I have considered that a higher
exchange rate represents depreciation. In the Mohanty and Klau paper higher rate represents appreciation,
and the coefficients are negative.
37
In the case of long run coefficients, most of the very high values are the result of a very low estimate for
the lagged interest rate. This may be biasing the long run estimates.

28
13 observations no attempt was made at running a multivariate regression with all the
regressors. In spite of the fact that the sample is extremely small, the results reported in
Table 9 are interesting and suggestive. Countries with history of higher inflation seem to
have a higher coefficient for ∆xr in their Taylor rules. Also, countries that have
historically had a more volatile (real) exchange rate seem to attach a higher coefficient to
the exchange rate in their monetary rule. When both variables are included in a bi-variate
regression their coefficient are still positive and continue to have a relatively high level of
significance.
V.

Concluding Remarks

The exchange rate is one of the most important macroeconomic variables in the
emerging and transition countries. It affects inflation, exports, imports and economic
activity. For decades the vast majority of emerging countries had rigid exchange rate
regimes – either pegs (adjustable or hard) or managed. This, however, has changed
during the last few years, when an increasingly large number of countries have adopted
flexible exchange rate regimes. This move away from exchange rate rigidity has tended
to take place at the same time as many countries have embraced inflation targeting as a
way of conducting monetary policy. The conjunction of IT and flexible rates has brought
to the center of the discussion a host of new policy issues, including issues related to the
role of the exchange rate in monetary policy, volatility and the relationship between
exchange rate changes and inflation.
In this paper I have addressed three of this issues: (a) the relationship between the
pass-through and the effectiveness of nominal exchange rates in IT regimes; (b) the
effects of IT on exchange rate volatility; and (c) the role (or potential role) of exchange
rate changes on the monetary rule in IT countries. The main findings from this analysis
may be summarized as follows: (1) Countries that have adopted IT have experienced a
declined in the pas-through from exchange rate changes to inflation. In many of the
countries in the sample this decline in the pass-through has been different from CPI
inflation than for PPI inflation. There is no evidence, however, of changes in the degree
of effectiveness of the nominal exchange rate as a shock absorber. (2) The adoption of
IT monetary policy procedures has not resulted in an increase in (nominal or real)

29
exchange rate volatility. However, in three out of five countries the adoption of a
floating exchange rate regime increased the degree of volatility of exchange rates. And
(3), there is some evidence that IT countries with a history of high an unstable inflation
tend to take into account explicitly developments in the nominal exchange rate when
conducting monetary policy.

30

Figure 1: Chile, Alternative Measures of Real Exchange Rate
.3

5.0

.2

4.9

.1

4.8

.0

4.7

-.1

4.6

-.2

4.5
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

Producer Price and Consumer Price Ratio
Effective Real Exchange Rate

04

31

Figure 2: Monthly Nominal Effective Exchange Rate Volatility
Australia

Brazil

.06

.5

.04

.4

Canada
.04
.03
.02

.3

.02

.01

.2

.00

.1

-.01

.00
-.02

-.02

.0

-.04

-.1

-.06

-.2
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

-.03
-.04
-.05
88

90

92

94

Chile

96

98

00

02

04

88

90

92

94

Israel

.08

96

98

00

02

04

00

02

04

Korea

.12

.4

.06

.3

.04

.08
.2

.02
.00

.04

.1

-.02

.0

-.04

.00
-.1

-.06
-.04

-.08
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

00

02

04

Mexico
.4
.3
.2
.1
.0
-.1
88

90

92

94

96

98

-.2
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

88

90

92

94

96

98

32
Figure 3: Monthly Changes in Observed and Shadow Nominal Exchange Rate
.08

.08

.06

.06

.04

.04

.02

.02

.00

.00

-.02

-.02

-.04

-.04

-.06

-.06

-.08

-.08
1992

1994 1996

1998 2000 2002

Shadow Nominal Exchange Rate
Observed Nom inal Exchange Rate

2004

33
Table 1
Inflation Targeting: Selected Countries
Inflation Targeting:
Country

Starting Date

Australia

Apr-93

Brazil

Jun-99

Canada

Feb-91

Chile

June-91, June-94

Israel

Dec-91

Korea

Jan-98

Mexico

Jan-99

Source: Central Bank’s monetary policy reports and press releases;
Various Central Bank of Chile and IMF research papers.

34

Table 2
SUR Estimates: Exchange Pass-Through, Selected Countries
(Quarterly Data: 1986.1-2005.1)
Australia

Brazil

CPI

PPI

dlog E

0.054

0.070
(1.31)

(24.76)

(22.30)

dlog P*

0.184

0.481

dlog P-1

0.548

0.060
(0.30)

(10.38)

C

0.006

DIT* dlog E

Chile

Israel

PPI

CPI

PPI

CPI

PPI

0.759

0.039

0.085

0.137

0.207
(2.08)

(12.18)

0.117

0.404

0.128

0.070

0.028

0.300

0.284

0.499

0.404

0.011

0.011

-0.013

0.004

-0.057

-0.054

-0.663

-0.524

DIT* dlog P-1

-0.344

-0.011

0.866

R2
DurbinWatson.
Determinant
residual
covariance
Time period

0.467
2.11

0.234
2.17

-

4.85e-9

(2.34)

(3.13)

(4.09)

(2.27)

(1.55)

(1.76)

(3.65)

(2.51)

(0.60)

(0.05)

CPI

Canada

Korea

Mexico

CPI

PPI

CPI

PPI

CPI

PPI

0.624

0.627

0.020

0.055

0.191

0.246

0.254

0.017

0.202

0.006

0.137

0.184

0.313

0.355

0.194

0.132

0.121

0.200

0.213
(2.15)

(10.49)

(10.06)

0.003

0.003

0.016

0.024

0.018

0.013

0.003

0.026

0.021

-0.066

0.032

-0.132

-0.162

-0.427

-0.430

-0.031

-0.063

-0.176

-0.053

0.379

-0.488

-0.054

-0.090

-0.120

0.120

-0.064

-0.097

-0.039

-0.454

-0.362

0.974
2.39

0.964
2.41

0.349
2.14

0.220
2.06

0.667
2.13

0.169
1.74

0.866
2.46

0.880
2.10

0.210
2.15

0.110
2.32

0.793
2.31

0.790
2.37

-

4.13e-6

-

1.49e-9

-

3.73e-8

-

2.98e-8

-

7.19e-9

-

5.23e-8

0.719

(0.22)

(0.55)

(4.95)

(1.51)

(1.66)

(8.67)

(0.54)

(3.28)

(1.41)

(0.79)

(2.69)

(3.99)

(2.75)

(1.20)

(2.77)

(0.79)

(0.66)

(1.83)

(1.24)

(0.28)

(0.19)

(2.88)

(0.26)

(3.43)

(3.88)

(2.27)

(0.79)

(1.10)

(1.77)

(1.66)

(1.32)

(0.66)

(0.18)

(2.84)

(4.78)

(5.23)

(0.92)

(5.95)

(1.54)

(2.92)

(4.33)

(6.42)

(0.54)

(1.20)

(0.07)

(2.07)

(4.59)

(0.43)

(0.43)

(2.10)

(0.88)

(0.94)

(0.77)

(0.51)

(4.85)

(0.64)

0.635

(1.96)

(1.05)

(2.02)

(5.98)

(1.29)

0.584

(1.79)

(0.31)

(1.74)

86.186.186.186.186.186.188.188.186.186.186.186.186.186.105.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
05.1
Absolute value of t-statistics are reported in parentheses
E is nominal effective exchange rate, P* is the US producer price index, P-1 is one lag of domestic producer or consumer price index, and DIT is dummy for periods with inflation
targeting.

35

Table 3
Short-Run and Long-Run Exchange Pass-Through, Selected Countries
(Quarterly Data: 1986.1-2005.1)
CPI Equations
Short-run pass thorough
Pre-IT
Post-IT

PPI Equations

Long-run pass thorough
Pre-IT
Post-IT

Short-run pass thorough
Pre-IT
Post-IT

Long-run pass thorough
Pre-IT
Post-IT

Australia

0.054

0.000

0.120

0.000

0.070

0.070

0.070

0.070

Brazil

0.719

0.056

1.027

-b

0.759

0.235

1.060

0.697

Canada

0.039a

0.000

0.078a

0.000

0.085a

0.085a

0.143a

0.143a

Chile

0.137

0.005

0.212

0.008

0.207

0.045

0.257

0.056

Israel

0.624

0.197

0.718

-b

0.627

0.197

0.713

0.224

Korea

0.020

0.020

0.025

0.025

0.055

0.055

0.070

0.070

Mexico

0.191

0.015

0.523

0.018

0.246

0.246

0.591

0.316

Source: Author’s elaboration based on estimations reported in Table 2.

36
Table 4
Wald Tests for Cross Equation Restrictions
(

2

with one degree of freedom)

Short-Run

Australia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Israel
Korea
Mexico
p-values in parenthesis
* significant at 5% level
** significant at 10% level

Long-Run

Pre-IT

Post-IT

Pre-IT

Post-IT

0.078

0.131

0.209

0.132

(0.78)

(0.72)

(0.65)

(0.72)

4.240*

3.966*

6.216*

0.543

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.01)

(0.46)

0.189

11.189**

0.085

8.219*

(0.66)

(0.01)

(0.77)

(0.00)

0.721

0.251

0.140

0.214

(0.39)

(0.61)

(0.71)

(0.64)

0.007

0.010

0.025

0.523

(0.93)

(0.87)

(0.87)

(0.46)

3.466**

0.030

2.840**

0.051

(0.05)

(0.91)

(0.09)

(0.92)

23.523*

14.846*

3.824*

6.235*

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.05)

(0.01)

37

Table 5
3SLS Estimates: Exchange Pass-Through, Chile
(Quarterly Data: 1988.1-2005.2)
CPI

PPI

dlog E-1

0.228

0.530

dlog P-1

0.375

0.281

dlog P*

-0.035

0.213

C

0.024

0.000

DIT* dlog E

-0.214
(1.47)

-0.446
(2.00)

DIT* dlog P-1

-0.105
(0.62)

-0.189
(0.70)

(1.55)

(2.53)

(0.26)

(1.69)

(2.21)

(1.62)

(0.72)

(0.00)

R2
0.647
0.056
Durbin-Watson
2.05
1.72
Time period
88.1-05.2
88.1-05.2
Determinant residual covariance
4.31e-0.8
Absolute value of t-statistics is reported in parentheses. E is nominal
effective exchange rate, P* is the US producer price index, P-1 is one lag of
domestic producer or consumer price index, and DIT is dummy for periods
with inflation targeting. Instruments: lagged first-difference of the US CPI,
commodity price index, and first-difference of the US PPI.

38
Table 6
GARCH Estimates: Inflation Targeting, Exchange Rate Regime,
and Nominal Exchange Rate Volatility, Selected Countries
(Monthly Data: 1988.1-2005.1)
Country
Australia (1,1)
Brazil (2,2)
Canada (1,1)
Chile (1,1)a
Chile (1,1)

b

Israel (1,1)
Korea (1,0)
Mexico (1,1)

DIT

Float

DW

R2

6.36e-06

-

1.96

0.10

(0.96)

-

-0.001

0.0008

1.97

0.25

(4.16)

(2.55)

6.73e-06

-

1.89

0.04

(0.66)

-

-7.48e-06

1.71e-07

1.96

0.18

(1.70)

(3.57)

-1.57e-05

2.54e-05

1.94

0.22

(4.20)

(5.97)

-3.71e-04

3.94e-04

2.30

0.05

(5.44)

(3.92)

0.002

0.002

1.73

0.10

(0.94)

(0.95)

-3.67e-04

2.1e-04

2.50

0.14

(1.06)

(0.63)

Absolute value of z-statistics are reported in parentheses. DIT is a dummy for periods with inflation
targeting, and Float is a dummy for periods with floating exchange rate.
a
Inflation targeting assumed to start on June, 1991.
b
Inflation targeting assumed to start on June, 1994.

39
Table 7
GARCH Estimates: Inflation Targeting, Exchange Rate Regime, and Real Exchange
Rate Volatility, Selected Countries
(Monthly Data: 1988.1-2005.1)
Country

Mean Equation

GARCH

DIT

Float

DW

R2

Australia

AR(2)

(1,1)

-1.77e-06

-

1.96

0.07

(0.52)

-

-3.67e-05

-

2.03

0.04

(1.11)

-

-8.39e-06

2.50e-06

1.87

0.05

(1.27)

(4.02)

-2.35e-05

4.66e-05

1.89

0.10

(2.57)

(4.22)

-3.47e-05

7.05e-05

1.89

0.09

(1.43)

(1.75)

Canada
Chile

a

Chile

b

Israel

AR(3)
AR(1)
AR(1)
AR(1)

(1,3)
(2,2)
(2,2)
(2,2)

Absolute value of z-statistics is reported in parentheses. DIT is a dummy for periods with inflation targeting, and Float
is a dummy for periods with floating exchange rate.
a
Inflation targeting assumed to start on June, 1991.
b
Inflation targeting assumed to start on June, 1994.

40
Table 8
Interest Rate Response to Changes in Real Exchange Rate
(Obtained from estimated Taylor-Rule Equations)
Country

Short term

Long term

India
Korea
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand

0.18
0.29
0.09
0.03
0.31

0.60
0.67
0.13
0.18
0.74

Brazil
Chile
Mexico
Peru

0.10
0.00
0.79
0.38

0.36
0.00
1.58
2.71

Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland

-0.03
0.15
0.05

-0.19
0.60
0.20

South Africa
0.12
Source: Mohanty and Klau (2005)

6.00

41
Table 9
Exchange Rate Coefficient in Taylor-Rule Equations and Country Characteristics
(Ordinary Least Squares)
(1)
Average Inflation

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.015
(1.74)***

St. Dev. Inflation

0.010
(0.71)

St. Dev. Real Exchange Rate

0.040
(1.78)***

Trade Openness

-0.001
(0.64)

Length period with floating regime

-0.000
(0.11)

Years since IT was adopted

0.005
(0.26)

Constant
Observations
R-squared

0.037

0.140

-0.031

0.276

0.207

0.170

(0.35)

(1.51)

(0.23)

(1.86)

(1.17)

(1.73)

13

13

13

13

13

13

0.22

0.04

0.22

0.04

0.00

0.01

Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
*** significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, * significant at 1%

42
REFERENCES

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein. 2005. "Trade Costs, Pricing to Market, and
International Relative Prices," mimeo, University of California at Los Angeles.
Ball, Laurence. 1999. "Policy Rules for Open Economies," In J. Taylor (ed.): Monetary
Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2004. "Central Bank Talk and Monetary Policy," speech before the
Japan Society, New York, New York, October 7.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/200410072/default.htm
Bernanke, Ben S. and Michael Woodford. 2005. The Inflation-Targeting Debate, NBER
Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 32. Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press.
Bernanke, Ben S., Laubach, Thomas, Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen. 1999.
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton, Princeton
University Press.
Borensztein, Eduardo and , José De Gregorio. 1999. “Devaluation and Inflation after
Currency Crises,” Unpublished manuscript, Universidad de Chile, February.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2005. “Inflation Targeting and Sudden
Stops,” in Bernanke, Ben S. and Michael Woodford (eds.): The Inflation-Targeting
Debate, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 32. Chicago and London: University
of Chicago Press.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1999. “Fixed vs. Flexible Exchange Rates” Fixed vs. Flexible
Exchange Rates: Preliminaries of a Turn-of-Millennium Rematch,” mimeo,
University of Maryland.
Calvo, Guilermo A. and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117(2): 379-408.
Campa, Jose Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg. 2002. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into
Import Prices: A Macro or Micro Phenomenon?,” NBER WP 8934, May.
Cecchetti Stephen G. and Junhan Kim. 2005. “Inflation Targeting, Price-Path Targeting,
and Output Variability,” in Bernanke, Ben S. and Michael Woodford (eds.): The
Inflation-Targeting Debate, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 32. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Corbo, Vittorio. 1998. “Reaching One-Digit Inflation: The Chilean Experience,” Journal
of Applied Economics. 1(1): 123-63.

43
Corbo, Vittorio and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2003. “Inflation Targeting: The Latin
American Experience,” in Gonzalez, Jose Antonio, et. al. (eds): Latin American
Macroeconomic Reforms: The Second Stage. Chicago and London: University of
Chicago Press: 19-71.
Della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. New Economic History of Argentina,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003
De Gregorio, José and Andrea Tokman. 2004. "Flexible Exchange Rate Regime and
Forex Interventions: The Chilean Case," Economic Policy Papers Nº 11, Central
Bank of Chile, December.
De Gregorio, José, Tokman, Andrea, and Rodrigo Valdés. 2005. “Tipo de Cambio
Flexible con Metas de Inflación en Chile: Experiencia y Temas de Interés,”.
Documento de Política Económica N°14. Banco Central de Chile. Agosto.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. 1970. Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine
Republic, New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Domínguez, Kathryn and Jeffrey A. Frankel. 1993. “Does Foreign-Exchange Intervention
Matter?. The Portfolio Effect”. American Economic Review, 83(5): 1356-69.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998. “Two Crises: Inflationary Inertia and Credibility”, The
Economic Journal, 108 (May): 680-702.
Edwards, Sebastian and Eduardo Levy Yeyati. 2005. “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock
Absorbers,” European Economic Review, 49(8): 2079-2105
Edwards, Sebastian and Roberto Rigobon. 2005. “Capital Controls, Exchange Rate
Volatility and External Vulnerability,” NBER Working Paper No. 11434.
Gagnon, Joseph E. and Jane Ihrig. 2004. “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate PassThrough,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 9(4): 315-338.
Hammermann, Felix. 2005. “Do Exchange Rates Matter in Inflation Targeting Regimes?
Evidence from a VAR Analysis for Poland and Chile,” in Langhammer, R. J. and L.
Vinhas de Souza, (Eds.): Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization in Latin
America.
Hochreiter, Eduard and Pierre L. Siklos, 2002. "Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes: The
Options for Latin America," The North American Journal of Economics and Finance,
13(3): 195-211.

44
Jonas, Jiri and Frederic S. Mishkin. 2005. “Inflation Targeting in Transition Countries:
Experience and Prospects,” in Bernanke, Ben S. and Michael Woodford (eds.): The
Inflation-Targeting Debate, NBER Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 32. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Kearns, Jonathan and Roberto Rigobon (2002). “Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank
Interventions: The Australian Case,” Journal of International Economics, 66(1): 3148.
Levy-Yeyeti, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger. 2003. “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on
the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American Economic Review, 93
(4), pp. 1178-89.
Medina, Juan P. and Rodrigo Valdés. 2002. “Optimal Monetary Policy Rules under
Inflation Range Targeting,” in Loayza N. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel (eds.): Monetary
Policy: Rules and Transmission Mechanisms. Series on Central Banking, Analysis,
and Economic Policies, vol. 4. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 95-115
Meese, Richard, and Rogoff Kenneth. “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
Seventies,” Journal f International Economics, 14(1-2): 3-24.
Meller, Patricio. 1996. Un Siglo de Economía Política Chilena: 1890-1990. Santiago,
Andrés Bello.
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2001. “One Decade of Inflation
Targeting in the World: What do we Know? What do we Need to Know?,” NBER
WP 8397, July.
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Miguel A. Savastano. 2001. “Monetary Policy Strategies for
Latin America,” Journal of Development Economics, 66(2): 415-444.
Mohanty, M.S. and Marc Klau. 2005. “Monetary Policy Rules in Emerging Market
Economies: Issues and Evidence,” in Langhammer, R. J. and L. Vinhas de Souza,
(Eds.): Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization in Latin America.
Morandé, Felipe. 2002. “A Decade of Inflation Targeting in Chile. Developments,
Lessons, and Challenges”, in N. Loayza y R. Soto (eds.): Inflation Targeting: Design,
Performance, Challenges, Santiago, Central Bank of Chile: 583-626.
Neely, Christopher J. 2001. “The Practice of Central Bank Intervention: Looking under
the Hood”. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 83(3): 1-10.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4): 73-96.
Pazos, Felipe. 1972. Chronic Inflation in Latin America. New York: Praeger Publishers.

45

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange
Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 148.
Sarno, Lucio and Mark P. Taylor. 2001. “Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange
Market: Is It Effective and, If So, How Does It Work?,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 39(3): 839-68.
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus and Alejandro Werner. 2002. “Inflation Targeting in Brazil,
Chile, and Mexico: Performance, Credibility, and the Exchange Rate. Economia.
2(2): 31-89.
Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus; and Matias Tapia. 2002. “Inflation Targeting in Chile,” North
American Journal of Economics and Finance, 13(2): 125-46.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 1999. "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule," Journal of
Monetary Economics 43 (3): 607-654.
_________________ 2000. "Open-Economy Inflation Targeting," Journal of
International Economics, 50(1): 155-183.
Tapia, Matías and Andrea Tokman. 2004. “Effects of Foreign Exchange Intervention
under Public Information: The Chilean Case,” Central Bank of Chile Working Papers
N° 255.
Taylor, Mark P. 2004. “Is Official Exchange Rate Intervention Effective?,” Economica,
71(281): 1-11.
Taylor, John B. 2000. “Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the Pricing Power of Firms,”
European Economic Review, 44 (7): 1389-1408.
___________ 2001. The Role of the Exchange Rate in Monetary-Policy Rules,”
American Economic Review, 91(2): 263-267.
____________ 2002. The Monetary Transmission Mechanism and the Evaluation of
Monetary Policy Rules,” in Loayza N. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel (eds.): Monetary
Policy: Rules and Transmission Mechanisms, Series on Central Banking, Analysis,
and Economic Policies, vol. 4. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Woodford, Mike. 2003. Interest and Prices, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University
Press.

