NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TARIFF INCIDENCE IN AMERICA’S GILDED AGE
Douglas A. Irwin
Working Paper 12162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12162
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

I wish to thank Robert Margo and seminar participants at Warwick, Erasmus, and the NBER’s DAE Program
Meeting for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Tariff Incidence in America’s Gilded Age
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 12162
April 2006
JEL No. F1, N7
ABSTRACT
In the late nineteenth century, the United States imposed high tariffs to protect domestic
manufacturers from foreign competition. This paper examines the magnitude of protection given to
import-competing producers and the costs imposed on export-oriented producers by focusing on
changes in the domestic prices of traded goods relative to non-traded goods. Because the tariffs
tended to increase the prices of non-traded goods, the degree of protection was much less than
indicated by nominal rates of protection; the results here suggest that the 30 percent average tariff
on imports yielded a 15 percent implicit subsidy to import-competing producers while effectively
taxing exporters at a rate of 11 percent. The paper also finds that tariff policy redistributed large
amounts of income (about 9 percent of GDP) across groups, although the impact on consumers was
only slightly negative because they devoted a sizeable share of their expenditures to exportable
goods. These findings may explain why import-competing producers pressed for even greater
protection in the face of already high tariffs and why consumers (as voters) did not strongly oppose
the policy.
Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu

Tariff Incidence in America’s Gilded Age

1. Introduction
One of the most controversial aspects of U.S. economic policy in the decades after the
Civil War was the use of high import tariffs to provide trade protection for domestic
manufacturers. For most of the nineteenth century, U.S. foreign trade consisted largely of
exports of raw materials and food (cotton and tobacco from the South and wheat and corn from
the Midwest) in exchange for imports of manufactured goods. After the Civil War, the United
States maintained high import duties to insulate domestic industries (located mainly in the North)
from foreign competition.
This protectionist policy was a contentious issue in national politics during the Gilded
Age of the 1880s. Tariff advocates claimed that high import duties helped labor by expanding
industrial employment and keeping wages high, while also aiding farmers by creating a steady
demand in the home market for the food and raw materials that they produced. Tariff critics
charged that those import duties raised the cost of living for consumers and harmed agricultural
producers by effectively taxing their exports, thus redistributing income from consumers and
farmers to benefit big businesses and capital-owners in the North.1
Despite this controversy, and the fact that import tariffs were among the most important
government policies of the period, little research has been devoted to the overall economic
consequences of late nineteenth century trade protection.2 Many questions about the economic
1
2

Reitano (1994) provides a recent historical overview of tariff politics during this period.

De Long (1998) provides a general discussion of trade policy during this period.
Several industry studies examine the role of protection in promoting the iron and steel industry,
such as Head (1994) on steel rails, Irwin (2000a) on pig iron, and Irwin (2000b) on the tin plate,

-2impact of high tariffs remain unanswered, perhaps the most important being that of tariff
incidence: how much did import-competing producers benefit from protectionist policies and
who paid the price? Standard indicators of trade policy fall short of addressing this issue.
Nominal rates of protection reveal nothing about the distributive effects of the tariff because its
incidence can be shifted onto other sectors of the economy. And effective rates of protection do
not necessarily indicate the magnitude (or even the direction) of the underlying incentive to shift
resources into import-competing industries.
This paper explores the incidence of U.S. tariff policy in the late nineteenth century by
focusing on how the policy changed the domestic prices of traded goods relative to non-traded
goods. A tariff increases the domestic price of importable goods relative to exportable goods, but
this positive effect for import-competing industries is often mitigated by a tariff-induced increase
in the price of non-tradeable goods. The rise in the price of non-traded goods also reduced the
relative price of exportables, to the detriment of that sector. Because of these effects, according
the results reported below, the average 30 percent U.S. tariff on imports during the 1880s yielded
just a 15 percent implicit subsidy to domestic import-competing producers and amounted to a 11
percent effective tax on exports. The tariff also redistributed a large share of national income
(about 9 percent of GDP) among various affected groups, but the impact on consumers was only
slightly negative because of the large share of exported products (particularly food) in consumer
expenditures.
These findings help resolve several puzzles about late nineteenth century U.S. trade
policy. First, the results explain why domestic manufacturers pressed for ever higher duties, even
but few papers focus on the economy-wide impact of the policy.

-3though nominal tariff rates were already very high. The reason could be that the effective
subsidy to them was much smaller than suggested by nominal rates of protection. Second, the
results confirm that tariffs were a highly charged political issue for good reason: they
redistributed large amounts of income between various groups. In particular, the burden of high
tariffs fell to some extent on producers of agricultural exports, which helps account for the
opposition of farmers to the existing levels of import taxation. Third, the fact that the
protectionist policy was just slightly harmful to consumers helps explain why many voters were
not strongly opposed to the policy.
Section 2 of the paper sets out the economic framework that underlies the concept of
“net” protection as contrasted with the more familiar concepts of nominal and effective rates of
protection. Section 3 examines the empirical relationship between the prices of traded and nontraded goods to determine the degree of protection (positive or negative) given to different
sectors of the economy. The results also reveal the income transfers between various groups
(consumers, exporters, import-competing producers, etc.) for the mid-1880s. Section 4 applies
this framework to the antebellum period to provide a contrast with the results from the late
nineteenth century and to compare the results to other studies of the pre-Civil War period, such
as Harley (1992). Section 5 concludes by discussing how these findings improve our
understanding of U.S. trade policy during this period.

2. Assessing the Degree of Trade Protection
The degree to which an import-competing sector of the economy is protected from
foreign competition is a deceptively complex question. The first step in addressing this question

-4is to examine nominal rates of protection. In the late nineteenth century, import tariffs were the
sole form of U.S. trade intervention (subsidies and quotas were not employed until later in the
twentieth century). The nominal rates of protection are the rates of duty in the import tariffs as as
set by Congress.
Table 1 shows the average import tariffs with respect to the major import-competing
sectors of the economy for 1885. Because the United States was a net exporter of agricultural
goods and a net importer of manufactured goods, tariffs were imposed mainly on imported
manufactured goods and consumption items. The average tariff on dutiable imports was about
40 to 45 percent and, because most tariff rates were very stable over this period, this is true of the
entire period from 1870 to 1913. The distinction between dutiable and non-dutiable imports is
important because about one-third of U.S. imports during this time entered the country duty-free,
largely because they were products that did not compete with domestic producers, such as coffee
and tea, raw silk and certain hides, India rubber, and tropical fruits such as bananas. The average
tariff on total imports (dutiable and duty-free) was about 30 percent through the 1880s (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1975, series U211-212).
Nominal rates of protection do not necessarily indicate the actual degree of protection
given to domestic producers. One problem with nominal rates is that they ignore the structure of
protection across industries. The effective rate of protection, defined as the percentage change in
value added in an activity as a result of the tariff structure, takes into account the impact of tariffs
on intermediate and final goods in determining the degree to which producers of final goods are
protected (Corden 1971). Low tariffs on intermediate goods combined with high tariffs on final
goods can result in very high effective rates of protection for final goods.

-5This tendency is evident in the late nineteenth century U.S. tariff code. As Table 1
indicates, tariffs on unprocessed raw materials (such as flax and wool) were set lower than duties
on final manufactured goods. For example, the duty on unmanufactured wool was about 33
percent, while the duty on manufactured wool products was about 67 percent. According to
Hawke’s (1975) calculations, the effective rate of protection given to domestic wool
manufacturers was 229 percent in 1889. Indeed, his study confirms that, for most U.S. industries
during this period, the escalation of the tariff with the level of processing led to much higher
effective rates of protection than indicated by the nominal rate of protection. However, a critical
shortcoming of the effective rate of protection is that it does not necessarily reflect the magnitude
(or even the direction) of the underlying incentive to shift resources into import-competing
industries.3
A third measure of protection takes the price of non-traded goods as a numeraire against
which one can determine the degree of assistance given to import-competing producers and the
size of the burden placed upon export-oriented producers. The “net” or “true” rate of protection
is defined as the proportionate change in the domestic price of importables relative to nontradeable goods.4 Taking McDougall’s (1966) and Dornbusch’s (1974) work on tariffs and
non-traded goods as a point of departure, this approach focuses on how a tariff leads to excess
demand for non-traded goods, resulting in an increase in their price and an appreciation of the
3

This is a general conclusion from numerous studies in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
For a more recent discussion, see Anderson (1998).
4

Corden (1971, pp. 106ff) calls this measure “net” protection while Clement and
Sjaastad (1984) call it “true” protection. See Greenaway and Milner (1993) for a fuller
discussion of the concept, which is often examined in the context of developing countries but has
yet to be applied to the United States.

-6real exchange rate (a decline in the price of traded relative to non-traded goods) as part of the
international adjustment mechanism.
To illustrate the concept, consider a small open economy that produces exportables,
importables, and non-traded goods. The prices of the traded goods are determined on the world
market (the terms of trade), but the prices of the non-traded goods depend on domestic supply
and demand. (Thus, there are three relative prices, the terms of trade and the prices of
exportables and importables in terms of the non-tradeables.) The imposition of an import tariff
raises the domestic price of importables relative to exportables and, initially, relative to
non-traded goods as well. This higher price shifts resources into the production of importables
and out of the production of exportables and non-tradeables. It also shifts demand away from
importables toward exportables and non-traded goods. The increased demand for and reduced
supply of non-traded goods increases the price of non-traded goods in terms of exported goods
and mitigates the increase in price of importables relative to non-traded goods.
These price changes are a necessary part of the international adjustment mechanism. An
increase in the tariff reduces imports, leading to an incipient balance of trade surplus and excess
demand for non-tradeables. An appreciation of the real exchange rate (that is, an increase in the
relative price of non-traded to traded goods) is required to restore balanced trade and eliminate
the excess demand. Because of the higher price of non-tradeables, the magnitude of protection
given to domestic producers of import-competing goods is less than that indicated by the nominal
tariff rate. In addition, producers of exportables face a decline in their price relative to that of
non-tradeables.
In this framework, the net or true rate of protection is defined as the proportionate change

-7in the domestic price of importables relative to non-tradeables. The tariff increases the domestic
price of importables by (1+t), where t is the ad valorem tariff rate, which in turn increases the
domestic price of non-tradeables by (1+d), where d is the percentage increase in the price of nontraded goods. As a result, the net protection to the importables sector is t* = (PM/PN) =
(1+t)/(1+d) -1 or
(1)

t* = (t - d)/(1 + d).

Similarly, the net subsidy to the exportables sector is
(1 )

s* = (s - d)/(1 + d),

where s is the rate of export subsidy granted by the government. If s = 0, as in the late nineteenth
century, then s* reduces to -d/(1+d), which will be negative (i.e., an export tax).
For example, suppose that a 50 percent import tariff leads to a 20 percent increase in the
price of non-traded goods. This means that the net subsidy to import-competing producers as a
result of the tariff (as measured by the increase in the price of importables relative to non-traded
goods) is 25 percent, while the net tax imposed on exporters (as measured by the decline in the
price of exportables relative to non-tradeables) is 17 percent. If the price of non-traded goods
had risen by the full amount of the tariff, then the import-competing sector would have received
no protection since its relative price would not have increased.
As is often the case in tax policy, policy makers can choose the nominal rate of
protection, but cannot directly control the incidence of the tariff because they cannot influence
how much it drives up the price of non-traded goods. In terms of incidence, in the example just
considered, only 60 percent of the nominal protection actually reaches import-competing
producers as a subsidy, while 40 percent of the nominal protection falls on exporters as an

-8effective export tax. Only if the tariff has no impact on non-traded goods prices will the nominal
rate of protection translate into assistance of the same magnitude for import-competing
producers.
Furthermore, the following equilibrium relationship can be shown to hold:
(2)

PN = ωPM + (1 − ω ) PX ,

where PN is the price of non-traded goods, PM is the price of importables, PX is the price of
exportables, a ^ indicates the proportion rate of change (e.g., PX/PX). The incidence or shift
parameter

is a function of the compensated demand and supply price elasticities for non-

tradeables with respect to the three prices.5 This incidence or shift parameter

summarizes the

general equilibrium relationship between the prices of traded and non-traded goods and indicates
the degree to which importables and non-tradeables are substitutes in production and
consumption. In general,

falls between zero and one and indicates the fraction of the increase

in the price of importables (with a tariff) that spills over and increases the price of nontradeables. When

is zero, there is no change in the price of non-tradeables as a result of the

tariff and hence the price of import-competing goods rises by the amount of nominal protection.
As

approaches one, in which case PN/PN will be close to PM/PM, implying that import-

competing and non-traded goods are close substitutes in production and consumption, there will
be little net protection of importables relative to non-tradeables.
If import tariffs are the only form of trade intervention, such that there are no export

5

Specifically, = (hDM - hSM)/(hSN - hDN), where hDi and hSi and the compensated demand
and supply price elasticities for non-traded goods with respect to the price of import-competing
goods and non-traded goods, in compliance with homogeneity restrictions. See Greenaway and
Milner (1993, pp. 120-121) for further details.

-9subsidies and therefore PX/PX = 0, then from equation (2) we have:
(2 )

d=

t.

Combining equations (1) and (2 ) yields
(3)

t* = (t - t)/(1 + t).

In this equation, the net or true rate of protection hinges on the nominal rate of tariff protection
(t) and the incidence parameter ( ). Since 0
the true degree of protection (t

t* 0). If

1, the nominal rate of protection overstates
= 0, then t* = t, but as

approaches one, then t*

approaches zero.
The incidence parameter

also indicates the proportion of the tariff that is borne on

exporters as an implicit export tax. Assuming again that there are no export subsidies, then
combining equations (1 ) and (2 ) yields
(3 )
If

s* = - t/(1 + t).
= 0, then the price of exportables in terms of non-tradeables does not change and exporters

do not suffer (i.e., s* = 0), but if

> 0, then s* < 0. In the limit, if

= 1, then the price of

exportables relative to non-tradeables falls by the full extent of the tariff and a nominal tariff of a
given amount acts as an export tax of the same amount. Thus, if the tariff has a large impact on
the price of non-traded goods, the tariff simultaneously yields a low level of protection for
import-competing producers while imposing a great cost on exporters.
Figure 1 illustrates these relationships. The horizontal axis measures the relative price of
exportables in terms of non-tradeables (PX/PN) and the vertical axis measures the relative price of
importables in terms of non-tradeables (PM/PN). In the absence of any trade policy interventions,
the domestic price of importables in terms of exportables (PM/PX) is given by the world market

-10and is represented by the ray extending from the origin. The schedule HH indicates different
combinations of prices of importables and exportables (relative to non-tradeables) that clear the
market for non-tradeable goods. (If the price of importables goes up, then the price of
exportables must go down to eliminate the excess demand for non-tradeables.) The initial
equilibrium is at A where the terms-of-trade ray intersects the HH schedule.
The imposition of an ad valorem import tariff of rate t increases the domestic price of
importables relative to exportables, rotating the ray upward by the amount of the nominal tariff.
The new equilibrium point is B, where this ray intersects the HH schedule. To remove the
incipient tariff-induced trade surplus and accompanying excess demand for non-tradables, the
price of non-traded goods increases by d percent. The price of exportables relative to nontradeables falls by 1/(1+d) while the price of importables relative to non-tradeables increases by
(1+t)/(1+d).
The magnitude of the increase in price of non-tradeables is determined by the degree of
substitutability between non-tradeables and importables in production and consumption. If there
is substitutability between nontraded and traded goods, then HH is negatively sloped.6 Figure 1
also depicts two extreme cases. If importables and non-tradeables are perfect substitutes in
production and consumption ( = 1), the HH schedule is horizontal, the price of non-tradeables
increases by the full extent of the tariff, and the final equilibrium is at C. In this case, the importcompeting sector receives no protection, because its relative price did not increase, and the
burden of the tariff falls entirely on producers of exportables, whose price falls relative to non6

This figure illustrates the particular case when there is substitutability in production and
consumption for traded and non-traded goods, but no such substitution between exportables and
importables.

-11tradeables by 1/(1+t). This nominal tariff is a pure export tax with no protection for importcompeting producers relative to non-tradeables.
Alternatively, if exportables and non-tradeables are close substitutes ( = 0), the HH
schedule is vertical, the price of non-tradeables does not change, and the final equilibrium is at D.
In this case, the nominal tariff equals the net or true protection given to import-competing
producers. The price of exportables falls relative to importables, but not relative to non-traded
goods.
This framework is a useful way of thinking about the late nineteenth century American
economy for several reasons. First, the U.S. economy at this time can be viewed as being
comprised of three sectors, producing agricultural goods (exportables), manufactured goods
(importables), and non-traded goods (services). These sectors were roughly balanced in terms of
size: in 1879, agriculture and mining accounted for 33 percent of GDP, manufacturing about 23
percent of GDP, and services roughly 44 percent of GDP (Gallman 1960, Gallman and Weiss
1969). Any analysis that goes beyond a simple two-sector tradeoff between the export and
import-competing sectors and brings into account another large segment of the economy (the
non-traded services sector) is therefore historically relevant to the U.S. economy at this time.
Second, the impact of protection in raising the price of non-traded goods and inflating the
cost structure of the economy is not only commonly recognized today, but was frequently
mentioned in the late nineteenth century. The imposition of high trade barriers to protect a large
segment of the economy could not help but to have an impact on the non-traded sector of the
economy as well. Many observers recognized that increased production in import-competing
industries as a result of the tariff would create demands on resources that would increase

-12production costs and thereby mitigate the gains to domestic producers of import-competing
goods while adversely affecting exporters. The Special Commissioner for Revenue, David Wells
(1867, p. 37), wrote in his first report that a high import tariff “will soon distribute itself
throughout the whole community, and will eventually manifest itself and reappear in the shape of
an increased price for all other forms of labor and commodities; thus aggravating the very evil
which in the outset it was intended to remedy.” And William Grosvenor (1871, p. 359) noted:
“A duty on one article may not affect at all the cost of producing others. But duties on three
thousand articles, each duty being diffused in its effect through a whole community, must have
some power to increase the cost of producing every thing, and thus must not only tend to
neutralize every benefit contemplated, but to put even our natural industries at a disadvantage.”7
Third, changes in the real exchange rate were an important part of the international
adjustment mechanism in the late nineteenth century. In response to a higher tariff, an alternative
adjustment would be a nominal exchange rate appreciation, which would also lower the relative
price of tradeables. In the late nineteenth century, however, the United States was on a metallic
monetary (gold) standard for much of the period and so nominal exchange rate changes were
ruled out. Instead, changes in the domestic price level, i.e., the price of non-tradeables, were
required to remove the excess demand for non-traded goods and to restore the trade balance to its
previous level.8

7

Contemporary economists such as Taussig (1906) described the various mechanisms by
which high tariffs kept the level of U.S. wages and prices higher than they would otherwise be.
8

For a recent study on commercial policy, the real exchange rate, and non-traded goods
that uses an approach similar to the one in this paper, see Devereux and Connolly (1996).

-133. Measuring Net Protection and Tariff Incidence, circa 1885
Like the concepts of nominal and effective protection, the net or true rate of protection
can be explored with some simple calculations. Because the incidence parameter

is

determined by a complex structure of substitution relationships, a common strategy is to estimate
it indirectly by rearranging equation (2) as follows:
(4)

PN − PX = ω ( PM − PX ) ,

and estimating
(5)

log (PN/PX)t =

where

+

log (PM/PX)t +

t

,

is the elasticity of PN/PX with respect to PM/PX and is an error term. This regression

relies on the fact that the terms of trade are determined by the world market while the prices of
non-traded goods are endogenous.9
This equation focuses on how changes in the relative price of imports (as depicted by a
rotation of the ray in Figure 1) affect the relative price of non-tradeables, but excludes anything
that might change the price of domestic non-traded goods without necessarily changing the price
of imports or exports. That is, it does not account for factors that might shift the HH schedule
itself. A plausible shift variable for domestic prices (the HH schedule) is the domestic money
stock, or currency held by the public, as changes in the money supply might bring about changes
in domestic prices beyond those induced by changes in the prices of traded goods. Therefore,
equation (5) can be modified as follows:
(5 )

log (PN/PX)t =

9

+

log (PM/PX)t +

log (M/PX)t + t,

It is also equivalent to estimating log (PN)t =

+

log (PM)t + (1 - ) log (PX)t +

t

,

-14where M is the domestic monetary stock.
This method of estimating

has the advantage of requiring only time series data on

export and import prices, the price of non-tradeables, and the money supply. Lipsey (1963)
calculates export and import prices starting in 1879, as presented in U.S. Bureau of the Census
(1975), series U-226 and U-238. A series representing the price of non-traded goods is not
readily available, in part because data on the prices of such goods (which typically include
housing and other services) are scarce and have not been collected to create a separate price
index. Researchers have typically used a broad price index, such as the GDP deflator or the
consumer price index, as largely representative of non-traded goods prices in lieu of data on
purely domestic goods prices. In this case, the GDP deflator is taken from Johnston and
Williamson (2005) and the consumer price index from David and Sollar (1977). The data on the
stock of money (currency held by the public) is presented in U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975),
series X 410.
One concern about this specification is that the results from a regression based on
equation (5) or (5 ) may be spurious if the relative price series are nonstationary. In results that
are not reported, augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistics on the data series confirm that one
cannot reject the hypothesis that log (PM/PX) and log (PN/PX) using either the GDP deflator or CPI
have a unit root in levels (i.e., are nonstationary), while one can reject that hypothesis in first
difference (indicating that the series are stationary when differenced). Estimation of equation (5)
and (5 ) in levels might be appropriate if the non-stationary series are cointegrated, i.e., that there
is a long-run equilibrium relationship between the two such that a linear combination of them is
stationary; otherwise, it should be estimated in first differences to ensure that the regressors are

-15stationary.
Table 2 presents regression results for equations (5) and (5 ) in levels and first differences
for the period 1879 to 1913. The results for the levels regressions suggest that log (PN/PX) and
log (PM/PX) are not cointegrated. Using the Engle-Granger (1987) approach, the augmented
Dickey-Fuller test on the residuals of the levels regression indicates that the residuals are
nonstationary and hence the levels results are not consistent and may be spurious. (The DurbinWatson test statistic also suggests that the residuals are not stationary.)
In the first-difference regression, both the regressors and the residuals are stationary. In
estimating equation (5), both measures of non-traded goods prices produce similar point
estimates of , 0.54 in the case of the GDP deflator and 0.57 in the case of the consumer price
index. However, as noted before, these estimates may suffer from omitted variables bias because
they do not account for possible changes in domestic prices that occur independently of changes
in the prices of traded goods. Hence, results are also reported including log (M/PX) as in
equation (5 ), which appears to confirm the bias of the previous estimates. With the inclusion of
this variable, the estimate of

falls to 0.42 in the case of the GDP deflator and 0.44 in the case

of the consumer price index, while the explanatory power of the regression improves
considerably.
Taking a rough estimate of

as 0.43 along with an average tariff on total imports of 30

percent, equation (2 ) indicates that these duties would push up the price of non-tradeables by 13
percent. Is it plausible that import tariffs were at such a high level as to have raised the prices of
non-traded goods by about 13 percent? Most accounts of this period put the level of U.S. prices
as substantially higher than those in free-trade Britain. Ward and Devereux (2003, p. 832) report

-16that the prices of services (housing, domestic service, and transportation) were roughly 25
percent higher in the United States than in Britain during the late nineteenth century, despite the
similar income levels in the two countries. In 1910, the nominal dollar-sterling exchange rate
was £4.86, but Williamson (1995) calculates the purchasing power parity exchange rate was 30
percent higher at £6.35, reflecting trade impediments and higher U.S. non-traded goods prices.
These would be upper-bound indicators of the possible impact of tariffs on the price of nontradeables.
Using equations (3) and (3 ), the estimate of

at about 0.43 implies that the nominal rate

of protection of 30 percent translates into a 15 percent degree of net protection given to importcompeting producers (manufacturing) and amounts to an 11 percent effective tax on exporters
(agriculture). As expected, import tariffs were not nearly as protective as indicated by nominal or
effective rates of protection and the burden imposed on the exportables sector was significant.
These results have implications that help explain several well-known features of the
nineteenth century debate over tariff policy. The advantages effectively gained by the importcompeting producers, as compared to non-traded goods producers, was much lower than might
be deduced from the nominal rates of protection. Just as agricultural subsidies in the twentieth
century get capitalized into land values and the prices of other inputs, thereby raising farmers’
costs, the import tariffs of the late nineteenth century put upward pressure on producers’ costs by
increasing nominal wages and the prices of non-traded goods. As a result, import-competing
interests had an incentive to press for even higher tariffs to gain greater protection. This may
account for the push by manufacturing interests for even higher rates of nominal protection in the
McKinley tariff of 1890.

-17The results also indicate that exporters faced a substantial export tax, on the order of
about 11 percent. The term

indicates the fraction of protection that is borne by exporters,

meaning that about forty percent of whatever nominal import tariffs were imposed resulted in a
higher price of non-traded goods with no compensating change in the price of exportable goods.
Although the Constitution formally prohibited export taxes, agriculture faced a large, implicit
export tax as a result of the import tariffs of the day. The implicit export tax hit a broad
constituency because agricultural exports were quite diverse in the late nineteenth century,
encompassing traditional staples such as cotton and tobacco produced in the South, as well as
grains and meat products produced in many states across the Midwest. This feature of protection
may account for the general opposition of Midwestern farmers and Southern planters to the high
level of the tariff.
The framework developed above can also reveal the income transfers associated with this
incidence of protection (Clement and Sjaastad 1984, Choi and Cumming 1986).10 Table 3
presents data on the structure of the economy that is required to calculate the income transfers
between various groups. Exportable production is the fraction of GDP accounted for by
agriculture and mining, while importables production is manufacturing as a share of GDP. In
order to get a central figure around 1885, these figures are a simple average of the shares in 1879
and 1889, taken from Gallman (1960) and Gallman and Weiss (1969).11
10

Although a fully specified, multi-sector computable general equilibrium model might
yield more precise accounting of changes in income distribution, previous research has found that
this framework yields findings similar to those more complex simulations without the detailed
data requirements. See Choi and Cumming (1986).
11

One adjustment was made to these data: food-related manufacturing, such as flour and
meat production, was shifted from the importables to the exportables sector. I thank Thomas

-18Table 4 presents an intersectoral transfer matrix that records the implied income transfers
among five groups – import-competing producers, exporters, consumers, taxpayers, and the
government – as a result of the tariff policy that put average import duties at 30 percent. The
redistribution of income is calculated under the assumption of that the policy does not change
total income.12 According to these results, trade protection was responsible for reshuffling about
9 percent of GDP between various agents in the economy. The implicit export tax accompanying
the policy of import protection imposed a cost on exporters – measured as t*qX/(1- ) – that
amounted to 3.1 percent of GDP. Meanwhile, the tariff forced consumers to pay 4.1 percent of
GDP in terms of higher prices on importables, 3.3 percent of GDP going to import-competing
producers (t*qM) and 0.8 percent of GDP going to the government (t*m) in customs duties.
Turning to the beneficiaries, import-competing industries gained 3.3 percent of GDP from
consumers, while consumers gained the equivalent of 2.3 percent of GDP at the expense of
exporters by virtue of the lower prices of exportables. The government collected a total of 1.6
percent of GDP in customs revenue, which – by assumption – was returned directly to taxpayers.
The most interesting question that the transfer matrix can address is whether consumers

Weiss for suggesting this point adjustment to me.
12

The framework employed in this paper is not equipped to examine the deadweight
losses from the tariff policy. The net welfare impact (or the static deadweight loss) from trade
protection would probably be very small, perhaps just a percentage point of GDP. Even if the
United States had no tariffs, the share of trade in GDP would have been relatively small given the
large size of the U.S. economy. In addition, protection did not create many grossly inefficient
import-competing industries because free trade within the large U.S. market ensured vigorous
competition among domestic producers. Using an applied general equilibrium model of the
antebellum U.S. economy, Harley (1992) calculates that the aggregate welfare loss associated
with the tariff in 1859 was less than one percent of GDP. Like the results presented below, this
small net loss masked significant amounts of redistribution.

-19benefitted or lost from protection. Consumers gain from the lower domestic price of exportables
(by the amount t*cX/(1- )) but lose from the higher domestic price of importables (by the
amount t*cM). This gives rise to the “neoclassical ambiguity” of the standard specific factors
trade model (analyzed by Ruffin and Jones 1977) wherein the change in the real wage as a result
of the tariff hinges on the weights of goods in the consumption bundle. In this case, the
condition for consumers to gain from protection is

> cM/(cM + cX), i.e., when the incidence

parameter is greater than the share of importables in the consumption of tradeables. Thus,
consumers stand a chance of gaining from tariffs when domestic consumption of exportables is
large.
The results here indicate that consumers lost slightly as a result of protection. As the
table indicates, consumers gained 2.3 percent of GDP at the expense of exporters but paid 3.3
percent of GDP to import-competing producers (the 0.8 percent of GDP sent to the government
in the form of tariff revenue is presumed to be returned to all consumers in a lump-sum
payment). Thus, tariff protection cost consumers on net about one percent of GDP. The reason
import duties did not put a huge burden on consumers is that about 40 percent of consumption
expenditures were devoted to food, and food accounted for more than half of U.S. exports in the
mid-1880s. (After cotton, breadstuffs and meat were the largest categories of U.S. exports.)
Although these products were important exports, most domestic production was consumed at
home; for example, about three quarters of the wheat crop was for domestic consumption. About
20 percent of consumer expenditures went to clothing, the major importable in the consumption
bundle, and another 10 percent was devoted to tobacco manufactures and alcohol, both of which

-20were imported.13 Thus, as Table 4 indicates, the consumption of importables as a share of GDP
exceeded that of exportables, but consumer spending was not highly skewed toward expenditures
on importables.14
Even if the net effect of protection on consumers was negative, consumers-cum-taxpayers
could have gained from protection on the assumption that all the revenues from import duties
(some of which are paid by exporters, not just consumers) were returned to consumers as a lumpsum rebate or exchanged for lower domestic taxes that financed public goods.15 Consumerscum-taxpayers gain whenever the shift parameter exceeds the share of production of importables
in the total production of tradeables, i.e.,

> qM/(qM + qX), a condition that does not quite hold.

Table 4 indicates that consumers lost 4.1 percent of GDP as a result of protection but gained 3.9
in government transfers, amounting to a net loss of just 0.2 percent of GDP. Thus, the overall
effect of tariff protection on consumers as taxpayers was roughly neutral.
If the impact of tariffs on consumers as taxpayers, as a broad class (and not in their role as
producers), was roughly neutral, it would have been difficult to mobilize them to oppose the
policy. In fact, in the 1888 presidential election fought largely over the tariff issue, the voting

13

Various consumer expenditure surveys of the 1870s and 1880s indicate budget shares
of about 42 percent for food, 10 percent for tobacco and alcohol, 18 percent for housing, 20
percent for clothing, and 10 percent for other items (Ward and Devereux 2003, p. 833).
14

Of course, either a different trade pattern or a different consumption pattern would
have produced a different result in terms of the impact on consumers. Consumers in Britain, like
those in the United States, devoted a large share of their expenditures to food, but consumers had
a strong interest in free trade because the country was a net food importer during the nineteenth
century.
15

This assumption does not, strictly speaking, hold because the revenues from the import
duties were largely redistributed to specific groups, such as Civil War veterans in the North.

-21electorate was closely divided but voted slightly more for the tariff-reform candidate. The
incumbent Democratic president, Grover Cleveland, who wanted to reduce tariff rates, received
48.6 percent of the vote, while his pro-tariff Republican rival, Benjamin Harrison, received 47.8
percent of the vote. However, given the geographic distribution of these votes, Harrison won the
electoral college by 233 to 168 and thus became president.16 The extremely close popular vote
could be interpreted as indicating that the electorate was equally divided on the tariff question,
consistent with the distributional effects here on consumers.
As a check on these results, we can use other data to assess the validity of the magnitude
of the transfers reported here. The most transparent transfer is from the government to taxpayers.
In the mid-1880s, the government collected about $200 million in tariff revenue, about 1.7
percent of GDP at that time, taking nominal GDP as about $12 billion (U.S. Bureau of the
Census 1975, series U-210). This is close to the 1.6 percent of GDP indicated in these
calculations.
One aspect of these calculations that might alter the magnitude of the implied transfers is
the production of exportables and importables as a share of GDP. If not all agricultural and
mining production was linked (by prices) to export markets, and not all manufacturing
production influenced by import competition, then these shares could exaggerate the size of the
tradeable goods sector of the U.S. economy and inflate the size of the transfers.

4. An Antebellum Comparison
Although this paper has focused on the impact of the tariff in the late nineteenth century
16

See Rietano (1994) for a detailed study of the 1888 political debate over tariff policy.

-22United States, a topic that has been relatively neglected, this framework can also be used to shed
some light on the antebellum period. Given the sharp political conflicts between the North and
the South over tariff policy, the connections between the tariff and income distribution prior to
the Civil War has long been of interest to economic historians. Pope (1972), James (1986), and
Harley (1992) all employed computable general equilibrium models of varying degrees of
sophistication to examine the impact of the tariff prior to the Civil War (specifically, in 1859, in
the case of James and Harley).
The framework of net protection provides a much simpler, but also much less detailed,
approach to the questions posed in those models.17 Two key differences promise to make the
results dissimilar from the late nineteenth century. First, the incidence parameter
to be higher in the antebellum period. As

is expected

also represents the degree of substitutability between

traded and non-traded goods, a value closer to one than to zero implies somewhat more
substitutability between importables and non-tradeables than between exportables and nontradeables. In the antebellum period, exports consisted largely of cotton and tobacco produced
on Southern plantations, and the concentration of exports in traditional goods (i.e., raw material
or natural resource intensive primary products) are typically less substitutable with nontradeables than are importables and non-tradeables.18 Second, the structure of the economy was
different prior to the Civil War. Although exports and imports as a percent of GDP were
17

An advantage of the net protection framework used in this paper is that the data
requirements and modeling assumptions are much less severe than in computable general
equilibrium models, although the results are also much less detailed.
18

Most studies find much higher estimates of for countries where traditional exports
dominate. In the late nineteenth century, the U.S. export bundle was a mix of traditional and
non-traditional exports, and hence should be lower.

-23comparable, production of exportables (agriculture) was a larger and production of importables
(manufactures) was a smaller part of the economy.
The results for the antebellum period will be presented with greater brevity than those
above. North (1966) calculated export and import prices for the period, the money stock is from
Temin (1969), and once again the GDP deflator is taken from Johnston and Williamson (2005)
and the consumer price index from David and Sollar (1977). Like the findings in the previous
section, the three variables – log (PM/PX) and log (PN/PX) using either the GDP deflator or the
CPI– are nonstationary in levels but are stationary in first differences for the period 1815 to 1860.
(These results are not reported but are available upon request.) Like the post bellum period, the
levels regressions suggest that log (PN/PX) and log (PM/PX) are not cointegrated and hence those
regression results are not consistent.
In the first-difference regressions, both the regressors and the residuals are stationary. In
the first-difference estimate of equation (5 ), the point estimates of

are 0.65 (with a standard

error of 0.06) using the GDP deflator and 0.78 (with a standard error of 0.08) using the consumer
price index. Taking a rough estimate of

as 0.70 along with an average tariff on all imports of

20 percent in late 1850s, equation (2 ) indicates that this tariff would push up the price of
non-tradeables by 14 percent. This implies that the net protection given to import-competing
producers (manufacturing) was just 5 percent and the effective tax on exporters (agriculture) was
12 percent. The higher estimate of

implies a large impact on the price of non-traded goods and

confirms what Southerners complained fiercely about the time, that a burden of the tariff was
largely shifted onto Southern exporters through higher prices of importables and non-traded
goods.

-24Table 5 presents the structure of the economy in 1850 and Table 6 presents the implied
transfers.19 Three differences stand out in comparison to the late nineteenth century period.
First, the magnitude of the total transfers was less in the antebellum period, perhaps because the
average tariff (after the early 1830s) was lower than in the Gilded Age. Second, despite that,
transfers from exporters were greater in the antebellum period than later. The greater resources
squeezed from exporters combined with a greater commodity and geographic concentration of
those exporters in the South made the tariff even more controversial in the antebellum period.
Third, unlike the later period, consumers in the antebellum period appear to gain from the tariff
because domestic consumption of exportables (agriculture) was greater while consumption of
importables (manufactures) was lower as a percent of GDP.20 These results may be somewhat
misleading in that the major exportables were cotton and tobacco, and at least the former was not
directly purchased by consumer households but by textile firms in the North.
The Table 6 results can be compared with those in Harley’s (1992) general equilibrium
calculations (in his tables 4 and 7). Perhaps because the categories are not exactly comparable,
the similarity in the results is mixed. Harley finds a much smaller positive impact of the tariff on
the price of non-traded goods, only about three to six percent, as opposed to the 14 percent here.
He also estimates that labor as a whole loses a small amount (about 0.5 percent) from the tariff
19

Due to the availability of greater data, previous work, such as Pope, James, and Harley,
cited above, also focused on the late antebellum period even though the most contentious debates
over the tariff were in the 1820s and early 1830s.
20

The most transparent transfer for which other data can be used to assess the validity of
the transfer magnitudes is that from the government to taxpayers. Around 1850, the government
collected about $40 to $50 million in tariff revenue, about 1.5 percent of GDP at that time, taking
nominal GDP as about $2.4 billion (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1975, series U-210). This is
reasonably close to the 1.0 percent of GDP indicated in these calculations.

-25whereas a non-trivial gain to consumers is estimated here (about 2 percent of GDP). This
difference may be due to the different assumptions about the consumption bundle, as households
were not the direct consumers of exportables such as cotton. However, Harley’s estimate of the
tariff’s burden on farmers and planters is closer to that found here; he estimates a loss of about
two to three percent of GDP for farmers and planters (exporters) while the results here indicate it
is about four percent. His gains to capital (an import-competing factor) are only about 0.4
percent of GDP whereas here they amount to about one percent of GDP.

5. Conclusions
This paper examined the issue of tariff incidence in the late nineteenth century United
States. Several findings give us insight into some of the important features of American trade
politics in the late nineteenth century. First, although the nominal level of protection was very
high to judge by legislated tariff rates, the net protection given to import-competing
manufacturers was diminished by the tariff-induced increase in the price of non-traded goods.
The calculations presented here suggest that the 30 percent average tariff on total imports
resulted in net protection of just 15 percent for import-competing producers (manufacturers) and
an export tax of 11 percent on export-oriented producers (agriculture). This low level of net
protection gave these manufacturers an ongoing incentive to press for higher duties to increase
their level of support.
Second, the tariff redistributed substantial amounts of income among various producer
groups and consumers. In addition, the burden of the tariff on exporters exceeded the benefits
received by import-competing producers. The sizeable redistribution brought about by the

-26protectionist trade policy justified its status as one of the most highly controversial issues in
national political during this period. Both the desirability and the efficiency of the transfers were
leading political issues.
Third, the policy of tariff protection appears to have been negative with respect to
consumers but roughly neutral with respect to consumers as taxpayers. Consumers do not bear
an enormous burden from the high tariff rates because of the large weight on exportable goods
(principally food) in domestic consumer expenditures. The political implication is that tariff
opponents would not be able to generate much support for their position by appealing to
consumer interests, and in fact the pro-tariff Republicans dominated national politics for many
decades after the Civil War.
Fourth, in the antebellum period, the incidence of the tariff was higher on the exportables
sector. Although the total transfers as a result of the tariff were lower than in the late nineteenth
century, the cost to the exportables sector was greater than in the post bellum period. Because
the production of export crops was highly concentrated in the South, states such as South
Carolina vehemently argued that the tariff was a sectional policy, making trade policy even more
politically divisive than in the late nineteenth century.

-27References
Anderson, James E. “Effective Protection Redux.” Journal of International Economics 44
(February 1998): 21-44.
Choi, Kwang-Ho, and Tracey A. Cumming. “Who Pays for Protection in Australia?” Economic
Record 62 (December 1986): 490-496.
Clements, Kenneth W., and Larry A. Sjaastad. How Protection Taxes Exporters. Thames Essay
No. 39. London: Trade Policy Research Centre, 1984.
Corden, W. M. The Theory of Protection. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971.
David, Paul, and Peter Solar. “A Bicentenary Contribution to the History of the Cost of Living in
America.” In Research in Economic History. Greenwich: JAI Press, 1977.
DeLong, J. Bradford. “Trade Policy and America’s Standard of Living: An Historical
Perspective.” In Imports, Exports, and the American Worker, edited by Susan Collins.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1998.
Devereux, John, and Michael Connolly. “Commercial Policy, the Terms of Trade, and the Real
Exchange Rate Revisited.” Journal of Development Economics 50 (June 1996): 81-99.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. “Tariffs and Nontraded Goods.” Journal of International Economics 4
(May 1974): 177-185.
Engle, Robert E and Clive W. J. Granger. “Cointegration and Error-Correction: Representation,
Estimation, and Testing.” Econometrica 55 (March 1987): 251-76.
Gallman, Robert E. “Commodity Output, 1839-1899.” In William Parker (ed.), Trends in the
American Economy in the Nineteenth Century. Princeton: Princeton University Press (for
NBER), 1960.
Gallman, Robert E., and Thomas J. Weiss. “The Service Industries in the Nineteenth Century.”
In Production and Productivity in the Service Industries, edited by Victor Fuchs. New York:
Columbia University Press (for NBER), 1969.
Greenaway, David, and Chris Milner. Trade and Industrial Policy in Developing Countries.
London: Macmillan, 1993.
Grosvenor, W. M. Does Protection Protect? New York: Appleton, 1871.

-28Harley, C. Knick. “The Antebellum American Tariff: Food Exports and Manufacturing.”
Explorations in Economic History 29 (October 1992): 375-400.
Hawke, G. R. “The United States Tariff and Industrial Production in the Late Nineteenth
Century.” Economic History Review 28 (February 1975): 84-99.
Head, Keith. “Infant Industry Protection in the Steel Rail Industry.” Journal of International
Economics 37 (November 1994): 141-165.
Irwin, Douglas A. “Did Late Nineteenth Century U.S. Tariffs Promote Infant Industries?
Evidence from the Tinplate Industry.” Journal of Economic History 60 (June 2000): 335-360.
Irwin, Douglas A. “Could the United States Iron Industry Have Survived Free Trade after the
Civil War?” Explorations in Economic History 37 (July 2000): 278-99.
James, John A. “The Welfare Effects of the Antebellum Tariff: A General Equilibrium
Analysis.” Explorations in Economic History 15 (July 1978): 231-56.
Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson. “The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for the
United States, 1790 - Present.” Economic History Services, October 2005, URL:
http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/
Lipsey, Robert E. Price and Quantity Trends in the Foreign Trade of the United States.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.
McDougall, I. A. “Tariffs and Relative Prices.” Economic Record 42 (June 1966): 219-242.
North, Douglass C. The Economic Growth of the United States, 1790-1860. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1966.
Phillips, P. C. B., and S. Ouliaris. “Asymptotic Properties of Residual Based Tests for
Cointegration.” Econometrica 58 (January 1990): 165–193.
Pope, Clayne. “The Impact of the Ante-Bellum Tariff on Income Distribution.” Explorations in
Economic History 9 (Summer 1972): 375-421.
Reitano, Joanne R. The Tariff Question in the Gilded Age: The Great Debate of 1888.
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994.
Ruffin, Roy, and Ronald Jones. “Protection and Real Wages: The Neoclassical Ambiguity.”
Journal of Economic Theory 14 (April, 1977): 337-348.
Taussig, Frank. “Wages and Prices in Relation to International Trade.” Quarterly Journal of

-29Economics 20 (August 1906): 497-522.
Temin, Peter. The Jacksonian Economy. New York: Norton, 1969.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1975.
Ward, Marianne, and John Devereux. “Measuring British Decline: Direct versus Long-Span
Income Measures.” Journal of Economic History 63 (September 2003): 826-851.
Wells, David A. Report of the Special Commissioner of the Revenue. Senate Executive
Document No. 2. 39th Congress, 2d Session. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1867.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. “The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background
Evidence and Hypotheses.” Explorations in Economic History 32 (1995): 141-196.

-30Table 1: Average Tariffs on Imported Goods in 1885
Category

Average Import Tariff
(percentage)

Breadstuffs

16

Chemicals, drugs, dyes, etc.

32

Cotton manufactures

40

Earthen, stone, and chinaware

56

Fruit, nuts, etc.

28

Flax, hemp, jute, unmanufactured

16

Flax, hemp, jute manufactures

34

Glass manufactures

59

Iron and steel manufactures

35

Leather manufactures

28

Silk manufactures

50

Distilled spirits, liquors, wine

77

Sugar, confectionery, molasses

70

Tobacco manufactures

81

Wool, unmanufactured

33

Wool manufactures

67

All other dutiable articles

25

Total, Dutiable Merchandise

46

Total, All Imported Merchandise

31

Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States (1901), pp. 239-248.

-31Table 2: Estimates of the Incidence Parameter

log(PGDP/PX)
Levels

log(PCPI/PX)

First Differences

Levels

First Differences

log(PM/PX)

0.69*
(0.01)

0.80*
(0.10)

0.54*
(0.12)

0.42*
(0.10)

0.95*
(0.16)

1.05*
(0.13)

0.57*
(0.11)

0.44*
(0.10)

log(M/PX)

--

0.11*
(0.02)

--

0.32*
(0.10)

--

0.09*
(0.03)

--

0.36*
(0.09)

Adj. R2

0.37

0.68

0.25

0.51

0.47

0.59

0.33

0.43

DW

0.35

0.75

1.88

1.45

0.05

0.72

2.02

1.32

ADF test statistic on
residuals

-2.13

-2.65

-6.14*

-4.77*

-3.07

-2.64

-5.85*

-4.48*

Note: Time period: 1879 - 1913. Constant term not reported. * indicates significance at the 1 percent level. Standard errors have
been corrected for heteroskedasticity. See text for data sources. ADF test statistics from Phillips and Ouliaris (1990).

-32Table 3: U.S. Economic Structure, c. 1885 (percent of GDP)
Exportable Production (qX)

27

Importable Production (qM)

22

Non-tradeable Production

51

Exports (x)

7

Imports (m)

5

Consumption of Exportables (cX = qX - x)

20

Consumption of Importables (cM = qM + m)

27

Source: Exportables includes agriculture, mining, and related manufactures (flour and grist mill
products, slaughtering and meat packing, cheese, butter and milk products); importables includes
manufacturing (excluding those in exportables), and non-tradeables includes construction and
services. The sectoral shares as a percent of GDP are an average of 1879 and 1889 in Gallman
(1960), Table A-1, and Gallman and Weiss (1969), Table A-1, with additional detail from the
Census of Manufactures for 1880 and 1890. Exports and imports from U.S. Bureau of the
Census (1975), series U 191, 194.
Table 4: Intersectoral Transfers c. 1885 (as a percent of GDP)

ImportCompeting
Industries

Consumers

Taxpayers

Government

Total

Exporters

0.0

2.3

0.0

0.8

3.1

Consumers

3.3

–

0.0

0.8

4.1

Government

0.0

0.0

1.6

--

1.6

Total

3.3

2.3

1.6

1.6

8.7

From

To

Note: Based on Table 3, = 0.43, and t = 0.30, which yields t* = 0.15 and s* = -0.11. Figures
may not sum to totals due to rounding.

-33Table 5: U.S. Economic Structure in 1850 (percent of GDP)
Exportable Production (qX)

36

Importable Production (qM)

19

Non-tradeable Production

45

Exports (x)

6

Imports (m)

7

Consumption of Exportables (cX = qX - x)

30

Consumption of Importables (cM = qM + m)

26

Source: Exportables includes agriculture, importables includes manufacturing, and nontradeables includes mining, construction, and services. The sectoral shares as a percent of GDP
are in Gallman (1960), Table A-1, and Gallman and Weiss (1969), Table A-1. Exports and
imports from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series U 191, 194.
Table 6: Intersectoral Transfers in 1850 (as a percent of GDP)

ImportCompeting
Industries

Consumers

Taxpayers

Government

Total

Exporters

0.0

3.7

0.0

0.7

4.4

Consumers

1.0

–

0.0

0.4

1.4

Government

0.0

0.0

1.1

--

1.1

Total

1.0

3.7

1.1

1.1

6.9

From

To

Note: Based on Table 6, and = 0.70, t = 0.20, which yields t* = 0.05 and s* = -0.12. Figures
may not sum to totals due to rounding.

-34Figure 1: Import Tariffs and Relative Prices

