                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DOES CHILD ABUSE CAUSE CRIME?

                                               Janet Currie
                                               Erdal Tekin

                                          Working Paper 12171
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12171


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




We would like to thank Neil Guterman, Christina Paxson, Chris Ruhm, Joyce Tabor, Volkan Topalli, and
participants in seminars at the City University of New York, Columbia's School Social Work, Columbia's
Teachers College, 2005 Population Association of America Meetings, 2005 IZA/SOLE Meetings, 2005 SEA
Meetings, Georgia State University, MDRC, University of Illinois at Chicago, and Koc University for helpful
comments. Roy Wada provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does Child Abuse Cause Crime?
Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 12171
April 2006
JEL No. I1, K4

                                            ABSTRACT

Child maltreatment, which includes both child abuse and child neglect, is a major social problem.
This paper focuses on measuring the effects of child maltreatment on crime using data from the
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). We focus on crime because it is
one of the most socially costly potential outcomes of maltreatment, and because the proposed
mechanisms linking maltreatment and crime are relatively well elucidated in the literature. Our work
addresses many limitations of the existing literature on child maltreatment. First, we use a large
national sample, and investigate different types of abuse in a similar framework. Second, we pay
careful attention to identifying the causal impact of abuse, by using a variety of statistical methods
that make differing assumptions. These methods include: Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), propensity
score matching estimators, and twin fixed effects. Finally, we examine the extent to which the effects
of maltreatment vary with socio-economic status (SES), gender, and the severity of the maltreatment.
We find that maltreatment approximately doubles the probability of engaging in many types of
crime. Low SES children are both more likely to be mistreated and suffer more damaging effects.
Boys are at greater risk than girls, at least in terms of increased propensity to commit crime. Sexual
abuse appears to have the largest negative effects, perhaps justifying the emphasis on this type of
abuse in the literature. Finally, the probability of engaging in crime increases with the experience of
multiple forms of maltreatment as well as the experience of Child Protective Services (CPS)
investigation.

Janet Currie                                           Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Columbia University                                    Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
420 W 118th St.                                        Georgia State University
New York, NY 10027                                     P.O. Box 3992
and NBER                                               Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
jc2663@columbia.edu                                    and NBER
                                                       tekin@gsu.edu
1. Introduction

       Child maltreatment, which includes both child abuse and child neglect, is a major social

problem. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1996), over a

million children are victims of maltreatment annually. Over half a million children suffer serious

injuries, and about 1,500 children die, making child maltreatment the leading cause of deaths

from injuries in children over a year old (Institute of Medicine, 1999). In addition to this

appalling immediate toll, child abuse is thought to have many harmful long-term consequences.

       This paper focuses on the effect of child maltreatment on crime using data from the

National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health). We focus on crime because it

is one of the most socially costly potential outcomes of maltreatment, and because the proposed

mechanisms linking maltreatment and crime are relatively well elucidated in the literature. The

link between child maltreatment and crime is a staple of the news media. For example, the

media noted that John Muhammad, the Washington D.C. sniper, was “regularly and severely

beaten as a child by several relatives, including an uncle who beat another child to death…”

(CNN, February 10, 2004). Child neglect is also often implicated. Neighbors of a nine-year-

old who stabbed her best friend to death were reported to have “angrily blamed the young

attacker’s absent, alcoholic mother yesterday for the Memorial Day tragedy” (The New York

Post, June 1, 2005). Yet there is little hard evidence available about the effects of child

maltreatment on crime, and there is criticism of the extent to which a “cycle of violence” has

been substantiated in the literature (c.f. Widom, 1989a).

       Our work addresses many limitations of the existing literature on child maltreatment.

First, according to the National Research Council (NRC) (1993) most studies focus on one type

of maltreatment (most often sexual abuse). Little is known about how the effects of different




                                                  1
types of abuse compare (Rebellon and Van Gundy, 2005). We will examine the effects of

different types of abuse in a similar framework. Second, most studies are based on clinical data

and convenience samples. In contrast, we use data from a national survey that includes a large

“control” group of children who were neither maltreated nor committed crime.1 To our

knowledge, this is the first study of the effect of child abuse on future criminality in the

economics literature.

        Third, the NRC panel noted that “Distinguishing consequences that are associated

directly with the experience of child maltreatment itself rather than other social disorders is a

daunting task for the research investigator” (NRC 1993, page 209). We attack the problem of

isolating the causal effects of maltreatment by comparing estimates obtained using several

different estimation methods all of which rely on differing assumptions. These methods include:

Ordinary Least Squares (OLS), propensity score matching estimators, and twin fixed effects.

We will show that the estimates are remarkably similar, regardless of estimation method.

        Fourth, the NRC noted that while poor families are over-represented in the caseloads of

child protective services, there has been little investigation of the extent to which the

consequences of maltreatment vary with socio-economic status (SES). Higher SES children

have better outcomes in many respects (c.f. Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002; Currie and

Stabile, 2003), and it is possible that high SES is also protective against the effects of abuse.

We look at this question and at whether the relationship between maltreatment and crime differs

1
  Administrative data on maltreatment and criminality capture only a fraction of all abuses and criminal
behaviors because not all maltreatment or criminal activity are reported to or captured by government
agencies. Administrative data sets often also contain only limited information on important mediating
factors such as family and socio-economic background. Furthermore, families about whom there are
official records may be those more likely to come to the attention of official agencies, and thus may be an
unrepresentative sample of families in which child abuse occurs (Smith and Thornberry, 1995). Rebellon
and Van Gundy (2005) underscore the fact that little previous research has employed nationally
representative samples.



                                                     2
for males and females. Most research has concentrated on males primarily because of lack of

data and because males commit most of the serious predatory and violent offenses. This has

resulted in a gap in our understanding of the risk factors for criminal behavior for males versus

females, which may hamper efforts to develop differential preventive strategies (Farrington and

Painter, 2004).

       While there are limitations of using large national data sets (primarily, the relative

crudeness of the available measures of maltreatment), our work is a potentially important

complement to small-scale studies that use more detailed measures. The key questions we

address, including the identification of causal effects of maltreatment and potential differences

by socio-economic status, are unlikely to be settled by research using small samples of children

who are suspected of having been abused or who have already committed crimes. Moreover,

even prospective longitudinal studies must often rely on proxy measures of abuse (such as harsh

parenting) given the legal and moral requirement to report and intervene if maltreatment is

known to have occurred.

       We find remarkably large and robust effects of maltreatment on a range of different

measures of criminal activity. Being maltreated approximately doubles the probability of

engaging in many types of crime. Low SES children are both at higher risk of maltreatment,

and suffer more negative effects. Boys appear to be at greater risk than girls, at least in terms of

increased propensity to some types of crimes such as assault, and in terms of propensity to be

convicted of crimes. Finally, sexual abuse appears to have the largest negative effects, perhaps

justifying the emphasis on this type of abuse in the literature.

       In Section 2, we provide a brief discussion of the mechanisms through which abuse may

cause crime later in life and summarize the literature on the subject. We then describe our data




                                                  3
in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the methodology. The results are presented in Section 5.

Section 6 concludes the paper.



2. Background

a) Why Would Maltreatment Cause Crime?

       Social scientists have developed a number of theories about the relationship between

maltreatment and crime. Brezina (1998) indicates that the most dominant are Social Learning

Theory (Akers, 1985; Bandura, 1973), Social Control Theory (also referred to as Social Bonding

Theory; Hirschi, 1969), and Social Psychological Strain Theory (Agnew, 1992, 2005).

       Social Learning Theory (SLT) maintains that children develop patterns of violent or

delinquent behavior through imitation. These behaviors are observed by children to result in

positive outcomes (e.g., control over others, or the acquisition of material or social benefits) (see

Gershoff, 2002; Widom, 1998; Garland and Dougher, 1990; Walters and Grusec, 1977).

       Social Control Theory (SCT) assumes that individuals have a natural tendency towards

crime and violence which is restrained by their social bonds. By disrupting these bonds,

maltreatment by caregivers makes individuals more likely to offend (see Zingraff, Leiter,

Johnsen, and Myers, 1994; Sampson and Laub, 1993).

       Social-Psychological Strain Theory (SPST) focuses on maltreatment as a source of acute

stress (Agnew 1992, 2005). Many studies examine the relationships between maltreatment and

outcomes such as behavior problems, developmental delays, and changes in brain functioning

(e.g. elevated cortisol levels) that may permanently alter the way that individuals respond to

environmental stimuli (c.f. Veltman and Browne, 2001; Cicchetti and Rogosch, 2001). These

studies suggest that maltreatment could predispose a child to risky, self-destructive or aggressive




                                                  4
behaviors. Claussen and Crittenden (1991) and Deblinger et al. (1989) document high rates of

post-traumatic stress syndrome among children who have been abused, and Widom (1994)

suggests that stress during critical periods may have an important impact on the development of

aggressive behavior in adolescents.

       There has been surprisingly little discussion of an economic approach to the relationship

between maltreatment and crime. Studies of the economics of crime suggest that many

individuals engage in crime because they do not have good market alternatives (c.f. Freeman,

1999). Hence, if maltreatment reduces human capital accumulation, or otherwise impairs an

individual’s ability to succeed in life, it may increase the risk that the individual engages in

crime. Slade and Wissow (2005) use the Add Health data and models with family fixed effects

to examine the effect of maltreatment reported in Wave III on some measures of academic

functioning and a composite measure of delinquency that were obtained in Wave I, when

children were still in the 6th to 12th grades. They find that maltreatment was related to higher

absenteeism and more problems completing home work, but do not find any effect on

delinquency.

       We have re-examined these relationships and find even stronger evidence of poor

academic functioning as of Wave I in children who later say that they were maltreated. These

children have lower grade point averages, are more likely to have repeated grades, and are more

likely to have been suspended or expelled from school. We also looked at wages as of Wave III

and found little effect. However, in a sample this young it is difficult to interpret this finding as

some of the worst-abused children may not be working, and others may be out of the labor

market because they are in school. We conclude that it is plausible that an economic model of

crime can explain our findings, but that we have no definitive proof.




                                                  5
b) Prior Evidence about the Effects of Maltreatment on Crime and Related Behaviors

       Several recent studies have examined the long-term consequences of child maltreatment

using designs that are more sophisticated than those critiqued by the NRC panel. The first group

establishes a cross-sectional relationship between past experiences of maltreatment and other

adverse events, and current risky behaviors/outcomes. For example, Felitti (1998) and Dube et

al. (2003a) show that adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) increase the risk for depressed

affect, suicide attempts, multiple sexual partners, sexually transmitted diseases, smoking, and

alcoholism. Dube et al. (2003b) provides further evidence about the relationship between ACEs

and adult use of illicit drugs, while Hillis et al. (2004) report on the relationship between ACEs

and teen pregnancy.

       While provocative, these relationships do not necessarily imply that ACE’s cause risky

behaviors, however. If, for example, poverty is associated with ACE’s then the fact that people

with ACE’s have higher rates of criminal activity could actually reflect a causal relationship

between poverty and involvement in crime. Moreover, many ACE studies aggregate

maltreatment with other forms of household dysfunction rather than trying to separately identify

the effect of maltreatment. Some studies that describe themselves as “longitudinal” also rely on

an essentially cross sectional comparison between adults who say they were abused at some

point before the study began, and other adults (c.f. Silverman et al. 1996).

       A second group of studies control for family background factors such as poverty by using

samples of twins in which one twin was maltreated and the other was not. Nelson et al. (2002),

Kendler et al. (2000) and Dinwiddie et al. (2000) all use this design to examine the effects of

child sexual abuse. The first two studies conclude that while some of the observed relationship




                                                 6
between maltreatment and negative outcomes is due to shared family background variables,

maltreated twins in discordant pairs are more likely than their twins to suffer negative outcomes.

However, Dinwiddie finds no differences between twins in discordant pairs.

       Twin studies highlight the importance of controlling adequately for family background

when attempting to identify the causal effects of maltreatment. But twin studies are likely to

under-estimate the causal effects of abuse for two reasons. First, to the extent that there is

random error in reports of abuse, estimates from twin models will be biased towards zero. (This

is because twin comparisons rely on discordant reports, and reporting errors will create spurious

differences). Second, the occurrence of abuse in a household may traumatize all children in the

household. In addition, there may be few pairs of twins with discordant reports of maltreatment.

We will also use a “twins design” as one of our methods, and will interpret any significant

effects from these models as lower bounds on the effects of maltreatment.

       One of the best known studies of the long term effects of maltreatment is by Widom

(1989b) who matched a sample of 908 children with substantiated cases of maltreatment to

controls who were selected to be similar in terms of age, sex, race, and socioeconomic status.

(No direct measures of SES were available, so Widom matched children who attended similar

schools). This study is unusual in that it distinguished between physical abuse, neglect, and

sexual abuse, and also involved long-term follow up of the subjects. She finds substantial

effects of both abuse and neglect on arrest both as a juvenile and as an adult: Being abused or

neglected as a child increases an individual’s risk for an arrest as a juvenile by 53 percent,

increases the probability of arrest as an adult by 38 percent, and increases the probability of an

arrest for a violent crime by 38 percent. However, matching on a small number of observable

traits provides no guarantee that the controls are really similar to the “experimental” group in




                                                  7
terms of unmeasured as well as measured characteristics. Widom also points out that the

limitations of relying on administrative data from an era in which mandatory reporting of child

abuse did not exist. We believe that it is useful to try to replicate Widom’s results using

nationally representative data (hers were from a mid-western town) and alternative statistical

methods.

       Appendix Table 5 summarizes some well known studies. Most studies employ a similar

methodology. A logistic regression is estimated on a crime variable, mostly official arrest

records. The key covariates are the binary measures of child abuse, mostly sexual abuse and

physical abuse. The endogeneity of abuse is either not addressed or it is dealt with by matching

treatments to controls on the basis of a small set of observables. There is substantial variation in

the estimated effects due to different designs, data sets, and sample compositions.



c) Gender Differences in Criminal Behavior

       There are well-known gender differences in the propensities of males and females to

engage in serious crime (Lanctot and LeBlanc, 2002) but there is little evidence about the ways

that risk factors such as maltreatment differ between males and females. We also know little

about whether socio-economic and family risk factors are more important for males or for

females. Rivera and Widom (1990) examine the link between childhood abuse and neglect and

later violent criminality. The authors find that maltreated males were at greater risk of

committing a violent offense than a matched control group while this was not true among

females. However, Maxfield and Widom (1996) found that abused and neglected females were

at a greater risk of arrest for violence than control females whereas the relationship was barely

significant for maltreated males. Rowe et al. (1995) examined siblings in 418 families




                                                 8
interviewed by telephone and concluded that males were more likely to engage in crime because

they were exposed to more risk factors. In one of the most comprehensive studies investigating

gender differences in risk factors for criminal behavior, Moffitt et al. (2001) followed 1,037

people from age three to age 21 in New Zealand. The researchers found little difference in the

determinants of delinquency among males and females—both sexes were more likely to be

delinquent if their mothers were critical and uncaring, if their mothers gave harsh and

inconsistent discipline, or if they grew up in advantaged households.



d) Effects of SES on Maltreatment

       Many studies have documented a relationship between poverty and child maltreatment

which is hypothesized to work by increasing stress on both parents and children (c.f. Pelton,

1994 for a review, or Drake and Pandey, 1996 who find that neighborhood poverty is most

strongly related to neglect). Paxson and Waldfogel (1999, 2002) find that higher rates of

poverty and unemployment are linked to a higher incidence of child maltreatment and neglect,

and that reductions in welfare benefits are also associated with large increases in substantiated

instances of neglect. Similarly, Coulton et al. (1995) find that children in neighborhoods

characterized by poverty, turnover, and high concentrations of female-headed families are at

greater risk of maltreatment. Brown et al. (1998) report that maternal youth was one of the

strongest predictors of subsequent maltreatment. However, these studies rely on aggregate Child

Protective Services data on incidence, and poor parents may be both more likely to be accused of

child maltreatment and less able to defend themselves against such charges. Thus, it is important

to ask using individual-level data whether measures of socioeconomic status do actually increase

the risk of child maltreatment, and mediate its effects.




                                                  9
        In their review of the literature, Malinosky-Rummell and Hansen (1993) note that “The

moderating effect of SES on long-term consequences has not yet been investigated” (page 76).

In one of the few studies to directly address this issue using individual-level data, Trickett, et al.

(1991) compared two groups of children with different backgrounds and found that in contrast to

the assumption implicit in Malinosky-Rummell and Hansen’s statement (that higher SES is

always protective), the effects of abuse were generally worse in the higher SES group (perhaps

because these children have more to loose).



3. Data

        Add Health was specifically designed to investigate adolescents'health and risk

behaviors.2 It is considered the largest and most comprehensive survey of adolescents ever

undertaken. A stratified sample of 80 high schools were selected to be representative of the U.S.

school system with respect to region of country, urbanicity, school size, school type, and

ethnicity. For each of these 80 schools, another school, called a feeder school, was selected on

the basis of its student contribution to the high school. Therefore, the school-based sample is

2
  The Add Health project is a program project designed by J. Richard Udry (PI) and Peter
Bearman, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development to the Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, with cooperative funding participation by the National Cancer Institute; the National
Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders; the National Institute on Drug Abuse; the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences; the National Institute of Mental Health; the National Institute of
Nursing Research; the Office of AIDS Research, NIH; the Office of Behavior and Social Science
Research, NIH; the Office of the Director, NIH; the Office of Research on Women'    s Health, NIH;
the Office of Population Affairs, DHHS; the National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS; the Office of Minority Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, DHHS; the Office of Minority Health, Office of Public Health and
Science, DHHS; the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, DHHS; and
the National Science Foundation. Persons interested in obtaining data files from The National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health should contact Add Health Project, Carolina Population
Center, 123 West Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (email: addhealth@unc.edu). More
information on the design of Add Health can be found at
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design.


                                                   10
based on 80 pairs of schools.3 An in-school questionnaire was administered to more than 90,000

students (virtually all students) in these sampled schools between September 1994 and April

1995. A random sample of some 200 students was selected from each of these schools for more

detailed in-home interviews, conducted between April and December 1995. A number of special

over-samples were also selected for in-home interviews with varying probabilities using

screeners from in-school questionnaires. These include the physically disabled, Black, ethnic,

and genetic over-samples. A total of 20,745 adolescents were interviewed for Wave I.

Interviews were also conducted with parents during Wave I. The adolescents are interviewed for

the second time in 1996 for Wave II, and for the third time between August 2001 and April 2002

for Wave III. The number of individuals interviewed in Wave III is 15,197.

         One of the over-samples that we utilize in this paper is the genetic over-sample. Based on

the information provided in the in-school questionnaire, monozygotic (identical) twins, dizygotic

(fraternal) twins, half-siblings were sampled with certainty.4 There are a total of 289

monozygotic twins, 452 dizygotic twins, and 43 pairs of twins with unidentified zygosity in the

Wave I Add Health sample. Sample sizes for our empirical analyses will be less than these




3
  Participating high schools were asked to identify junior high or middle schools that were expected to provide at
least 5 students to the entering class of the high school. Some schools were their own feeder schools. Therefore, the
total number of schools in Add Health is actually 132.
4
  The zygosity of the twin pairs was determined in a number of ways. First, all mixed sex twin pairs were
classified as dizygotic. The majority of same-sex twins were determined to be monozygotic or dizygotic
on the basis of self-reported confusability of their appearance (i.e. whether they looked like two peas in a
pod as young children, and whether they were confused by strangers, teachers, of family members). A
zygosity scale was created as an average of the reports by twins to the confusability items and a
classification was made on the basis of a cut-off created by this scale. For cases where self-report
appearance data was missing, the classification was made on the basis of the mother’s responses to the
confusability questions. Despite these efforts, some twins were classified as of uncertain zygosity status.
The zygosity of these pairs was determined by DNA tests on the basis of molecular genetic markers. In
some cases, there was a conflict between the twin’s reports of zygosity and the classification based on
confusability of appearance. These twins were classified as of uncertain zygosity. In our analyses, we
treated these pairs as dizygotic twins.


                                                         11
numbers, however, because some of these twins do not appear again in Wave III and there are

missing data in key variables for at least one twin in some twin pairs.

        For sensitive topics, such as delinquent behavior, adolescents listened to pre-recorded

questions through earphones and entered their answers directly on laptops in order to maintain

confidentiality and to minimize the potential for interviewer or parental influence. Also, in order

to obtain accurate responses about the timing of events, subjects were prompted with a calendar

that gave the dates of many important events. Mocan and Tekin (2005, 2006) and Tekin and

Markowitz (2005) provide evidence that rates of many risky behaviors reported in the Add

Health are consistent with those measured in other sources.



        a) Measures of Maltreatment

        In Wave III, respondents answered questions about the way they were treated by their

parents or other adults who took care of them before they were in the 6th grade. Specifically,

they were asked whether and how often:

1. Parents (or other adult care-givers) had left them home alone when an adult should have been

with them.

2. Parents (or other adult care-givers) had not taken care of their basic needs, such as keeping

them clean or providing food or clothing.

3. Parents (or other adult care-givers) slapped, hit, or kicked them.

4. Parents (or other adult care-givers) had touched them in a sexual way, forced them to touch

him or her in a sexual way, or forced them to have sexual relations.

5. Social services investigated how they were taken care of or tried to take them out of their

living situations.




                                                 12
Respondents were also asked whether they had ever lived in a foster home.

        The wording of these questions reflects an emerging consensus about definitions of

maltreatment as reflected, for example, in the government sources like the Administration for

Children (ACF) and Families of the Department of Health and Human Services.5

        One limitation of this suite of questions is that they do not allow us to judge the timing of

maltreatment. A second limitation our study shares with most others is that it is based on adult

retrospective reports of maltreatment. It is possible that people tend to forget past abuse as they

grow older. We have investigated “forgetting” directly by asking whether the older people in

the sample were less likely to report childhood abuse than those who were 18. We find no

evidence that this is the case.

        A potentially more serious problem is that people with negative outcomes may be more

likely to report childhood maltreatment. For example, they may blame past maltreatment for

their current problems. In this case, Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates will tend to find

“effects” of maltreatment that are too large. Measurement error of this type could also bias twin

fixed effects models. Suppose that one twin is more likely to report bad things in general. Then

this twin will be more likely to report both maltreatment and crime leading to spurious results.

        We investigated this problem by examining responses to a series of questions that should

have been answered in the same way by both twins. These questions included whether or not the

father was in jail at Wave I; how far the two twins lived away from each other; how often the

twins saw each other; how often the twins talked to each other; and how often the twins fought

with each other. As shown in Appendix Table 1, we found few significant correlations between


5
  For example, the definitions given at the ACF’s National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information web site (http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/admin/glossary.cfm) are very similar to the abuse
questions asked in the Add Health.



                                                  13
differences in the twins’ reports about maltreatment and differences in reports about these other

variables. These findings provide some evidence against the hypothesis that one twin is just

“more negative” than the other.

        In the third wave of Add Health, respondents answered detailed questions about their

relationships with their parents. Specifically, they answered questions on whether (1) they

enjoyed spending time with parents, (2) parents were warm and loving toward them, (3) they felt

close to their parents, and (4) they received money or any other significant payment from their

parents within the past 12 months. We compared these measures to the reports of maltreatment

as a way to both assess the internal validity of our data and to test the reliability of our

maltreatment measures. For all four measures of closeness to parents, respondents who reported

maltreatment also reported that they had more distant relationships with their parents for all of

our maltreatment variables.

        Table 1 shows the fraction of respondents reporting various forms of maltreatment. The

incidence of reports of particular types of maltreatment varies widely. Almost 5% say that they

were investigated by Child Protective Services (CPS) or lived in foster care, which may be

indicative of the most severe, substantiated abuse. Roughly eleven percent of the sample report

that their parents ever failed to meet their basic needs. Only 4.8% of the sample report any form

of sexual abuse, while roughly a third of the respondents report that their parents ever left them

alone when they “should have been supervised” or that their parents hit them. While these later

figures seem especially high, they are broadly consistent with other studies. For example, Scher

et al. (2004) use a sample of 967 adults from a community survey in Memphis Tennessee to

determine the prevalence of retrospectively reported child maltreatment and find that 30% of




                                                  14
women and 40% of men reported some form of maltreatment while 19% reported physical

abuse, 18% reported neglect, and 5% reported sexual abuse.

       Altogether more than half of the children report some form of “maltreatment”. Since a

definition of maltreatment that encompassed half of all children would seem unacceptable, we

examined the distribution of reports and found that only 8.2% report that they were left alone

when they should have been supervised more than 10 times, while 6.3% indicate that they were

hit, kicked, or slapped by their parents or other adult care givers more than 10 times. If we use

these higher thresholds for neglect and physical abuse then we find that 23.1% of respondents

report that they were maltreated in any way. In what follows we will report results using all of

these different potential measures of maltreatment.

       Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 show that there are significant gender differences in

exposure to abuse in our sample. Except for sexual abuse, males are more likely to report

maltreatment than females. The figures in Table 1 are consistent with previous studies that

documented that males are more likely to report physical abuse than females, while sexual abuse

during childhood is more commonly reported by females (MacMillan et al., 1997). It is also

noteworthy that the fraction of twins who report abuse (shown in column 4) is similar to that

reported in the full sample. Finally, column (5) shows the fraction of twins who have different

reports of maltreatment. This column shows that discrepant reports are quite common, which is

necessary if we are to identify effects of abuse in twin models.



       b) Outcome Measures

       The Add Health asks many questions related to delinquent and criminal activity. The

crime questions in Add Health are similar to those found in other surveys and to official




                                                15
definitions of “crime” found in government sources such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics. We

focus on six questions that emphasize serious and/or common crimes committed in the 12

months prior to the survey. The crimes we examine include property damage, assault, armed

robbery, burglary, theft; and any hard drug use in the past 12 months. We also look at a

summary measure of whether any non-drug crime was committed in the past 12 months, and

whether the respondent was ever convicted. Finally, we look at whether the respondent was

himself/herself a victim of a crime in the past 12 months. Our measure of victimization is a

composite obtained by combining answers to seven questions about whether the respondent had

a gun/knife pulled on him/her, was shot or stabbed, was beaten up without anything being

stolen/with something stolen, or was otherwise injured by someone at least once in the past 12

months. The definitions and means of outcomes and other variables used in the analyses are

presented in Table 2.

       Our rationale for examining victimization is that while many innocent people are the

victims of crime, people who are themselves engaged in crime (e.g. drug dealers), or those with

criminals in their peer groups, are likely to be at higher risk. In fact, our data suggest that

victimization is much more likely among those who report committing crime. For example, more

than 38 percent of individuals who have committed any non-drug crime in the past 12 months

also report having been victimized during the same period. On the other hand, only 5.2 percent

of those who have not committed any of these offenses reported victimization. Similarly, the

percentage hard drug drugs users is 20 percent among victimized individuals, but only 10 percent

among those who report no victimization.

       The first panel of Table 2 shows means of these outcomes by whether or not respondents

suffered various types of maltreatment. The table indicates that across almost every domain,




                                                  16
children who suffered maltreatment are at least twice as likely to have engaged in crime as those

who did not. They are also more likely to have been convicted, and to have been victimized

themselves. Table 2 also offers some support for the idea that those who suffer the worst abuse

have the worst outcomes. For example, those who were left alone or physically abused more

than ten times have worse outcomes than those who report that either of these outcomes ever

happened.



       c) Explanatory variables

       Of course there may be many other factors that differ between children who were

maltreated and those who were not. The Add Health allows us to control for a rich set of

individual and family background characteristics that may be correlated with both maltreatment

and criminal behavior. The second panel of Table 2 shows some of the explanatory variables

used in the analyses (for a full list, see Appendix Table 2). We see, for example, that children

who were maltreated are more likely to have had a mother with less than a high school

education, more likely to have had a father in jail at Wave I, more likely to have been on welfare

at Wave 1, and more likely to have a mother who was a teenager at the time of her child’s birth..

Overall, children in families that were poor at Wave I are much more likely to report

maltreatment in Wave 3 though again, there are differences by type of maltreatment. Only 3.9%

of non-maltreated children are in families with incomes less than half the poverty line, compared

to 7% of the respondents who report that their parents ever failed to meet their basic needs, 5.1%

who report physical abuse, and 8.5% of those who report sexual abuse. These figures provide

some evidence that the incidence of maltreatment (and not just the incidence of verified reports




                                                17
to CPS)) varies with SES. It will be important to control for observed differences between

families in order to identify a causal effect of maltreatment.

       The last two panels of Table 2 focus on factors that might differ between twins in an

effort to get at the question of why one twin would be abused while the other was not. It is not

uncommon for some children in a household to be maltreated while others are unharmed (New

York Times, 2005a); the question is whether this has anything to do with pre-existing

characteristics of the child, or whether it is a random choice of the parent?

       Panel 3 shows that in the entire sample, parents are somewhat more likely to have

reported that a child was “bad tempered” at Wave I if the child reported that he/she was

maltreated at Wave III. However, there is little systematic relationship between whether the

parent reported a learning problem and whether the respondent later reported maltreatment.

Panel 4 focuses on twin pairs with reported differences in maltreatment, and shows that there are

few systematic differences between these twins in birth weight, parental reports of bad temper,

and gender. The most significant differences are that parents who are reported to have physically

abused their children more than 10 times are more likely to have reported that the abused child

was bad tempered (which may be more of a comment on the parent’s temperament than the

child’s), and parents are less likely to have failed to meet the basic needs of male children.

These results suggest that in cases where one twin is abused and another is not, the choice of

which is which may be more or less random.

       In a study that supports this conclusion, Jaffee et al. (2004) examine monozygotic twins

and report four reasons why one twin was treated differently than the other: One twin had been

ill (but there was no consistent pattern in whether the mother treated the sickly child better or

worse than the other); mothers had folk beliefs that children had to have opposite personalities,




                                                 18
or that one had to be dominant; mothers identified one of the twins with themselves; and

mothers identified one of the twins with a partner or ex-partner.

       As discussed above, we will also ask whether the effects of maltreatment vary with SES.

SES is multi-dimensional concept, with many potential measures. We have experimented with

various measures based on income, maternal education, teen parenthood, welfare use, and single

parenthood. In what follows, we use an indicator of “low SES” that is equal to one if two or

more of the following conditions hold: Mother is a high school drop out, the family income is

less than poverty, the mother was a teenager when the child was born, the father was not present

at Wave I, the biological father was ever jailed as of Wave I, or the parents were on welfare at

Wave I. Appendix Table 3 breaks out means of outcomes by SES and whether or not the child

was maltreated. These means suggest that maltreated children are more likely to engage in

crime, irrespective of SES. On the other hand, there are some types of crime that are more

common (assault) or less common (drug use) even among low SES people who were never

maltreated. A second panel of Appendix Table 3 breaks out children who experienced CPS or

foster care intervention. The table shows that those who report both such involvement and past

abuse have systematically worse outcomes than other children, which is consistent with the idea

that these children experienced the worst maltreatment.



4. Methods

       The sensitive nature of child maltreatment makes it difficult to use experimental designs

or even prospective longitudinal studies of at risk subjects. It would be unthinkable to divide

study children into a control group and a treatment group that was maltreated. And in

prospective studies, the researcher is morally and legally obligated to intervene if any cases of




                                                19
maltreatment are detected. We will use retrospective reports and non-experimental data and

attempt to compensate statistically for the problems involved in using these data. It is important

to note that the crudeness of our measures is counter-balanced to some extent by the large sample

size. That is, use of a “noisy measure” will make it harder to detect effects, but it is easier to

detect even small effects in larger samples. We will begin with OLS models of the effects of

different abuse measures on the criminal activity and victimization outcomes. These models

will be of the form:

    (1) Outcome =      +   1*Maltreatment    +   2*X   +   3*State   + ,

where Outcome is one of the crime involvement measures, maltreatment is one of the measures

of maltreatment, X is a vector of individual and family control variables (See the notes to Table 3

for a complete list), State is a vector of state fixed effects that control for things like state

institutions that deal with maltreatment and persistent differences in income between states, and

 is an error term. By comparing models with and without the vector X, we will be able to see

the extent to which correlations between maltreatment and criminal outcomes are affected by the

inclusion of detailed controls for observable characteristics.

        As discussed above, we expect OLS models to yield over-estimates of the effects of

maltreatment if some people are both systematically more likely to report bad outcomes, and

more likely to report maltreatment. Omitted variables that are correlated both with maltreatment

and with bad outcomes could also yield upward biased estimates (though the rich detail in the

Add Health data set will help to minimize this possibility).

        In an effort to deal with omitted variables biases and to test the robustness of our results,

we also estimate models using propensity matching methods, first introduced by Rosenbaum and




                                                   20
Rubin (1983).6 Matching methods attempt to make efficient use of the observable data, but may

still be biased if the “selection only on observables” assumption is not satisfied. Hence, we next

turn to models estimated using twins.       In order to implement this design, we restrict our sample

to twin pairs, and estimate models of the form:

    (2) Outcome =      +    1*Maltreatment    +   2   *X’ +   3*PairID   + ’,

where now X’ is a much smaller vector of control variables that vary within twin pairs (gender

and birth weight) and PairID is a unique identifier for each twin pair. These models control for

all of the common elements of family background that are shared by the twins.

        Although all of the twins share the same family backgrounds, only mono-zygotic or

identical twins are considered to be genetically identical since they result from the splitting of a

single fertilized egg. Since Add Health provides information on the zygosity of twins, we also




6
  In matching, each control unit is matched to a fixed number of units with the opposite treatment under
the assumption of “unconfoundedness”, i.e. the assumption that the treatment is random conditional on
some set of observed characteristics. The average treatment effect is then calculated as the average
within-match differences in the outcome variable between the treated and the untreated units. Unlike
regression techniques, matching estimators do not impose any functional form restrictions nor do they
assume a homogenous treatment effect across populations (Zhao, 2004). The propensity score method
avoids the difficulty of adjusting for a multidimensional set of covariates by matching only on the
univariate propensity score as shown by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983). The propensity score is just an
index of a unit’s probability of being treated, conditional on observable characteristics (usually calculated
using a model predicting the probability of treatment). Intervals of sample units with similar propensity
scores are determined and within each interval, one must ensure that the balancing property is satisfied,
i.e., the means of each characteristic do not differ between the treated and control units. Once the
propensity score is estimated and the balancing property is satisfied, the average treatment effect on the
treated can be calculated (Leuven and Sianesi, 2003; Becker and Ichino, 2002). Following Dehejia and
Wahba (2002), we use a range of simple estimators including matching without replacement, single
nearest neighbor matching with replacement, and radius matching with replacement. For matching
without replacement, we consider low-to-high and high-to-low matching where the treatment units are
ranked from lowest to highest or vice versa before the matching is performed. For radius matching, we
consider a range of calipers. For each method, in addition to using a weighted difference in means, we
estimate a regression weighted by the number of times a control unit is matched to a treatment unit
(Dehejia and Wahba, 2002). See also the symposium on matching estimators in the February 2004 issue
of the Review of Economics and Statistics.



                                                       21
estimate our models limiting the sample only to identical twins. These models obviously control

for many of the factors common to both twins, in order to focus on the effects of maltreatment.

        To assess the extent to which the relationship between maltreatment and outcomes differ

by gender and by SES we will also estimate (2) with an interaction term between maltreatment

and gender, and with an interaction between maltreatment and SES.

        Finally, we present a set of estimates interacting maltreatment with an indicator equal to

one if the children report CPS involvement or foster care, and a second set of estimates focusing

on multiple types of abuse. These models can be viewed as a specification check which we use

to confirm that the effects of maltreatment increase with the severity of the maltreatment.

        Sample weights are available to correct for design effects and unequal probability of

selection. Estimating the OLS models using the sample weights did not change the results. This

is not surprising given the large set of covariates included in the regressions. Since Add Health

is a school based survey, we have also estimated OLS models clustering the standard errors by

school and using the sample weights, and again this did not change the results in any way.7



5. Results

        Our main results for the “any abuse” variable defined using the “greater than 10 times”

cutoffs for being left alone and for physical abuse are shown in Table 3. The first column shows

an OLS model that includes a limited set of controls for child age, gender, race, ethnicity, and

whether the child was born in the U.S. The second column shows models estimated with our full

list of controls. It is remarkable that the inclusion of many of these controls has very little effect

on the estimated “abuse” coefficients in the OLS models. All are statistically significant and

7
 There are 875 individuals with a missing sample weight and 265 individuals with no school identifier.
These observations are dropped from the sample in models where sample weights are used and standard
errors are clustered.


                                                  22
large relative to the means for “never maltreated” children shown in Table 2. For example, the

probability of being involved in any non-drug related crime approximately doubles. The next

two columns show the propensity score matching estimates using matching without replacement

and single nearest neighbor matching.8 Again, these estimates are remarkably consistent with

those obtained from the simplest OLS model.

        The coefficients on the other control variables in the OLS models are generally consistent

with those described in the literature. To economize on space, we present the full set of

coefficients for the “Any maltreatment” models in Appendix Table 4. The results with models

for other abuse types are very similar and are available from the authors. This table shows, for

example that having a father who had been in jail at Wave I is strongly predictive of child

criminal behavior, and doubles the probability of engaging in some crimes. Similarly, being

male is associated with large increases in all types of criminal behavior, often doubling or

tripling the probability that someone engages in crime. Age is negatively associated with

criminal activity. For example, the propensity to commit any non-drug crime falls by about 7

percentage points between age 25 and age 18.          Being white is associated with lower

probabilities of committing non-drug type of crimes but with higher probabilities of using hard

drugs. This pattern is reversed for blacks. Having been born outside the U.S. is associated with

lower propensities of committing crime.

        Most of the other variables controlling for family background are estimated with little

precision. However, there is some evidence that children with a biological or stepfather present

8
  The propensity score is estimated using a logit model on the full list of controls and several interaction
terms in order to satisfy the balancing property. We present results for matching without replacement
using low-to-high ordering of the treatment units based on the propensity score and single nearest
neighbor matching with replacement. Models from matching without replacement with high-to-low
ordering of the propensity score and radius matching with calipers of 0.00005 and 0.00001 produced
almost identical results. Results from these methods and the logit that estimates the propensity score are
available from the authors.


                                                     23
at Wave I are less likely to engage in crime compared to those with no father present. Mother’s

education is usually associated with lower criminal propensities except for drug crimes:

Individuals whose mothers have at least some college degree are more likely to use hard drugs.

These findings suggest that those with higher incomes are more likely to use drugs, other things

being equal.

       Column 5 shows model (2) estimated using the sample of twins. The estimated

coefficients on abuse are somewhat higher in this subsample than in the OLS models, though

they are generally within one standard error. Column 6 shows models with twin fixed effects.

These estimates are somewhat smaller than those in column 5, as one would expect. However,

they still show evidence of large and statistically significant effects of maltreatment on most

indicators of criminal activity. For example, individuals who were subject to any type of abuse

are 14 percentage points more likely to commit some type of non-drug offense. They are also

significantly more likely to commit burglary (by 4.4 percentage points), assault (by 6.4

percentage points), theft (by 4 percentage points), damage property (by 9.4 percentage points),

and use drugs (by 8.6 percentage points). Maltreatment not only increases the probability that an

individual will engage in crime but also increases the probability that he will be a victim of a

crime (by 7.9 percentage points) as well.

       Finally, the last column of the Table shows estimates using only the monozygotic twins.

We have only 178 pairs of MZ twins with no missing data on both twins on abuse measures, and

relatively few with differential maltreatment. For example, among these 178 twin pairs, the

number of pairs with discordant reports is only 10 for physical abuse (>10 times); 18 for sexual

abuse; 21 for neglect (>10 times); 25 for failing to meet basic needs; and 44 for any abuse (using

the >10 times definitions). Therefore, it is remarkable that we still estimate significant effects of




                                                 24
maltreatment on many types of crime even in these models. In particular, estimates for burglary

and use of hard drugs (both relatively frequent crimes) are robust to this change of samples. The

point estimate for “crime victim” is also quite stable, though it is not statistically significant

(p=0.20) given the larger standard errors in the MZ models.

        Table 4 explores the effect of different types of maltreatment on outcomes, using the twin

fixed effects models. This table shows quite different effects of different forms of maltreatment.

Leaving children alone when they should have been supervised appears to be relatively benign.

But having parents who ever failed to meet ones basic needs greatly increases the probability of

committing a crime. Similarly, having parent who ever struck, hit or kicked them increases the

probability of criminal activity, and the effect tends to be greater if the parent struck them

frequently. Sexual maltreatment has the largest negative effects: For example, respondents who

report that they were sexually abused are 33 percentage points more likely to have committed

any non-drug offense. Curiously, there is no significant effect on drug offenses. A comparison

of the first two lines of Table 4 offers some support for our emphasis on a measure of “any

abuse” that uses the “greater than 10 times” cutoffs for frequent physical maltreatment and being

left alone: This measure is more often statistically significant and tends to have larger effects

than a measure of whether there was ever any maltreatment.

        Table 5 examines interactions between gender and maltreatment in the context of the

twin fixed effects models. This table and those following leave out the “ever having been

struck, etc.” and “ever having been left alone” measures to save space. The main effects confirm

that males are more likely to commit crime. The most consistent interactive effects are for

sexual abuse, which seems to have very large effects on males. The propensities to commit

armed robbery, burglary, assault, and grand theft are increased by 25, 19, 41, and 25 percentage




                                                  25
points respectively among males who were subjected to sexual abuse. There is also a large effect

of most types of maltreatment on the probability of being convicted among males.

       Table 6 presents interactions between SES and maltreatment. Many interactions are

positive and statistically significant, indicating that maltreatment is more likely to cause crime in

low-SES individuals. Low SES people are also more likely to have been convicted if they

suffered any maltreatment and if they were neglected. There is one strongly significant negative

interaction in the table, in the models of the effects of physical abuse on the propensity to

damage property. This interaction offsets the positive main effect, suggesting that only higher

SES children subjected to physical abuse more than 10 times are more likely to damage property.

Note that this interaction is not significant in models where the maltreatment variable is whether

the child was ever physically abused, but the main effect is also much smaller in this model.

       If we are measuring an effect of maltreatment, then one might expect the effects to be

worse if the maltreatment is more serious. Table 7 shows estimates of models that interact

maltreatment with whether or not the respondent reported CPS involvement or foster care.

Under the maintained hypothesis that CPS and foster care are involved in the most severe cases,

this table asks whether the effects of child maltreatment are worse when the maltreatment is

more serious. The evidence in Table 7 is consistent with the common sense hypothesis that it is.

       Another index of the severity of abuse is whether more than one type of maltreatment

took place. For example, if sexual abuse and neglect cause crime separately, one might expect

that a person who experienced both sexual abuse and neglect would be at a higher risk of

committing crime than a person who had only one of these experiences. Our data show that joint

experiences of maltreatment are common. For example, sexual abuse is three times (two times)

higher among those who also experienced physical abuse (neglect) than those who did not




                                                 26
experience physical abuse (neglect). Similarly, physical abuse is twice as common among those

who were neglected than among those who were not neglected. The distribution of joint

experiences of maltreatment is as follows: 77.3 percent of our sample report no maltreatment

(using > 10 times cut-offs for physical abuse and neglect); 16.1 percent report only one type of

maltreatment; 5.4 percent report two types of maltreatment; 1 percent report three types of

maltreatment; and 0.18 percent report all four types of maltreatment.

       In order to examine the hypothesis that the probability of engaging in crime increases

with the joint experiences of maltreatment, we created binary indicators for experiencing

multiple types of maltreatment and estimated models with twin fixed effects. Since there is no

one in our twin sample who reported all four types of maltreatment, there are two dummy

variables in the models representing “only one type of maltreatment” and “two or three types of

maltreatment”. We combined the indicators for two and three types of maltreatment into one

category since the fractions of twin sample reporting two and three types of maltreatment are 5.6

percent and 0.9 percent, respectively.9 The omitted category is “no maltreatment”. The results

presented in Table 8 provide evidence suggesting that the probability of crime increases with if a

person suffers multiple forms of maltreatment. For every outcome, the magnitude of the effect

is larger if the person suffered two or more types of maltreatment than if only one type of

maltreatment occurred.



6. Discussion and Conclusions

       In order to determine the social cost of child maltreatment, we need to quantify its effects

on important outcomes. This paper focuses on the effects on crime. We find that child


9
 The fractions of the twin sample reporting no maltreatment and only one type of maltreatment are 79
percent and 17 percent, respectively.


                                                  27
maltreatment roughly doubles the probability that an individual engages in many types of crime.

It is useful to put this result in perspective by comparing it to other estimates of the effects of

factors related to crime. For example, using time series data from New York, Corman and

Mocan (2005) find that a 1 percentage point decline in unemployment generates only a 2.2

percentage point decline in burglaries. They also find that a 10 percent increase in minimum

wage leads to about 3.5 percent decrease in robberies in New York City.

       An important predictor of whether or not a child will become a criminal is whether the

father of that child is criminal also (Raine, 1993; Reis and Roth, 1993; Wilson and Herrnstein,

1985). Jacob and Lefgren (2003) find that the level of violent crime increases by 28 percent on

days when school is in session and property crime decreases by 14 percent on such days.

Although controversial, some studies have also shown an association between mental health

disorders and criminal behavior. For example, in a sample drawn from a Danish birth cohort, the

risk of offending is found to be 4.6 times higher for individuals with schizophrenia, and 2 times

higher for those with an affective psychoses as compared to subjects never admitted to a

psychiatric ward (Hodgins et al. 1996).

       Grogger and Willis (2000) find that the introduction of crack cocaine in metropolitan

areas was responsible for a 20 percent increase in murder rates, a fifteen percent increase in

rapes, and a 27 percent increase in aggravated assault. Using individual-level data from the first

two waves of Add Health, Mocan and Tekin (2006) find that having access to a gun at home

increases the propensity to commit a variety of crimes by about 30 percent among adolescents.

Duggan (2001) calculates that the decreases in gun ownership over the 1990s can explain up to a

third of the decline in crime over the same period. Finally, Bingenheimer et al. (2005) find that




                                                  28
exposure to firearm violence approximately doubles the probability that an adolescent will

engage in serious violence over the subsequent 2 years using propensity score matching methods.

       This brief review suggests that the effects of abuse are large relative to those of many

other risk factors for crime. The large size of these effects suggests that maltreatment may

generate large externalities in terms of the costs of crime. It is important to note that our

estimates represent an “overall” effect of maltreatment on crime in that we do not control for

potential mediators such as educational attainment.

       One potential explanation for the large effects is that children who experience

maltreatment start engaging in crime earlier. Widom (1989b) shows that abused or neglected

children are more likely to be arrested as both as juveniles and as adults. Starting to engage in

criminal behavior early may appreciate illegal human capital by raising experience in criminal

activities, and depreciate capital in legal activities such as schooling or labor market. This would

further increase criminal propensities. We looked at this possibility by estimating models of the

effects of maltreatment on the likelihood of having been convicted in a juvenile court. OLS

estimates were large and statistically significant. However, estimates from twin fixed effects

models were estimated with much less precision though they were qualitatively similar.

       Table 9 considers a crude translation of the effects measured in this paper into dollar

terms, using estimates of the costs of some of the crimes we examine that are taken from the

literature. The results of this exercise are very sensitive to the estimated cost per crime, which

varies widely between papers. Lochner and Moretti (2004) use estimates of the cost of crime

that take account of the impact on victims, as well as costs of incarceration. Their estimates do

not take account of other costs, such as the costs to society of avoiding crime, and thus should

probably be regarded as lower bounds. Cohen (2004) derives estimates based on “willingness to




                                                 29
pay” for crime reduction. These estimates may well be upper bounds given that people are not

required to pay anything to fill in these surveys. It should be noted that the largest estimated

costs of crime are for murder, which is such a rare outcome that we cannot look at changes in its

incidence in our data.

       The Lochner and Moretti estimates suggest that the crime induced by abuse costs society

about $6.7 billion per year. The Cohen estimates suggest a much larger figure of $62.5 billion.

It is interesting to compare these figures to the cost of preventing maltreatment. Unfortunately,

few intervention programs have been proven to be effective in rigorous studies. Olds et al. report

that randomized trials of nurse home visiting programs that start in infancy show that they can

reduce the incidence of substantiated cases of maltreatment by 50 percent (Olds et al., 1999). At

a cost of about $4,000 per child, the total cost of providing this service to all children would be

about $16 billion. Given that the crime induced by abuse is only one of the social costs of

maltreatment, these estimates suggest that a home visiting program like Olds’ might well pay for

itself in terms of reducing social costs, even using conservative estimates of the costs of crime.

If we attach some benefit to improving the lives of poor children (beyond the value we attach to

saving other people money) then the cost-benefit analysis begins to look even more favorable.

       In summary, our study provides evidence that the apparent negative effects of

maltreatment on children’s propensity to engage in crime are real and not simply artifacts of

other features of dysfunctional families. We find that being maltreated approximately doubles

the probability of engaging in many types of crime and that the effects are worst for children

from low SES backgrounds. Perhaps unsurprisingly, boys are at greater risk for increases in

criminal propensities than girls. Sexual abuse appears to have the largest effects on crime,

perhaps justifying the emphasis on this type of abuse in the literature and in the media. Finally,




                                                 30
the probability of engaging in crime increases with the experience of multiple forms of

maltreatment as well as the experience of CPS. These findings suggest that criminal behavior

increases not only with the incidence of maltreatment but also with the severity of maltreatment,

as one might expect.




                                               31
References


Agnew, R. “Foundation for a General Strain Theory of Crime and Delinquency,” Criminology,
30: 47-87, 1992.

Akers, R. L. (1985). Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning Approach, Belmont CA: Wadsworth.

Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A Social Learning Analysis. New Jersey: Prentice Hall

Becker, Sasha, and Andrea Ichino. “Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Based on
Propensity Scores,” The Stata Journal 2002, (2)4:358-377.

Benjamin, Daniel (2003). “Does 401(k) Eligibility Increase Savings? Evidence from Propensity
Score Subclassification” Journal of Public Economics, 87, 1259-1290.

Bernstein, Nina. “A Tough Road for Siblings Who Survived Abuse,” The New York Times,
January 15, 2006.

Bingenheimer, Jeffrey B., Robert T. Brennan, and Felton J. Earls (2005). “Firearm Violence
Exposure and Serious Violent Behavior,” Science 308(5726): 1323-1326.

Brezina, T. (1998). Adolescent maltreatment and delinquency: The question of intervening
processes. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 35, 71-99.

Brian, Jacob, and Lars, Lefgren. “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
Concentration, and Juvenile Crime,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93(5), December,
1560-1577.

Brown, Jocelyn, Patricia Cohen, Jeffrey Johnson and Suzanne Salzinger. “A Longitudinal
Analysis of Risk Factors for Child Maltreatment: Findings of a 17-Year Prospective Study of
Officially Recorded and Self-Reported Child Abuse and Neglect,” Child Abuse and Neglect,
22(11) 1998, 1065-1078.

Case, Anne; Lubotsky, Darren and Paxson, Christina. “Economic Status and Health in
Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient,” American Economic Review, December 2002, 92(5),
pp.1308-34.

Cicchetti, Dante and F.S. Rogosch. “The Impact of Child Maltreatment and Psychopathology on
Neuroendocrine Functioning,” Development and Psychopathology, 13(4):783-804, Fall 2001.

Claussen, Angelika and Patricia Crittenden. “Physical and Psychological Maltreatment:
Relations Among Types of Maltreatment,” Child Abuse and Neglect, 15, 1991, 5-18.

Cohen, Mark A.; Roland T. Rust, Sara Stehen, Simon T. Tidd. “Willingness-To-Pay for Crime
Control Programs“, Criminology, 42(1), 2004, 89-109.



                                              32
Corman, Hope, and Naci Mocan. “Carrots, Sticks, and Broken Windows,” Economica,
November 2005, 72, pp. 655-681.

Coulten, Claudia, Jill Korbin, Marilyn Su, and Julian Chow. “Community Level Factors and
Child Maltreatment Rates,” Child Development, 66, 1995, 1262-1276.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: Why is the Relationship
Stronger for Older Children?,” American Economic Review, v93 #5, December 2003, 1813-
1823.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. “Mortality, Education, Income, and Inequality among
American Cohorts,” NBER Working Paper #7140, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1999.

Deblinger, Esther, Susan McLeer, Marc Atkins, Diana Ralphe and Edna Foa. “Post-Traumatic
Stress in Sexually Abused, Physically Abused and Nonabused Children,” Child Abuse and
Neglect, 13, 1989, 403-408.

Dehejia and Sadek Wahba. “Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental Causal
Studies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2002, 84(1): 151-161.

Dinwiddie, S. A.C. Heath, M.P. Dunne, K.K. Bucholz, P.A. Madden, W.S. Slutske, L.J. Bierut,
D.B. Statham, N.G. Martin. “Early Sexual Abuse and Lifetime Psychopathology: A Co-Twin-
Control Study,” Psychology and Medicine, 30 #1, 41-52, Jan. 2000.

Drake, Brett and Shanta Pandey. “Understanding the Relationship Between Neighborhood
Poverty and Specific Types of Child Maltreatment,” Child Abuse and Neglect, 20, 1996, 1003-
1018.

Dube, Shanta,Vincent Felitti, Maxia Dong, W.H. Giles, and Robert Anda. “The Impact of
Adverse childhood Experiences on Health Problems: Evidence from Four Birth Cohorts Dating
Back to 1900,” Preventive Medicine, 37 #3, 2003a, 268-277.

Dube, Shanta, Vincent Felitti, Maxia Dong, Daniel Chapman, Wayne Giles, and Robert Anda.
“Childhood Abuse, Neglect and Household Dysfunction and the Risk of Illicit Drug Use: The
Adverse Childhood Experiences Study,” Pediatrics, 111 #3, 2003b, 654-572.

Dubowitz, H. & Guterman, N. B. (in press). Preventing child neglect and physical abuse, in A.
Giardino (ed.), Child maltreatment-A clinical guide and reference (3rd ed.), Maryland Heights,
MO: G. W. Medical Publishing.

Duggan, Mark. “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, 109:5 (October 2001),
1086-1114.




                                              33
Farrington P., David, and Kate A. Painter. “Gender Differences in Offending: Implications for
Risk-focused Prevention,” Home Office Report 09/2004.

Felitti, Vincent J., Robert Anda, Dale Nordenberg, David Williamson, Alison Spitz, Valerie
Edwards, Mary Koss, and James Marks. “Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household
Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes of Death in Adults,” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 14 #4, 1998, 245-258.

Fiscella, K. H.J. Kitzman, R.E. Cole, K.J. Sidora, and D. Olds. “Does Child Abuse Predict
Adolescent Pregnancy?” Pediatrics, 101, April 1998, 620-624.

Freeman, Richard. “The Economics of Crime,” in The Handbook of Labor Economics, David
Card and Orley Ashenfelter (eds.), v 3c, Chapter 52, (New York: North Holland) 1999.

Garland, R.J. & Dougher, M.J. (1990). The abused-abuser hypothesis of child sexual abuse: A
critical review of theory and research. In J.R. Feierman (Ed.), Pedophilia: Biosocial dimensions
(pp. 488-509). New York: Springer-Verlag.

Grogan-Kaylor, Andrew, and Melanie D. Otis. “The Effect of Childhood Maltreatment on Adult
Criminality: A Tobit Regression Analysis,” Child Maltreatment, Vol. 8, No. 2, May 2003, 129-
137.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Michael Willis. “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in Urban
Crime Rates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2000.

Hillis, S.D., R.F. Anda, S.R. Dube, V.J. Felitti, P.A. Marchbanks, J.S. Marks. “The
Association Between Adverse Childhood Experiences and Adolescent Pregnancy, Long Term
Psychosocial Consequences, and Fetal Death,” Pediatrics, 113 #2, 2004, 320-327.

Hirschi, T. (1969). Causes of Delinquency, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Hodgins, S., S. A. Mednick, P. A. Brennan, F. Schulsinger, and M. Engberg. “Mental Disorders
and Crime: Evidence from a Danish Birth Cohort” Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 489-496,
1996.

Imbens, Guido. “Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Under Exogeneity: A
Review,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2004, 86(1): 4-29.

Institute of Medicine. Reducing the Burden of Injury, Richard Bonnie (ed.) (Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press) 1999.

Jacob Brian ,and Lars Lefgren (2003). “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,
Concentration and Juvenile Crime," American Economic Review, 93(5), 1560-1577.




                                               34
Jaffee, S.R., A. Caspi, T.E. Moffitt, M. Polo-Tomas, A. Taylor. “The Limits of Child Effects:
Evidence for Genetically Mediated Child Effects on Corporal Punishment but Not on Physical
Maltreatment,” Developmental Psychology, 40 #6, 1047-58.

Jalan, Jyotsna, and Martin Ravallion (2003). “Estimating the Benefit Incidence of an Antipoverty
Program by Propensity-Score Matching” Journal of Business and Statistics, 21, January, 19-30.

Kendler, Kenneth, Cynthia Bulik, Judy Silberg, John Hettema, John Myers, Carol Prescott.
“Childhood Sexual Abuse and Adult Psychiatric and Substance Use disorders in Women: An
Epidemiological and Co-twin Control Analysis,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 953-959,
2000.

Lanctot, N. and M. LeBlanc. “Explaining Deviance by Adolescent Females,” in M. Tonry (Ed.)
Crime and Justice, Vol. 29, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Lechner, Michae. “Program Heterogeneity and Propensity Score Matching: An Application to
the Evaluation of Active Labor Market Policies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, May
2002, 205-220.

Leuven, Edwin, and Barbara Sianesi (2003), “psmatch2: Stata module to perform full
Mahalanobis and propensity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance
testing”, http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html

Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison
Inmates, Arrests, and Self Reports,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94(1), pages 155-189.

MacMillan, H. L.,J. E. Fleming, N. Trocme, M. H. Boyle, M. Wong, Y. A. Racine, W. R.
Beardslee, and D. R. Offord. “Prevalence of Child Physical and Sexual Abuse in the
Community: Results from the Ontario Health Supplement,” The Journal of the American
Medical Association, Vol. 278, No. 2, July 9, 1997.

Malinsky-Rummell, Robin and David Hansen. Long-term Consequences of Childhood Physical
Abuse, Psychological Bulletin, 114 #1, 1993, 68-79.

Maxfield, M. G, and Cathy S. Widom. ”The Cycle of Violence: Revised 6 Years Later,”
Achieves of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,150, 390-395,1996.

Megargee, E. L. “Assessment Research in Correctional Settings: Methodological Issues and
Practical Problems,” Psychological Assessment, 7, 359-366, 1995.

Mocan, H.Naci, and Daniel I. Rees. “Economic Conditions, Deterrence and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from Micro Data,” American Law and Economic Review, Fall 2005,7:2, pp. 319-349.

Mocan, H. Naci, and Erdal Tekin. “Guns and Juvenile Crime,” forthcoming at the Journal of
Law and Economics, October 2006.




                                              35
Mocan, H. Naci, and Erdal Tekin. “Drug Use and Juvenile Crime: Evidence from a Panel of
Siblings and Twins,”in Economics of Substance Use: Individual Behavior, Social Interactions,
Markets, and Politics, Bjorn Lindgren and Michael Grossman (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier,
2005, pp.91-120.

National Research Council. “Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect,” (Washington D.C.:
National Academy Press) 1993.

Nelson, E.C., A.C. Heath, P.A. Madden, M.L. Cooper, S.H. Dinwiddie, K.K. Bucholz, A.
Glowinski, T. McLaughlin, M.P. Dunne, D.J. Statham, N.G. Martin. “Association Between Self-
reported Childhood Sexual Abuse and Adverse Psychosocial Outcomes: Results from a Twin
Study,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 59 #2, 139-145, Feb. 2002.

Olds, David, Charles Henderson, Harriet Kitzman, John Eckenrode, Robert Cole, and Robert
Tatelbaum. “Prenatal and Infancy Home Visitation by Nurses: Recent Findings,” in The Future
of Children, v9 #1, 1999, 44-65.

Paxson, Christine and Jane Waldfogel. “Parental Resources and Child Abuse and Neglect,
Papers and Proceedings of the American Economic Association, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 239-244,
May 1999.

Paxson, Christine and Jane Waldfogel. “Work, Welfare and Child Maltreatment,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 20(3), pp. 435474, 2002.

Pelton, Leroy H. “The Role of Material Factors in Child Abuse and Neglect,” in Gary Melton
and Frank Barry (eds.) Protecting Children from Abuse and Neglect (London: The Guilford
Press) 1994.

Raine, Adrian. “The Psychopathology of Crime: Criminal Behavior as a Clinical Disorder,” San
Diego, CA: Academy Press, 1993.

Rebellon, Cesar J., and Karen Van Gundy. “Can Control Theory Explain the Link between
Parental and Physical Abuse and Delinquency? A Longitudinal Analysis,” Journal of Research in
Crime and Delinquency, Vol. 42, No, 3, August 2005, 247-274.

Reiss, A. J., and Jeffrey A. Roth. “Understanding and Preventing Violence” Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.

Rivera, B. and Widom Cathy S. “Childhood Victimization and Violent Offending,” Violence and
Victims, 5,19-35, 1990.

Rosenbaum, Paul R. and Donald B. Rubin (1983), “The Central Role of the Propensity
Score in Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika 70, April, 41–55.

Sampson, R. L., and Laub, J. H. (1993). Crime in the Making, Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press.



                                              36
Scher, Christine, David Forde, John McQuaid, Murray Stein. “Prevalence and Demographic
Correlates of Childhood Maltreatment in an Adult Community Sample,” Child Abuse and
Neglect, 28 #2, 2004, 167-180.

Siegel, A. Jane, and Linda M. Williams. “The relationship between Child Sexual Abuse and
Female Delinquency,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, vol. 40, No. 1, February
2003, 71-94.

Silverman, Amy B., Helen Z. Reinherz and Rose M. Giaconia. “The Long-Term Sequelae of
Child and Adolescent Abuse: A Longitudinal community Study,” Child Abuse and Neglect, 20
#8, 709-723, August 1996.

Simons, L. Ronald, Leslie Gordon Simons, and Lora Ebert Wallace. “Families, Delinquency, and
Crime: Linking Society’s Most Basic Institution to Antisocial Behavior” Los Angeles, CA:
Roxbury Publishing Company, 2005.

Slade, Eric and Lawrence Wissow. “The Influence of childhood Maltreatment on Adolescents’
Academic Performance,” xerox, Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of
Maryland, March 28, 2005.

Smith, C. and T. O. Thornberry. “The Relationship between Childhood Maltreatment and
Adolescent Involvement in Delinquency,” Criminology, 1995, 33: 451-77.

Swantson, Y. Heather, Patrick N. Parkinson, Brian I O’Toole, Angela M. Plunkett, Sandra
Shrimpton, and R. Kim Oates. “Juvenile Crime, Aggression and Delinquency After Sexual
Abuse: A Longitudinal Study,” British Journal of Criminology, 43(4), 2003, 729-749.

Tekin, Erdal, and Sara Markowitz. ”Suicidal Behavior and Labor Market Productivity,” NBER
Working Paper No. 11238, April, 2005.

Trickett, P.K., J.L. Aber, V. Carlson, and D. Cicchetti. “The Relationship of Socioeconomic
Status to the Etiology and Developmental Sequelae of Physical Child Abuse,” Developmental
Psychology, 27(1): 148-158.

Veltman, Marijcke and Kevin D. Browne. “Three Decades of Child Maltreatment Research:
Implications for the School Years,” Trauma, Violence, and Abuse, vol 2(3): 215-239, July 2001.

Walklate, Sandra. “Gender, Crime, and Criminal Justice” United Kingdom: William Publishing,
2001.

Wallace, C., P. Mullen, P. Burgess, S. Palmer, D. Ruschena, and C. Browne. “Serious Criminal
Offending and Mental Disorder” British Journal of Psychiatry, 172, 477-484, 1998.

Walters, GC and Grusec, JE (1977) Punishment San Francisco: WH Freeman.




                                              37
Widom, C.S. (1989a). Does Violence Beget Violence? A Critical Examination of the Literature,
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 3-28.

Widom, C.S. (1989b). The Cycle of Violence, Science, 244: 160-166.

Widom, C.S. (1994). Childhood Victimization and Risk for Adolescent Problem Behaviors. In
M.E. Lamb and R. Ketterlinus (eds.), Adolescent Problem Behaviors (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum)
127-164.

Widom, C. S. (1998). Childhood victimization: Early adversity and subsequent psychopathology,
in B. P. Dohrenwend (Ed.) Adversity, Stress, and Psychopathology. New York: Oxford
University Press (pp. 81-95).

Widom, C. S. (2000). Childhood victimization: Early adversity, later psychopathology. National
Institute of Justice Journal, Jan: 3-9.

Wilson, J. O., and R. Herrnstein. “Crime and Human Nature” New York: Simon and Schuster,
1985.

Zingraff, M. T., J. Leiter, K. A. Myers, M. C. Johnsen. “Child Maltreatment and Youthful
Problem Behavior,” Criminology, 1993, 31(2): 173-202.

Zingraff, M. T., Leiter, J., Johnsen, M. C., and Myers, K. A. (1994). The mediating effect of
good school performance on the maltreatment-delinquency relationship. Journal of Research in
Crime and Delinquency, 31, 61-91.

Zhong, Zhao, (2005). “Sensitivity of Propensity Score Methods to the Specifications” Institute
for the Study of Labor Discussion Paper No. 1873, December.




                                               38
Table 1: Fraction of Add Health Sample Reporting Maltreatment

                                                                   Fraction Twins
                                                  Femal    Twin       with Diff.
Type of Maltreatment               All    Males     es    Sample      reports
Ever left alone                  0.397    0.424   0.373    0.405       0.409
Left alone > 10 times            0.082    0.089   0.077    0.082       0.129
Ever basic needs unsatisfied     0.113     0.14   0.091    0.126       0.161
Ever hit, spanked, kicked etc.   0.292    0.311   0.275    0.279        0.33
Hit etc. > 10 times              0.063    0.067    0.06     0.05       0.078
Ever sexual abuse                0.048    0.045   0.051    0.057       0.101
Ever any abuse                   0.526     0.55   0.506    0.518       0.412
Any abuse using > 10 times       0.231    0.256   0.209    0.241       0.272
cutoffs for physical abuse and
being left alone
Ever Child Protective Services   0.049    0.047   0.05    0.049        0.072
or foster care

Number of observations           13,509   6,200   7,309    928




                                            39
Table 2: Definitions and Means of Outcomes and Explanatory Variables by Any Maltreatment, Type of Maltreatment, Involvement CPS
Variable          Definition                               Full     Never Any   Ever Left   Left     Ever Fail   Ever       Physical   Ever     CPS or
Name                                                       Sample   Maltreat-   Alone       Alone>   to Meet     Physical   Abuse      Sexual   Foster
                                                                    ment                    10X      Needs       Abuse      >10X       Abuse
1. Outcomes
Any Non-Drug      =1 if committed any of the non-drug       0.164     0.109       0.226      0.241     0.295       0.244      0.261     0.324    0.289
                  crimes in the past 12 months, else =0
Armed             =1 if used or threatened to use a         0.020     0.011       0.031      0.028     0.058       0.038      0.034     0.074    0.057
Robbery           weapon to get something from
                  someone else in the past 12 months,
                  else =0
Burglary          =1 if went into a house or building to    0.019     0.009       0.030      0.040     0.050       0.035      0.031     0.068    0.045
                  steal something in the past 12 months,
                  else =0
Assault           =1 if pulled a knife on someone, shot     0.071     0.049       0.010      0.094     0.155       0.105      0.108     0.193    0.168
                  someone, or badly hurt someone in the
                  past 12 months, else =0
Damaged           =1 if deliberately damaged property       0.087     0.052       0.122      0.132     0.141       0.135      0.156     0.158    0.137
Property          that belonged to someone else in the
                  past 12 months, =0 otherwise
Theft>$50         =1 if stole something worth more than     0.033     0.018       0.050      0.053
                  50 dollars in the past 12 months, else                                               0.075       0.056      0.049     0.099    0.062
                  =0
Any Hard          =1 if used any hard drugs (heroin,        0.120     0.085       0.151      0.208     0.149       0.170      0.185     0.183    0.179
Drugs             crystal meth, cocaine, LSD, ecstasy,
                  inhalants, PCP, mushrooms, etc.) in
                  the past 12 months, else =0
Victim            =1 if the respondent had a gun/knife      0.106     0.077       0.140      0.139     0.227       0.152      0.149     0.263    0.226
                  pulled on them, was shot or stabbed,
                  was beaten up without anything being
                  stolen/with something stolen, or was
                  otherwise injured by someone at least
                  once in the past 12 months, else =0

Ever             =1 if ever convicted in an adult or a      0.060     0.040       0.085      0.110     0.117       0.093      0.126     0.099    0.143
Convicted        juvenile court, else =0
2. Selected Explanatory Variables
Mother           =1 if the mother has less than high        0.142     0.137       0.145      0.144     0.189       0.154      0.157     0.188    0.192
Ed<HS a          school degree, =0 otherwise
Jailed father    =1 if the biological father was ever       0.135     0.098       0.177      0.219     0.208       0.189      0.226     0.228    0.272
                 jailed, =0 otherwise


                                                                        40
Welfare            =1 if parents were on welfare during          0.073           0.066        0.077       0.076        0.135          0.084          0.084        0.135    0.160
                   Wave I, =0 otherwise
Sibling4+          =1 if four or more siblings, =0               0.080           0.083        0.072       0.053        0.097          0.081          0.083        0.095    0.100
                   otherwise
Income<50%         =1 if parental income was less 50% of         0.042           0.039        0.043       0.049        0.070          0.048          0.051        0.063    0.087
of Poverty         poverty line at Wave I, =0 otherwise
Biological         =1 if biological father was present at        0.587           0.623        0.541       0.465        0.472          0.554          0.554        0.412    0.321
Father Present Wave I, =0 otherwise
Mother Age at Mother’s age at respondent’s birth was             0.074           0.069        0.083       0.092        0.094          0.084          0.080        0.106    0.084
birth 19 a         19 or less, =0 otherwise
3. Means of child characteristics that may differ between twins
Child Bad          =1 if the parent reported that                0.260           0.234        0.282       0.303        0.321          0.305          0.314        0.325    0.343
Tempered           respondent was bad tempered at Wave
                   I, =0 otherwise
Child Learning =1 if the parent reported that                    0.096           0.092        0.104       0.085        0.140          0.092          0.079        0.129    0.146
Problems           respondent had learning problems at
                   Wave I, =0 otherwise
Number of Observations                                          13,509           6,396        5,357       1,133        1,528          3,941           846          650      808
4. Differences in reports of abuse on differences in child characteristics, twin sample only
Birth Weight                                                                     0.048        0.063       0.085        0.058          0.038          0.077        0.131    0.042
                                                                                [.085]        [.077]     [.127]        [.132]         [.091]         [.161]       [.171]   [.151]
Bad Temper                                                                      -0.042       -0.037      -0.019        -0.057        -0.105          0.222       -0.114    0.056
                                                                                [.044]        [.045]     [.088]        [.067]      [0.048]**       [.090]**       [.074]   [.097]
Male                                                                            -0.064       -0.044       0.092        -0.193          -0.09        -0.093        0.039       0
                                                                               [.035]*        [.034]     [.061]      [.056]***      [.038]**         [.080]       [.074]   [.078]
 a
   Omitted category.
 Notes: The models also include binary variables for the missing data on race, Hispanic Ethnicity, U.S. born status, parental religiosity, first child, birth weight,
 number of siblings, parental welfare status, mother’s education, jailed father, family income, and mother’s age at respondent’s birth. Therefore, sum of dummies
 for these variables may not sum up to 1 in the Table. Sample sizes for the outcomes range from 13,452 in “Any Non-Drug Crime” to 13,502 in “Any Hard
 Drugs”.
 Standard errors are in brackets. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.




                                                                                   41
Table 3: Effects of Any Abuse on Criminal Activity
(Using >10X cutoff for physical maltreatment and being left alone,
Outcomes = Involvement in Crime Last 12 Months and Ever Convicted)
                  OLS         OLS      Propensity Score Matching                            Twins                          Identical
               Short List     Full       With Replacement      Single Nearest             Sample           Twin               Twin
               Controls    Controls         Low to High        Neighbor                 Full Controls        FE                FE
    Any         0.112***    0.108***          0.109***             0.100***               0.167***        0.147***           0.062
 non-drug       (0.008)     (0.008)           (0.010)              (0.012)                 (0.030)        (0.044)           (0.074)
   Armed        0.024***    0.023***          0.024***             0.025***                0.030**         0.006            0.070***
  Robbery       (0.004)     (0.004)           (0.005)              (0.005)                 (0.013)        (0.017)           (0.025)
 Burglary       0.027***    0.026***          0.027***             0.026***                0.036**        0.044***           0.047*
                (0.004)     (0.004)           (0.004)              (0.005)                 (0.014)        (0.014)           (0.026)
 Damaged        0.060***    0.060***          0.063***             0.059***               0.094***        0.094***           0.023
 Property       (0.007)     (0.007)           (0.008)              (0.008)                 (0.025)        (0.035)           (0.056)
  Assault       0.058***    0.053***          0.051***             0.048***               0.096***        0.064**            0.039
                (0.006)     (0.006)           (0.007)              (0.009)                 (0.022)        (0.030)           (0.057)
 Theft>$50      0.034***    0.033***          0.034***             0.031***               0.051***        0.040**            0.023
                (0.004)     (0.005)           (0.005)              (0.006)                 (0.016)        (0.020)           (0.035)
 Any Hard       0.067***    0.065***          0.071***             0.068***                0.072**        0.086**           0.117**
    Drug        (0.007)     (0.007)           (0.009)              (0.010)                 (0.026)        (0.034)           (0.045)
   Crime        0.081***    0.074***          0.078***             0.076***               0.103***        0.079**            0.071
   Victim       (0.007)     (0.007)           (0.009)              (0.009)                 (0.026)        (0.037)           (0.059)
    Ever        0.056***    0.047***          0.047***             0.049***                0.036*          0.012             0.055
 Convicted      (0.006)     (0.006)           (0.007)              (0.007)                 (0.021)        (0.030)           (0.050)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.
"Short list" includes: child age, gender, race, ethnicity, and child U.S. born.
"Full controls" also include: child birth weight (<1500, 1500-2500, >2500 grams, missing); first born, first born
missing; mom's education (<HS, HS, >HS, missing); Father ever jailed (or ever jailed missing); Parents' religion
(Catholic, Baptist, Other Protestant, Other, None, Missing); Number of siblings (none, 1, 2, 3, 4, missing); Father
present (biological, step, or missing); Family on AFDC in wave 1 (or missing); Poverty status (<=5, .5-1, 1-2x,
>2x, missing); Mother's age at birth (<=19, 20-30, 31-40, 41+, missing); State fixed effects.
Twin FE models include child gender and indicators for very low birth weight and low birth weight.
The regression adjustment for the matching estimators use the full list of controls specified above. Standard errors for
these regressions are computed using a bootstrap with 499 replications.




                                                                        42
Table 4: Effects of Different Types of Maltreatment on Outcomes - Twin FE Models
(Each cell of the table shows the coefficient on the maltreatment indicator from a different regression).

      Any           Armed                     Damaged                   Theft       Any Hard                    Ever
   Non-Drug       Robbery       Burglary       Property     Assault     > $50         Drug       Victimized   Convicted
1. Any Maltreatment using >10 cutoffs for physical maltreatment and being left alone.
0.147***         0.006         0.044***      0.094***      0.064**    0.040**      0.086**       0.079**      0.012
(0.044)          (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.035)       (0.030)    (0.020)      (0.034)       (0.037)      (0.030)
2. Ever any maltreatment
0.069*           -0.006        0.020*        0.061**       0.033      0.014        0.100***      0.036        -0.002
(0.036)          (0.014)       (0.012)       (0.029)       (0.024)    (0.016)      (0.027)       (0.030)      (0.025)
3. Maltreatment=1 if Parents Ever Left Alone When Should Have Been Supervised
0.003            -0.021        0.014         0.025         -0.007     0.006        0.046*        -0.008       0.006
(0.036)          (0.014)       (0.012)       (0.029)       (0.025)    (0.016)      (0.028)       (0.030)      (0.025)
4. Maltreatment=1 if Parents Left Alone When Should Have Been Supervised > 10 Times
0.011            -0.065***     0.020         0.025         0.020      0.001        0.043         0.086        -0.004
(0.065)          (0.025)       (0.021)       (0.051)       (0.044)    (0.029)      (0.049)       (0.053)      (0.044)
5. Maltreatment=1 if Parents Ever Failed to Meet Basic Needs
0.151**          0.051**       0.047**       0.103**       0.081**    0.066**      0.087*        0.041        0.027
(0.058)          (0.022)       (0.019)       (0.046)       (0.039)    (0.026)      (0.045)       (0.048)      (0.040)
6. Maltreatment=1 if Parents Ever Struck etc.
0.137***         0.025         0.024*        0.080**       0.073***   0.005        0.128***      0.106***     -0.005
(0.040)          (0.016)       (0.013)       (0.032)       (0.027)    (0.018)      (0.031)       (0.033)      (0.028)
7. Maltreatment=1 if Parents Struck etc. > 10 Times
0.251***         0.026         0.052*        0.170***      0.045      0.027        0.182***      0.119*       0.043
(0.083)          (0.032)       (0.027)       (0.066)       (0.056)    (0.037)      (0.063)       (0.068)      (0.057)
8. Maltreatment=1 if Sexual Maltreatment
0.328***         0.129***      0.106***      0.242***      0.142***   0.130***     0.038         0.109*       0.062
(0.072)          (0.028)       (0.023)       (0.057)       (0.049)    (0.032)      (0.056)       (0.060)      (0.050)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.




                                                                       43
Table 5: Twin FE Models with Interaction Male and Maltreatment
                Any         Armed                 Damaged                 Theft        Any                   Ever
             Non-Drug      Robbery Burglary       Property     Assault    >$50      Hard Drug    Victim    Convicted
1. Abuse=1 if Any Maltreatment Using > 10 Cutoffs for Physical Abuse and Being Left Alone
Abuse       0.098          -0.007      0.022     0.119**       -0.024   0.011      0.020        0.039      -0.075*
            (0.062)        (0.024)     (0.020)   (0.049)       (0.042)  (0.028)    (0.047)      (0.051)    (0.042)
Abuse*      0.094          0.026       0.043     -0.048        0.167*** 0.053      0.126**      0.078      0.164***
 Male       (0.082)        (0.032)     (0.026)   (0.065)       (0.055)  (0.037)    (0.063)      (0.068)    (0.056)
Male        0.124**        0.009       0.020     0.137***      0.006    -0.006     0.050        0.076*     0.083**
            (0.053)        (0.021)     (0.017)   (0.042)       (0.036)  (0.024)    (0.040)      (0.044)    (0.036)
2. Abuse=1 if Ever Any Maltreatment
Abuse       0.009          -0.001      0.003     0.029         -0.033   0.020      0.053        0.023      -0.058*
            (0.052)        (0.020)     (0.017)   (0.041)       (0.035)  (0.023)    (0.039)      (0.042)    (0.035)
Abuse*      0.113          -0.010      0.032     0.059         0.125*** -0.010     0.086*       0.025      0.106**
 Male       (0.069)        (0.027)     (0.022)   (0.054)       (0.046)  (0.031)    (0.052)      (0.057)    (0.047)
Male        0.101*         0.023       0.019     0.096**       -0.008   0.018      0.042        0.091*     0.077*
            (0.060)        (0.023)     (0.019)   (0.047)       (0.041)  (0.027)    (0.045)      (0.050)    (0.041)
3. Abuse=1 if Parents Left Alone When Should Have Been Supervised > 10 Times
Abuse       -0.117         -0.069*     0.020     -0.016        -0.009   -0.038     -0.071       0.049      -0.167**
            (0.097)        (0.037)     (0.031)   (0.077)       (0.066)  (0.043)    (0.074)      (0.080)    (0.065)
Abuse*      0.230*         0.007       -0.000    0.074         0.051    0.070      0.204**      0.067      0.293***
 Male       (0.130)        (0.050)     (0.042)   (0.103)       (0.088)  (0.058)    (0.099)      (0.106)    (0.087)
Male        0.149***       0.013       0.039**   0.128***      0.060*   0.008      0.081**      0.106***   0.107***
            (0.049)        (0.019)     (0.016)   (0.039)       (0.033)  (0.022)    (0.037)      (0.040)    (0.033)
4. Abuse=1 if Parents Ever Failed to Meet Basic Needs
Abuse       0.054          0.016       0.020     0.104         -0.085   0.045      0.045        -0.009     -0.073
            (0.082)        (0.031)     (0.026)   (0.065)       (0.054)  (0.036)    (0.062)      (0.067)    (0.055)
Abuse*      0.176*         0.064       0.048     -0.001        0.301*** 0.038      0.076        0.090      0.181**
 Male       (0.104)        (0.040)     (0.033)   (0.082)       (0.069)  (0.046)    (0.079)      (0.086)    (0.070)
Male        0.116**        -0.001      0.023     0.118***      -0.001   -0.002     0.071*       0.086**    0.098***
            (0.051)        (0.020)     (0.016)   (0.040)       (0.034)  (0.023)    (0.039)      (0.042)    (0.035)
5. Abuse=1 if Parents Struck etc. > 10 Times
Abuse       0.263**        0.005       0.015     0.192**       0.068    0.119** 0.084           0.131      0.038
            (0.122)        (0.047)     (0.039)   (0.096)       (0.083)  (0.054)    (0.092)      (0.100)    (0.083)
Abuse*      -0.023         0.038       0.067     -0.038        -0.042   -0.167** 0.177          -0.021     0.009
 Male       (0.161)        (0.062)     (0.052)   (0.127)       (0.110)  (0.072)    (0.122)      (0.133)    (0.110)


                                                                   44
Male        0.160***     0.014         0.032**    0.129***       0.064*     0.022      0.081**      0.104***   0.131***
            (0.048)      (0.019)       (0.015)    (0.038)        (0.033)    (0.021)    (0.036)      (0.040)    (0.033)
6. Abuse=1 if Sexual Abuse
Abuse       0.237**      0.019         0.022      0.218***       -0.040     0.019      -0.011       0.062      -0.027
            (0.094)      (0.035)       (0.029)    (0.074)        (0.063)    (0.041)    (0.073)      (0.078)    (0.065)
Abuse*      0.205        0.248***      0.190***   0.054          0.412***   0.250***   0.110        0.106      0.200**
 Male       (0.136)      (0.051)       (0.043)    (0.108)        (0.091)    (0.060)    (0.106)      (0.113)    (0.094)
Male        0.151***     -0.001        0.024      0.127***       0.033      -0.004     0.089**      0.099**    0.119***
            (0.048)      (0.018)       (0.015)    (0.038)        (0.032)    (0.021)    (0.037)      (0.040)    (0.033)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.




                                                                       45
Table 6: Twin FE Models with Interaction SES and Maltreatment
                Any        Armed                Damaged                 Theft         Any                       Ever
             Non-Drug Robbery Burglary Property Assault                 >$50      Hard Drug          Victim   Convicted
1. Abuse=1 if Any Maltreatment Using > 10 Cutoffs for Physical Abuse and Being Left Alone
Abuse        0.105**      -0.021      0.052***  0.081**     0.068*    0.014     0.069*              0.061     -0.030
             (0.052)      (0.020)     (0.017)   (0.041)     (0.035)   (0.023)   (0.040)             (0.043)   (0.035)
Abuse*       0.154*       0.097*** -0.024       0.047       -0.015    0.091**   0.061               0.067     0.149**
 Low SES (0.093)          (0.036)     (0.030)   (0.074)     (0.064)   (0.042)   (0.071)             (0.077)   (0.064)
2. Abuse=1 if Ever Any Maltreatment
Abuse        0.021        -0.022      0.019     0.030       0.021     -0.002    0.087***            0.016     -0.030
             (0.039)      (0.015)     (0.013)   (0.031)     (0.027)   (0.018)   (0.030)             (0.032)   (0.027)
Abuse*       0.224***     0.071**     0.005     0.144**     0.059     0.074**   0.062               0.083     0.131***
 Low SES (0.074)          (0.029)     (0.024)   (0.058)     (0.050)   (0.033)   (0.056)             (0.061)   (0.050)
3. Abuse=1 if Parents Left Alone When Should Have Been Supervised > 10 Times
Abuse        -0.009       -0.068**    0.026     0.029       0.045     -0.037    -0.026              0.073     -0.088*
             (0.075)      (0.029)     (0.024)   (0.059)     (0.051)   (0.033)   (0.057)             (0.062)   (0.051)
Abuse*       0.071        0.008       -0.020    -0.015      -0.089    0.136**   0.240**             0.047     0.294***
 Low SES (0.134)          (0.051)     (0.043)   (0.105)     (0.090)   (0.059)   (0.101)             (0.109)   (0.089)
4. Abuse=1 if Parents Ever Failed to Meet Basic Needs
Abuse        0.040        0.018       0.034     0.007       0.046     0.038     0.056               0.010     -0.008
             (0.070)      (0.027)     (0.022)   (0.055)     (0.047)   (0.031)   (0.053)             (0.058)   (0.048)
Abuse*       0.345***     0.102**     0.040     0.299***    0.108     0.087     0.096               0.095     0.107
 Low SES (0.119)          (0.046)     (0.038)   (0.094)     (0.081)   (0.053)   (0.091)             (0.099)   (0.082)
5. Abuse=1 if Parents Struck etc. > 10 Times
Abuse        0.325***     -0.003      0.085**   0.331***    0.121*    0.043     0.208**             0.151*    0.068
             (0.106)      (0.041)     (0.034)   (0.083)     (0.072)   (0.048)   (0.081)             (0.088)   (0.073)
Abuse*       -0.178       0.080       -0.085    -0.418***   -0.199* -0.041      -0.058              -0.075    -0.063
 Low SES (0.174)          (0.067)     (0.056)   (0.137)     (0.118)   (0.078)   (0.133)             (0.144)   (0.119)
6. Abuse=1 if Sexual Abuse
Abuse        0.280***     0.110*** 0.106***     0.169**     0.137** 0.077*      -0.037              0.090     0.072
             (0.093)      (0.036)     (0.030)   (0.074)     (0.064)   (0.041)   (0.072)             (0.078)   (0.065)
Abuse*       0.118        0.048       0.000     0.178       0.013     0.131**   0.184               0.048     -0.026
 Low SES (0.146)          (0.056)     (0.047)   (0.115)     (0.100)   (0.065)   (0.113)             (0.122)   (0.101)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.



                                                                       46
Table 7: Twin FE Models with Interaction Between Investigation by CPS or Foster and Maltreatment
                    Any         Armed                 Damaged                Theft         Any                       Ever
                 Non-Drug      Robbery Burglary Property Assault             > $50     Hard Drug   Victim          Convicted
1. Abuse=1 if Any Maltreatment Using > 10 Cutoffs for Physical Abuse and Being Left Alone
Abuse           0.100**        -0.015     0.041***    0.077**     0.014     0.041*     0.081**   0.043             -0.015
                (0.047)        (0.018)    (0.015)     (0.038)     (0.032)   (0.021)    (0.036)   (0.039)           (0.032)
Abuse*CPS or 0.291***          0.101**    -0.030      0.172**     0.165** -0.027       0.127     0.137             0.222***
 Foster         (0.110)        (0.042)    (0.035)     (0.087)     (0.073)   (0.050)    (0.084)   (0.091)           (0.075)
2. Abuse=1 if Ever Any Maltreatment
Abuse           0.039          -0.013     0.017       0.046       0.010     0.013      0.097***  0.019             -0.019
                (0.037)        (0.014)    (0.012)     (0.029)     (0.024)   (0.017)    (0.028)   (0.030)           (0.025)
Abuse*CPS or 0.371***          0.085**    -0.007      0.287***    0.117*    -0.006     0.111     0.140*            0.271***
 Foster         (0.098)        (0.038)    (0.032)     (0.078)     (0.066)   (0.045)    (0.075)   (0.081)           (0.067)

3. Abuse=1 if Parents Left Alone When Should Have Been Supervised > 10 Times
Abuse            -0.076          -0.060**   0.021     -0.059    0.020     -0.002          0.018         0.045      -0.023
                 (0.070)         (0.027)    (0.022)   (0.055)   (0.048)   (0.031)         (0.054)       (0.058)    (0.048)
Abuse*CPS or 0.517***            -0.089     -0.155**  0.498***  -0.151    -0.139          0.285*        0.120      0.181
 Foster          (0.197)         (0.076)    (0.063)   (0.155)   (0.134)   (0.088)         (0.151)       (0.162)    (0.135)
4. Abuse=1 if Parents Ever Failed to Meet Basic Needs
Abuse            0.061           0.003      0.028     0.073     -0.013    0.064**         0.085         -0.048     -0.007
                 (0.067)         (0.026)    (0.022)   (0.053)   (0.045)   (0.030)         (0.052)       (0.055)    (0.046)
Abuse*CPS or 0.390***            0.164*** 0.026       0.221**   0.224*** 0.005            0.096         0.302***   0.144
 Foster          (0.128)         (0.049)    (0.041)   (0.102)   (0.086)   (0.057)         (0.098)       (0.105)    (0.088)
5. Abuse=1 if Parents Struck etc. > 10 Times
Abuse            0.202**         0.034      0.066**   0.126*    0.058     0.036           0.177**       0.118      0.023
                 (0.095)         (0.037)    (0.031)   (0.075)   (0.065)   (0.043)         (0.072)       (0.078)    (0.065)
Abuse*CPS or 0.163               -0.025     -0.043    0.119     -0.035    -0.031          0.073         -0.076     0.109
 Foster          (0.175)         (0.068)    (0.056)   (0.139)   (0.119)   (0.079)         (0.133)       (0.145)    (0.120)
6. Abuse=1 if Sexual Abuse
Abuse            0.260***        0.054      0.084***  0.274***  -0.038    0.118***        0.020         0.057      -0.065
                 (0.092)         (0.035)    (0.029)   (0.073)   (0.061)   (0.041)         (0.071)       (0.077)    (0.063)
Abuse*CPS or 0.243               0.257*** 0.014       0.031     0.320*** 0.101            0.070         0.209      0.433***
 Foster          (0.177)         (0.067)    (0.057)   (0.140)   (0.118)   (0.079)         (0.138)       (0.148)    (0.121)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.


                                                                       47
Table 8: Twin FE Models with Multiple Experiences of Maltreatment
                          Any       Armed                Damaged                         Theft        Other                 Ever
Variable               Non-Drug Robbery Burglary Property                   Assault      >$50      Hard Drug   Victim    Convicted
Only One Maltreatment 0.082*       -0.027     0.023      0.031              0.021      0.002      0.079**      0.050     -0.007
                       (0.048)     (0.018)    (0.015)    (0.038)            (0.032)    (0.021)    (0.037)      (0.040)   (0.033)
Two or More types of   0.296***    0.106*** 0.105***     0.240***           0.152***   0.117***   0.097*       0.128**   0.068
Maltreatment           (0.071)     (0.027)    (0.023)    (0.056)            (0.048)    (0.032)    (0.055)      (0.059)   (0.049)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.




                                                                       48
Table 9: Estimated Annual Costs of Maltreatment in Terms of Increases in Costs of Crime

a) Costs from Lochner and Moretti (2004)
                                                                    Annual          Total
                                                Estimated         Per Person       Cost of
               Cost Per        Prevalence        Effect of         Cost of         Abuse
Crime           Crime        in Add Health     Abuse - OLS          Abuse         (millions)
Assault         9,917             0.071           0.064            $145.98          5,693
Robbery         9,385             0.020           0.006              12.95           505
Burglary         987              0.019           0.044               9.99         389.61
Theft>$50        198              0.033           0.040               1.82          100.1
                                                                     Sum:           6,688

b) Costs from Cohen (2004)
                                                                    Annual          Total
                                                Estimated         Per Person       Cost of
               Cost Per        Prevalence        Effect of         Cost of         Abuse
Crime           Crime        in Add Health     Abuse - OLS          Abuse         (millions)
Assault         70,000            0.071           0.064            1030.40         40,186
Robbery        232,000            0.020           0.006             320.16         12,486
Burglary        25,000            0.019           0.044             253.00          9,867
                                                                     Sum:          62,539

Notes: Lochner and Moretti (2004) present estimates of the social costs of crime and include
incarceration costs. Cohen (2004) derives estimates from a survey asking willingness to pay for
crime prevention.
Estimated effects of abuse on probability of crime are from Table 3, column 6. Annual per person
costs are obtained by multiplying the cost by the estimated effect, and then multiplying by the
incidence of any abuse (.23). Total cost of abuse is estimated based on 39 million people aged
20-29 in 2000. Costs in Lochner and Moretti are in $1993, and in Cohen are in $2000.




                                                   49
Appendix Table 1: Regressions of Differences in Twin Reports of Maltreatment on Differences in Reporting of Other Outcomes
                                                                                                                            Ever
                Ever Any      Any Maltreatment        Ever Left         Left      Ever failed to Ever Physical  Physical  Sexual
             Maltreatment            > 10X              Alone      Alone>10X       meet needs       Abuse      Abuse> 10X Abuse
1. Differences in reports about whether father had ever been in jail as of Wave I
Difference        0.117*             0.060             0.049         0.078            0.051          0.049         0.105  -0.030
                 (0.062)            (0.065)           (0.038)       (0.067)          (0.056)        (0.035)      (0.071)  (0.043)
2. Differences in reports about how often twins fight with each other
Difference        0.037              0.022             0.001         0.035            -0.022         0.020       0.055*   -0.012
                 (0.036)            (0.034)           (0.024)       (0.038)          (0.024)        (0.018)      (0.032)  (0.019)
3. Differences in reports about how far they must travel to see each other
Difference        0.027              0.050             0.007         0.034            -0.032         0.013        0.013    0.007
                 (0.056)            (0.050)           (0.036)       (0.058)          (0.033)        (0.027)      (0.048)  (0.029)
Differences in reports about how often they talk to each other
Difference        -0.033             -0.031            0.028         -0.014          -0.068*         0.006        -0.040   -0.009
                 (0.055)            (0.050)           (0.037)       (0.059)          (0.037)        (0.025)      (0.047)  (0.022)
5. Differences in reports about how often they see each other
Difference       -0.110*           -0.147***         -0.092**       -0.060            -0.056         -0.019       -0.045   -0.048
                 (0.066)            (0.055)           (0.038)       (0.070)          (0.044)        (0.033)      (0.057)  (0.032)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.




                                                                       50
Appendix Table 2: Definitions and Means of All Explanatory Variables Included in Regressions by Any Maltreatment, Type of
Maltreatment, Involvement CPS
Variable Name    Definition                            Full     Never       Ever        Left      Ever Failed   Ever       Physical   Ever      CPS or
                                                       Sample   Any         Left        Alone     to Meet       Physical   Abuse      Sexual    Foster
                                                                Maltreat    Alone       >10X      Needs         Abuse      >10X       Abuse
                                                                ment
Age18 a          =1 if 18 years old, =0 otherwise       0.010     0.009         0.012     0.017      0.010        0.011      0.015      0.008    0.011
Age19            =1 if 19 years old, =0 otherwise       0.095     0.090         0.104     0.093      0.093        0.091      0.070      0.114    0.099
Age20            =1 if 20 years old, =0 otherwise       0.132     0.123         0.145     0.152      0.156        0.134      0.143      0.126    0.144
Age21            =1 if 21 years old, =0 otherwise       0.160     0.159         0.163     0.158      0.168        0.151      0.124      0.151    0.149
Age22            =1 if 22 years old, =0 otherwise       0.190     0.186         0.189     0.166      0.182        0.201      0.197      0.182    0.213
Age23            =1 if 23 years old, =0 otherwise       0.192     0.198         0.187     0.208      0.179        0.191      0.195      0.197    0.191
Age24            =1 if 24 years old, =0 otherwise       0.160     0.170         0.145     0.150      0.141        0.160      0.194      0.152    0.140
Age25            =1 if 25 years old, =0 otherwise       0.152     0.055         0.048     0.050      0.058        0.054      0.051      0.060    0.048
Age26+           =1 if 26 years old or older, =0        0.009     0.010         0.008     0.006      0.012        0.006      0.011      0.011    0.006
                 otherwise
Male             =1 if male, =0 otherwise               0.459     0.436         0.491     0.495      0.567        0.489      0.482      0.432    0.433
White            =1 if white, =0 otherwise              0.656     0.670         0.642     0.642      0.559        0.635      0.610      0.575    0.609
Black            =1 if Black, =0 otherwise              0.222     0.229         0.220     0.201      0.282        0.211      0.217      0.274    0.272
             a
Other race       =1 if other race, =0 otherwise         0.105     0.085         0.120     0.135      0.141        0.133      0.147      0.115    0.105
Hispanic         =1 if Hispanic, =0 otherwise           0.159     0.146         0.170     0.150      0.201        0.189      0.176      0.203    0.141
USborn           =1 if born in the U.S., =0             0.922     0.931         0.912     0.908      0.904        0.906      0.904      0.922    0.952
                 otherwise
Mother Ed<HS     =1 if the mother has less than         0.142     0.137         0.145     0.144      0.189        0.154      0.157      0.188    0.192
a
                 high school degree, =0 otherwise
Mother Ed=HS     =1 if the mother has high school       0.316     0.318         0.317     0.288      0.320        0.304      0.261      0.288    0.318
                 degree, =0 otherwise
Mother Ed>HS     =1 if the mother has more than         0.443     0.453         0.428     0.442      0.338        0.430      0.442      0.368    0.324
                 high school degree, =0 otherwise
Jailed father    =1 if the biological father was        0.135     0.098         0.177     0.219      0.208        0.189      0.226      0.228    0.272
                 ever jailed, =0 otherwise
Catholic         =1 if parents are Catholic, =0         0.247     0.235         0.254     0.244      0.236        0.267      0.223      0.238    0.202
                 otherwise
Baptist          =1 if parents are Baptist, =0          0.204     0.220         0.192     0.173      0.238        0.177      0.177      0.240    0.217
                 otherwise
Other            =1 if parents are other Protestant,    0.210     0.219         0.203     0.211      0.166        0.195      0.191      0.148    0.207
Protestant       =0 otherwise
Other Religion   =1 if parents are other religion,      0.145     0.142         0.145     0.155      0.131        0.155      0.183      0.145    0.150
                 =0 otherwise
No Religion a    =1 if parents believe in no            0.054     0.048         0.060     0.068      0.062        0.060      0.058      0.069    0.069
                 religion, =0 otherwise


                                                                           51
First Child     =1 if the person is the first child,   0.489   0.470        0.510   0.556   0.490   0.522   0.559   0.520   0.533
                =0 otherwise
Welfare         =1 if parents were on welfare          0.073   0.066        0.077   0.076   0.135   0.084   0.084   0.135   0.160
                during Wave I, =0 otherwise
Very Low BW     =1 if birth weight was less than       0.018   0.020        0.016   0.015   0.018   0.015   0.018   0.020   0.020
                1500 grams, =0 otherwise
Low BW          =1 if birth weight was between         0.072   0.070        0.077   0.067   0.071   0.071   0.076   0.091   0.090
                1500 and 2500 grams, =0
                otherwise
Normal BW a     =1 if birth weight is greater than     0.730   0.743        0.714   0.711   0.676   0.722   0.700   0.680   0.600
                2500 grams, =0 otherwise
Sibling0 a      =1 if no siblings, =0 otherwise        0.193   0.183        0.210   0.265   0.217   0.202   0.229   0.212   0.267
Sibling1        =1 if one sibling, =0 otherwise        0.353   0.357        0.346   0.361   0.317   0.352   0.323   0.337   0.286
Sibling2        =1 if two siblings, =0 otherwise       0.244   0.240        0.246   0.221   0.238   0.241   0.233   0.228   0.189
Sibling3        =1 if three sibling, =0 otherwise      0.114   0.119        0.111   0.091   0.121   0.111   0.124   0.112   0.097
Sibling4+       =1 if four or more siblings, =0        0.080   0.083        0.072   0.053   0.097   0.081   0.083   0.095   0.100
                otherwise
Income<50%      =1 if parental income was less         0.042   0.039        0.043   0.049   0.070   0.048   0.051   0.063   0.087
                50% of poverty line at Wave I,
                =0 otherwise
Income50-       =1 if parental income was              0.062   0.061        0.064   0.063   0.092   0.065   0.067   0.105   0.111
100%            between 50% and 100% of
                poverty line at Wave I, =0
                otherwise
Income100-      =1 if parental income was              0.139   0.130        0.153   0.145   0.178   0.153   0.154   0.192   0.276
200%            between 100% and 200% of
                poverty line at Wave I, =0
                otherwise
Income200%a     =1 if parental income was greater      0.757   0.770        0.740   0.744   0.660   0.734   0.728   0.640   0.626
                than 200% of poverty line at
                Wave I, =0 otherwise
Biological      =1 if biological father was            0.587   0.623        0.541   0.465   0.472   0.554   0.554   0.412   0.321
Father          present at Wave I, =0 otherwise
Step Father     =1 if step father was present at       0.108   0.097        0.120   0.142   0.102   0.121   0.124   0.145   0.239
                Wave I, =0 otherwise
No Father a     =1 if no father was present at         0.302   0.277        0.336   0.392   0.422   0.322   0.317   0.435   0.432
                Wave I, =0 otherwise
Mother Age at   Mother’s age at respondent’s           0.074   0.069        0.083   0.092   0.094   0.084   0.080   0.106   0.084
birth 19 a      birth was 19 or less, =0 otherwise
Mother Age at   Mother’s age at respondent’s           0.519   0.529        0.506   0.488   0.467   0.507   0.492   0.471   0.350
birth20-30      birth was between 20 and 30, =0


                                                                       52
                   otherwise
Mother Age at      Mother’s age at respondent’s           0.133          0.146        0.120      0.102          0.086          0.114           0.099          0.095    0.061
birth31-40         birth was between 31-40, =0
                   otherwise
Mother Age at      Mother’s age at respondent’s           0.007          0.007        0.006      0.004          0.007          0.007           0.009          0.009    0.005
birth40+           birth was greater than 40, =0
                   otherwise
a
  Omitted category.
Notes: The models also include binary variables for the missing data on race, Hispanic Ethnicity, U.S. born status, parental religiosity, first child, birth weight,
number of siblings, parental welfare status, mother’s education, jailed father, family income, and mother’s age at respondent’s birth. Therefore, the sum of
dummies for these variables may not sum up to 1 in the Table.




                                                                                  53
Appendix Table 3: Criminal Activity by SES and CPS/Foster Care Intervention
                                    Low SES                                              High SES
                                                  Abuse using                                               Abuse using
                 Never Abuse       Ever Abuse    Higher Cutoffs Never Abuse             Ever Abuse         Higher Cutoffs
Ever convicted       0.046            0.106          0.126          0.038                 0.069                0.097
Damaged property     0.039            0.116          0.138          0.055                  0.118               0.136
Assault              0.071            0.127          0.150          0.042                  0.078               0.107
Robbery              0.015            0.039          0.054          0.010                  0.024               0.034
Burglary             0.011            0.032          0.043          0.009                  0.026               0.040
Theft>$50            0.018            0.051          0.065          0.017                  0.046               0.060
Used Other Drug      0.062            0.125          0.093          0.092                  0.161               0.138
Crime Victim         0.098            0.185          0.215          0.071                  0.113               0.157
Any Non-drug         0.121            0.240          0.279          0.105                  0.204               0.251
# Observations       1,361            1,880          1,006          5,030                  5,220               2,105

                                 CPS or Foster Care                                No CPS or Foster Care
                                                       Abuse using                                          Abuse using
                   Never Abuse      Ever Abuse        Higher Cutoffs Never Abuse        Ever Abuse         Higher Cutoffs
Ever convicted        0.056           0.163               0.160         0.040              0.069               0.095
Damaged property      0.075           0.151               0.159         0.052              0.114               0.132
Assault               0.179            0.163              0.169         0.041              0.075               0.100
Robbery               0.013           0.067               0.071         0.011              0.023               0.032
Burglary              0.013           0.053               0.055         0.009              0.023               0.035
Theft>$50             0.031           0.069               0.076         0.017              0.044               0.057
Used Other Drug       0.130           0.192               0.204         0.086              0.148               0.164
Crime Victim          0.247           0.163               0.227         0.069              0.115               0.152
Any Non-drug          0.255           0.294               0.301         0.101              0.199               0.242
# Observations         162              646                494          5,898              6,065               2,421




                                                                     54
Appendix Table 4: Full OLS Results for Models Corresponding to Column 2 of Table 3.
                            Any    Armed            Damaged Attacked Theft          Other                Ever
Variable                Non-Drug Robbery Burglary Property Someone > $50 Hard Drug Victim             Convicted
Any Abuse               0.108*** 0.023*** 0.026*** 0.060*** 0.053*** 0.033*** 0.065***     0.074***   0.047***
                        (0.008)   (0.004) (0.004) (0.007)     (0.006)  (0.005) (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.006)
Age19                   0.050     0.008    -0.016   0.026     0.015    -0.025    -0.042    0.047*     0.013
                        (0.034)   (0.013) (0.018) (0.028)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.034)     (0.026)    (0.019)
Age20                   0.010     0.004    -0.015   -0.005    -0.010   -0.026    -0.040    0.012      0.013
                        (0.034)   (0.013) (0.018) (0.028)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.033)     (0.025)    (0.018)
Age21                   -0.006    0.004    -0.025   -0.023    0.005    -0.041* -0.064*     0.021      0.011
                        (0.033)   (0.013) (0.017) (0.028)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.033)     (0.025)    (0.018)
Age22                   -0.021    -0.002   -0.027   -0.033    -0.010   -0.038* -0.065**    0.014      0.018
                        (0.033)   (0.013) (0.017) (0.027)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.033)     (0.025)    (0.018)
Age23                   -0.039    -0.005   -0.027   -0.051*   -0.009   -0.049** -0.071**   0.010      0.016
                        (0.033)   (0.013) (0.017) (0.027)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.033)     (0.025)    (0.018)
Age24                   -0.066** -0.005    -0.033* -0.060** -0.025     -0.049** -0.080**   -0.011     0.012
                        (0.033)   (0.013) (0.017) (0.027)     (0.024)  (0.022) (0.033)     (0.025)    (0.018)
Age25                   -0.072** -0.015    -0.042** -0.071** -0.023    -0.067*** -0.096*** -0.003     0.025
                        (0.035)   (0.013) (0.017) (0.028)     (0.025)  (0.022) (0.034)     (0.027)    (0.020)
Age26+                  -0.068    -0.002   -0.039** -0.083** 0.006     -0.056** -0.109*** 0.014       -0.006
                        (0.046)   (0.019) (0.019) (0.033)     (0.037)  (0.026) (0.039)     (0.041)    (0.027)
Male                    0.156*** 0.023*** 0.020*** 0.095*** 0.080*** 0.029*** 0.055***     0.102***   0.088***
                        (0.006)   (0.003) (0.002) (0.005)     (0.005)  (0.003) (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.004)
White                   -0.026** 0.001     -0.007   -0.008    -0.015*  -0.005    0.036***  -0.015     0.002
                        (0.013)   (0.004) (0.005) (0.010)     (0.009)  (0.007) (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.008)
Black                   0.021     0.023*** 0.009    -0.017    0.031*** 0.009     -0.072*** 0.036***   -0.009
                        (0.015)   (0.006) (0.006) (0.011)     (0.011)  (0.008) (0.011)     (0.013)    (0.009)
Hispanic                -0.001    0.004    0.000    -0.021*** 0.016**  0.001     -0.017*   0.018*     -0.009
                        (0.010)   (0.004) (0.004) (0.008)     (0.008)  (0.005) (0.010)     (0.009)    (0.007)
Usborn                  0.024*    0.007*   0.003    0.008     0.027*** -0.000    0.046***  0.048***   0.040***
                        (0.013)   (0.004) (0.004) (0.009)     (0.009)  (0.007) (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.006)
Mother Ed=HS            -0.012    0.002    0.002    -0.007    -0.006   -0.009* 0.013       -0.019**   -0.015**
                        (0.010)   (0.004) (0.004) (0.008)     (0.008)  (0.005) (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.007)
Mother Ed>HS            -0.005    0.004    0.000    0.007     -0.015*  -0.006    0.036***  -0.022**   -0.013*


                                                                55
                    (0.010)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.007)
Jailed Father       0.038***    0.013***   0.007*    0.018**   0.028***    0.012**     0.034***   0.034***    0.052***
                    (0.010)     (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.008)
Catholic            0.020*      0.001      0.002     0.011     0.007       0.003       -0.001     -0.005      0.004
                    (0.011)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.007)
Baptist             0.004       -0.000     -0.008*   -0.014*   0.018**     -0.011**    -0.017*    0.015       0.009
                    (0.011)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.009)    (0.010)     (0.007)
Other Protestant    0.017       0.001      0.000     -0.004    0.017**     -0.004      -0.003     0.007       0.011
                    (0.011)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.007)
No Religion         0.019       -0.010*    -0.001    0.005     0.032***    -0.006      0.013      0.025*      0.021*
                    (0.016)     (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.013)   (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.015)    (0.013)     (0.011)
First Child         0.003       -0.002     0.001     0.010*    0.000       0.001       -0.007     0.001       -0.003
                    (0.008)     (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.006)   (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.007)    (0.006)     (0.005)
Very low BW         -0.022      -0.003     -0.006    0.007     -0.010      -0.028***   -0.025     0.003       0.011
                    (0.023)     (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.018)   (0.017)     (0.006)     (0.018)    (0.021)     (0.017)
Low BW              -0.012      0.003      -0.002    -0.003    -0.000      -0.008      -0.008     -0.008      0.009
                    (0.012)     (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.005)     (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.008)
Sibling1            -0.006      -0.004     0.002     0.001     0.001       0.000       -0.004     -0.005      -0.016**
                    (0.010)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.009)    (0.008)     (0.007)
Sibling2            -0.000      -0.004     0.002     0.009     0.005       0.002       -0.015     0.004       -0.015*
                    (0.012)     (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.008)
Sibling3            -0.001      -0.010*    0.002     0.005     0.012       -0.003      -0.020*    -0.006      -0.014
                    (0.014)     (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.011)   (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.009)
Sibling4+           -0.001      -0.000     -0.000    0.001     0.013       0.005       -0.019     0.029**     -0.001
                    (0.016)     (0.007)    (0.006)   (0.011)   (0.011)     (0.008)     (0.013)    (0.014)     (0.011)
Welfare             0.005       -0.002     -0.002    0.006     -0.004      0.007       -0.015     0.001       0.002
                    (0.014)     (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.010)   (0.011)     (0.007)     (0.010)    (0.013)     (0.009)
Income<50%          0.015       0.001      -0.006    0.015     0.008       0.001       -0.018     0.007       0.009
                    (0.021)     (0.009)    (0.009)   (0.015)   (0.016)     (0.010)     (0.015)    (0.019)     (0.014)
Income50-100%       -0.019      -0.005     -0.009    -0.013    -0.010      -0.008      -0.013     -0.020      -0.006
                    (0.019)     (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.013)   (0.015)     (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.017)     (0.012)
Income100-200%      0.003       -0.006     -0.005    0.011     -0.010      0.005       0.006      -0.011      0.001
                    (0.018)     (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.013)   (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.014)    (0.016)     (0.012)
Biological Father   -0.184***   -0.042     0.006     -0.035    -0.170***   -0.020      0.007      -0.161***   0.016
                    (0.065)     (0.032)    (0.006)   (0.044)   (0.058)     (0.029)     (0.042)    (0.062)     (0.032)


                                                                  56
Step Father                   -0.186*** -0.045    0.007   -0.038     -0.162***   -0.013    0.042      -0.138**    0.026
                              (0.065)    (0.033) (0.007) (0.045)     (0.058)     (0.029)   (0.043)    (0.062)     (0.032)
Mother Age at birth20-30 -0.009          -0.002   -0.001  -0.000     -0.015      -0.001    0.031***   -0.017      0.001
                              (0.013)    (0.005) (0.005) (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.006)   (0.010)    (0.012)     (0.009)
Mother Age at birth31-40 -0.001          -0.001   0.001   0.011      -0.019*     -0.002    0.049***   -0.030**    -0.004
                              (0.015)    (0.006) (0.006) (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.008)   (0.012)    (0.013)     (0.010)
Mother Age at birth40+ -0.055            -0.003   0.001   -0.022     -0.042      -0.018    0.022      -0.074***   -0.034
                              (0.039)    (0.017) (0.016) (0.028)     (0.026)     (0.017)   (0.030)    (0.028)     (0.021)
Constant                      0.055      0.036    0.020   0.023      0.109       0.065*    -0.148**   0.069       -0.072
                              (0.079)    (0.037) (0.022) (0.059)     (0.066)     (0.039)   (0.060)    (0.071)     (0.048)
Number of Observations 13452             13482    13482   13453      13489       13478     13502      13486       13493
R-squared                     0.08       0.03     0.02    0.06       0.06        0.02      0.06       0.07        0.07
Standard errors in parentheses.
A *, **, *** indicates significance at 90%, 95%, 99% respectively.
Note: Model also includes state fixed effects.




                                                                        57
Appendix Table 5: Summary of Studies on the Effect of Child Abuse on Future Criminal Behavior
Study          Outcome/Abuse                   Data/Sample                  Methodology              Results
Swantson et    Juvenile offending, aggression, Children with substantiated Logistic regressions.     Effect of sexual abuse on self-reported
al. (2003)     and delinquency; Sexual abuse   sexual abuse who were        Controls for age, sex,   criminal activity, Odds ratio=2.29
                                               hospitalized in Australia.   SES, and whether the     Effect of sexual abuse on official conviction
                                               Interviews with 38 abused    child was living with    records, Odds ratio=1.64
                                               and 68 non-abused            biological parents at    SES is not a significant predictor of
                                               individuals and their        intake.                  criminality.
                                               parents nine years after
                                               intake. Controls were
                                               selected randomly from
                                               schools in Sydney.
Widom          Official records of arrest for  908 cases of substantiated   “Matched cohorts”        Being abused or neglected increased arrests
(1989b)        delinquency, adult criminality, physical and sexual abuse    design. Matching is      for delinquency.(Control=16.8,
               and violent criminal behavior;  and neglect cases from       done on the basis of     Treatment=26%), adult criminal record
               Sexual abuse, physical abuse,   1967 through 1971 from       age, sex, race, and      (Control=21.1%, Treatment=28.6%), and any
               and neglect.                    one metropolitan area in the school child attended    violent criminal record (Control=7.9%,
                                               Midwest. Victims 11 years (as an approximation        Treatment=11.2%).
                                               of age or less (drawn from   for SES).
                                               an examination of the
                                               population of 2623 abuse
                                               and neglect petitions).
                                               Control group contained
                                               667 cases.
Siegel and     Official records of arrest for  206 women treated in a       McNemar’s Test for       Sexual abuse increases the odds of both
Williams       any offense, for a violent or   hospital emergency room in bivariate                  juvenile and adult arrests (Odds ratios are 2.4
(2003)         property offense, for running a a major city following a     relationships and        and 2.0, respectively).
               way, and for drug offense;      report of child sexual abuse multivariate logistic
               Sexual abuse.                   during 1973-1975 and 205     regressions. Separate
                                               women from the emergency analyses for
                                               room records of the same     delinquent adult and
                                               hospital who had no          juvenile outcomes.
                                               recorded child sexual abuse No controls for
                                               history. Control group       family background.
                                               matched on race, age and

                                                                   58
                                                  the date seen in the
                                                  emergency room.
Smith and      Self reported prevalence and       1000 students from the        Logistic regressions.   A history of maltreatment increases the
Thornberry     frequency of: general              Rochester Youth               Controls for race,      probability of having an official record of
(1995)         delinquency, serious               Development Study are         ethnicity, sex, SES,    arrest by 13 percentage points. A history of
               delinquency, (e.g. armed           interviewed over a period     and family structure.   maltreatment increases the probabilities of
               robbery and burglary),             of four and one-half years.                           having self-reported moderate and violent
               moderate delinquency (e.g. joy-                                                          delinquencies by 13 and 11 percentage points,
               riding and simple assault),                                                              respectively. The effects on serious and
               minor delinquency (minor theft                                                           minor delinquencies are 7 and 8 percentage
               and being loud and rowdy in                                                              points, but are not significant.
               public), and violent
               delinquency (an index of
               violent offenses). Official data
               include the number of times
               subjects had official contact
               with the police as a juvenile or
               an arrest as an adult;
               Maltreatment measured using
               on data from Child Protective
               Services records.
Maxfield and   Official records of arrest for     See Widom, above.             See Widom, above. .     At an average age of 26, 29% of the abused
Widom (1996)   delinquency, adult criminality,                                                          and neglected children had been arrested in
               and violent criminal behavior;                                                           comparison to 21% of the controls. By the
               Sexual abuse, physical abuse,                                                            average age of 32.5, 49% of the abused and
               and neglect.                                                                             neglected children had been arrested while
                                                                                                        38% of the controls had been arrested. 18% of
                                                                                                        the maltreated group had been arrested for a
                                                                                                        violent offense in comparison to 14% of the
                                                                                                        control group. Odds of being arrested as a
                                                                                                        juvenile were 1.8 times higher than for the
                                                                                                        matched controls. The odds for adult arrest
                                                                                                        and for arrest for a violent offense were 11.57
                                                                                                        and 1.35 times higher, respectively.
                                                                                                        Maltreated females significantly more likely
                                                                                                        to have arrests for violence as juveniles and
                                                                                                        adults than non-abused and neglected females.


                                                                      59
Zingraff et al.   Court records of complaints      Randomly sampled one in        Logistic regressions.    Maltreated children are at a higher risk of
(1993)            filed with the juvenile court;   three substantiated cases      Controls for age, sex,   delinquency in comparison to the school
                  Physical abuse, sexual abuse,    from the child abuse and       race, and family         based sample (14% versus 5%). 9% of the
                  and neglect.                     neglect registry of an urban   structure                controls from the welfare caseloads were
                                                   North Carolina county                                   referred to the juvenile court on delinquency
                                                   during 1983-1989.                                       complaints. No significant differences
                                                   Comparison groups                                       between the groups for violent or property
                                                   randomly drawn from the                                 offenses.
                                                   county’s public school
                                                   population and the county’s
                                                   welfare caseload.
                                                   Maltreatment measures
                                                   from the substantiated
                                                   social service agency
                                                   records.
English,          Juvenile and adult arrest        877 substantiated cases of     Matched cohorts          Overall, 19.6% of the abused and neglected
Widom, and        records from local, state, and   child abuse and/or neglect     design with control      group versus 4.1% of the controls had a
Brandford         federal law enforcement          from court dependency          cases matched based      juvenile arrest record (Relative risk=4.8) and
(2002)            agencies 15-24 years following   records during 1980-84         on the basis of age,     41.7% of the abused and neglected group
                  dependency; Abuse measures       from a large urban area of     race, ethnicity,         versus 21.05 of the controls had an adult
                  include injury, sexual abuse,    the State of Washington        gender, and family       arrest (Relative risk=2). Abused and neglected
                  sexual exploitation, and         and 877 cases of non-          social class.            males are 5 times more likely to be arrested as
                  negligent treatment.             abused and non-neglected       Univariate, bivariate,   a juvenile (32% versus 6%) and about two
                                                   matched control group.         and multivariate         times more likely to be arrested as an adult
                                                                                  statistical techniques   (59.5% versus 31.6%). Abused and
                                                                                  were used to analyze     neglected females are 4 times more likely to
                                                                                  the data.                be arrested as a juvenile (64.3% versus
                                                                                                           32.3%) and twice as likely to be arrested as an
                                                                                                           adult compared to controls (25.8% versus
                                                                                                           11.5%)
Widom (2000)      Arrest records, suicide attempts, See Widom, above.             See Widom, above.        Odds of arrest for a juvenile offense are 1.9
                  diagnosis of antisocial                                                                  times higher among maltreated than among
                  personality disorder, alcohol                                                            controls (31.2% versus 19%) and odds of
                  abuse and/or dependence;                                                                 arrest for an adult crime are 1.6 times higher
                  Maltreatment measures include                                                            (48.4% versus 36.2%). 18.8 % of the
                  childhood physical abuse,                                                                maltreated and 7.7% of the controls had
                  sexual abuse, and neglect.                                                               suicide attempts; 18.4% of the maltreated and


                                                                        60
                                                                                                         11.2% of the controls had antisocial
                                                                                                         personality disorder; 54.5% of the maltreated
                                                                                                         and 51% of the controls had alcohol
                                                                                                         abuse/dependence. Larger effects on suicide
                                                                                                         attempts and alcohol abuse/dependence for
                                                                                                         females than for males.
Rebellon and   Detailed measures of self-          Data from the 1st (1976), 2nd   Negative binomial     Physical parental abuse is associated with an
Van Gundy      reported delinquency (e.g. theft,   (1977), and 3rd (1978)          estimation.           increase of 97 percent in violent offense
(2005)         robbery, burglary, gang fights,     waves of the National           Demographic and       counts and an increase of 240 percent in
               assault); Abuse measure is          Youth Survey.                   social controls are   property offense counts controlling for
               physical abuse.                                                     included.             demographics.
Grogan-        Number of arrests experienced       See Widom, above.               OLS and Tobit         No statistically significant effects in OLS.
Kaylor and     as a young adult for violent                                        regression analyses   Tobit analyses suggest that neglected children
Otis (2003)    crimes and property crimes;                                                               averaged 0.45 more arrests (a 38% increase
               Abuse measures include                                                                    from the mean) than nonneglected children
               physical abuse, neglect and                                                               and the effect is statistically significant.
               sexual abuse.                                                                             Physical abuse and sexual abuse increase the
                                                                                                         number of arrests by 0.18 (a 16% increase
                                                                                                         from the mean) and 0.09 (8% increase from
                                                                                                         the mean), respectively, but the effects are not
                                                                                                         significant.




                                                                       61
