NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC PRESCHOOL AND MATERNAL LABOR SUPPLY:
EVIDENCE FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF KINDERGARTENS
INTO AMERICAN PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Elizabeth Cascio
Working Paper 12179
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12179
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

This paper has benefited from the comments of Hilary Hoynes, Ethan Lewis, Ann Huff Stevens, and
participants at the Second Annual UKCPR Small Grants Conference. This project was supported with a grant
from the UK Center for Poverty Research through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, grant number 5 ASPE417-02. The opinions
and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author and should not be construed as representing
the opinions or policy of the UKCPR or any agency of the Federal government. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Elizabeth Cascio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Public Preschool and Maternal Labor Supply: Evidence from the Introduction of Kindergartens
into American Public Schools
Elizabeth Cascio
NBER Working Paper No. 12179
April 2006
JEL No. H52, I20, J13, J22
ABSTRACT
Beginning in the mid-1960s, many state governments, particularly in the South and West, began to
subsidize kindergartens for the first time. These initiatives generated wide variation across states
over time in the supply of seats for five year olds in public schools. This paper uses the staggered
timing and age-targeting of these preschool expansions to examine how the provision of universal
child care through public schools affects maternal labor supply. I find that single women with five
year olds but no younger children were more likely to be employed once kindergartens were
available. The estimated effect is large, implying that three mothers entered the labor force for every
ten children enrolled in public school. By contrast, I detect no significant labor supply response
among other single women with eligible children or among married mothers of five year olds. These
findings complement other research suggesting that preschools targeted toward at-risk populations,
such as children in single-parent families, are more cost effective than universal programs.
Elizabeth Cascio
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
eucascio@ucdavis.edu

I.

Introduction
State and local governments across the United States are either considering or have

already passed initiatives to extend public schooling to children under the age of five. While the
main benefit of preschool is thought to come through improvements in the longer-run social and
economic outcomes of attendees (Barnett 1995; Karoly et al. 1998; Currie 2001), public schooling
also provides free child care during the school day. This has prompted some to argue that
increases in employment of primary caregivers and reductions in use of public assistance would
help offset the cost of universal preschools in the short term (e.g., Gelbach 2002; Karoly and
Bigelow 2005). The loss in labor output from an inability of many families to afford high-quality
child care may alone be sufficient justification for provision of universal preschools.
But how much does employment – maternal employment in particular – respond to
public schooling? Which mothers change their labor supply? Many studies have estimated the
sensitivity of maternal employment to child care costs (see Anderson and Levine (1999) and Blau
and Currie (2004)), but their elasticity estimates are not easily generalized, in part because free
preschools do not provide a pure price subsidy to all mothers (Gelbach 1999). Several recent
studies also examine how public preschool availability affects maternal labor supply using quasiexperiments (Baker, Gruber, and Milligan 2005; Berlinski and Galiani 2005; Schlosser 2005).
However, these studies are focused on other countries, where mothers arguably have different
preferences and different competing child care arrangements. Moreover, while Gelbach (2002)
presents estimates of how preschool eligibility influences maternal labor supply in the United
States, he employs an identification strategy that has been criticized in other applications.
This paper provides new evidence on these questions by using variation in preschool
availability from the introduction of kindergartens into American public schools. Starting in the
mid-1960s, many state governments began subsidizing provision of public school kindergarten

1

programs for the first time. These funding initiatives generated rapid increases in the probability
that school districts operated kindergartens: In most affected states, public kindergartens went
from being sporadically available to universal in a matter of three or four years (Cascio 2004). My
analysis compares the child care and labor force decisions of women with age-eligible (five-yearold) children around the time these funding initiatives were passed. I construct several
comparison groups, taking advantage of the staggered timing of the funding initiatives, as well as
the fact that they did not subsidize the care of children who were not age five.
My analysis uses data from the public use microdata samples of the 1950 through 1990
Decennial Censuses. Relative to recent work on related questions using a similar research design
(Baker, Gruber, and Milligan 2005; Berlinski and Galiani 2005; Schlosser 2005), the Census allows
me to examine pre-initiative trends in employment over a long period, which is key in evaluating
the credibility of my differences-in-differences (DD) estimates. The Census also offers large
samples, which make it possible to estimate models for different subpopulations and to define
narrow comparison groups for a differences-in-differences-in-differences (DDD) type analysis.
I find that the introduction of state aid for kindergartens raised the labor supply of single
mothers of five year olds and no younger children, but had no effect on the labor supply of other
women with eligible children. For the former, the employment estimates are highly stable across
specifications and choice of comparison group. The estimates are also sizable, implying that for
every ten children enrolled in public school as a result of the funding initiatives, three mothers
entered the labor force. By contrast, for married mothers of five year olds with no younger
children, there is not a statistically significant employment response, and estimates are precise
enough to rule out effects of the magnitude observed for their single counterparts. The estimates
for single and married mothers with children aged five and younger are more sensitive to
specification, but hover around zero. For all groups, the introduction of kindergartens led to

2

large increases in the public school enrollment, and for most, there was a large and significant
movement away from private programs.
These findings suggest that, at most, modern-day preschool expansions in United States
will generate positive labor supply responses among single mothers. As a result, it may be more
cost effective to target public preschool programs toward at-risk populations. Indeed, although
universal preschools make child care accessible to many credit-constrained single parents, they
also crowd out private child care that is affordable, particularly for two-parent families. Targeted
early childhood interventions may also have longer-run social and economic benefits for children
(Barnett 1995; Karoly et al. 1998; Currie 2001; Cunha et al. 2005) that do not exist for lowerintensity universal programs (Cascio 2004).
In the next section, I further distinguish the approach of this paper from the existing
literature. Section III describes the kindergarten funding initiatives and formalizes the
identification strategy. Section IV describes the Census samples and conducts some preliminary
specification tests. Section V presents the results, and in Section VI, I discuss the findings and
conclude.

II.

Background
A well-known empirical regularity in the study of female employment is the strong

positive relationship between the age of a woman’s youngest child and her labor supply. The
probability of that a mother is employed rises steeply between the birth of her last child and
when that child turns age six, and remains relatively flat as he continues to age. This suggests that
public schooling may make relatively high quality child care accessible to many mothers who
would otherwise not be able to afford it on the private market. If so, extending public schooling
to younger children may speed a mother’s return to paid work.

3

Gelbach (1999) formalized this idea. For mothers who would not otherwise be working,
public preschool provides a 100 percent price subsidy for child care on the employment margin,
increasing the price of leisure relative to private consumption and encouraging women to
substitute toward work. For mothers who would otherwise work more hours than the length of
the school day, the price subsidy for child care is inframarginal, with a kink in the budget
constraint occurring where the number of hours worked is equal to the number of hours in the
school day. The effect of public preschool eligibility on maternal labor supply is neither a price
nor an income elasticity of employment, but rather a combination of the two.
While important from a policy perspective, identifying the effect of a child’s public school
eligibility on his mother’s labor supply is challenging, since his age might be related to other
factors that bear on the mother’s decision. Identifying the effect of public preschool availability
on maternal labor supply is similarly difficult, since localities that fund preschools are likely doing
so in response to demand.
The existing literature has tackled this identification problem in two ways. The first
approach attempts to find instrumental variables for a child’s eligibility for existing public
preschools. For example, five year olds born in the first quarter of the calendar year are
significantly less likely to be attending public school kindergarten, in large part because they
would have been too young to qualify for school entrance the prior fall (Angrist and Krueger,
1991).1 Using quarter of birth as an instrument for the public kindergarten enrollment of five
year olds in 1980 U.S. Census, Gelbach (2002) finds that married mothers with children in public
kindergarten were more likely to be working and work more hours, regardless of the age of the
youngest child in the household. Among single mothers, significant positive responses were
limited to those with no children under the age of five.
Age in the Census is measured as of April 1. Five year olds born in the first quarter are therefore the
youngest five year olds.

1

4

While Gelbach (2002) represents a novel attempt to find exogenous variation in public
school eligibility, the season of a child’s birth may be directly related to his mother’s employment
status. The invalidity of the quarter-of-birth instrument for schooling was initially suggested for
applications where wage was the dependent variable (Bound, Jaeger, and Baker 1995; Bound and
Jaeger 2000). More recently, season of (mother’s) birth has been shown to have direct effects on
infant health (McCrary and Royer 2005), as well as on (own) test scores during high school
(Cascio and Lewis forthcoming). Quarter of birth may thus be related to human capital shared
by mother and child and therefore not a valid instrument. The approach taken in this paper relies
in no way on this source of variation.
The second approach to identification, and the one taken in this paper, exploits variation
in the presence of public preschool programs across geographic areas over time – a DD
approach. Recent DD studies have focused on preschool expansions in other countries,
including Argentina (Berlinski and Galiani 2005), Canada (Baker, Gruber, and Milligan 2005), and
Israel (Schlosser 2005). Each of these papers uncovers strong take-up of new preschool seats,
though the magnitude and precision of their estimated labor supply responses vary dramatically.
Nonetheless, each study finds some evidence that increases in the supply of preschool slots raises
maternal employment, if not for married mothers with eligible children (Baker, Gruber, and
Milligan 2005; Schlosser 2005), then at least for single mothers with no other children under the
age eligibility threshold (Berlinski and Galiani 2005).
One potential problem with these studies is bias from reversion to the mean. In each,
data to investigate pre-existing trends in employment are limited, if not lacking completely,
making it difficult to conclude that gains in maternal labor force participation in treated areas
would not have occurred absent the program. In fact, in two of the studies (Berlinski and Galiani
2005; Schlosser, 2005), the variation in preschool availability derives from centrally-administered

5

programs, which built more preschools in areas that initially had fewer or lower pre-existing
levels of maternal employment. The positive labor supply response to these programs in
particular may reflect a return to some longer-run trend, rather than a true policy impact. 2
An advantage of the present analysis is that the Census data allow me to investigate preinitiative trends in maternal employment over a long time frame in an attempt to rule out this
source of bias. In particular, I use Census data dating to 1950 – more than 15 years before the
modern wave of U.S. kindergarten expansion began. With these data, I test whether there were
significant deviations in maternal employment from its long-run trend in the years immediately
preceding the initiatives. I also test whether the funding initiatives can predict maternal
observables; ideally, this is not the case, as discussed in the next section. Both of these exercises
highlight the difficulty of uncovering credible estimates in this type of application.
Other advantages of this study come from the large samples available in the Census. For
example, like Gelbach (2002), I have sample sizes sufficient to conduct separate analyses by
marital status and age of a woman’s youngest child. For the DDD analyses, I am also able to
define very narrow comparison groups of mothers. In existing work, additional comparison
groups include essentially all mothers without age-eligible children, presumably due to small
samples, not due to their actual comparability. Thus, the available data and the specification
checks I perform make it possible to arrive at estimates that are potentially less biased than those
previously presented.
As noted above, the parameter estimated in this paper is also useful in thinking about
extensions of public schooling to younger children in the United States. The true responsiveness
of U.S. women to the provision of free child care through public schools is likely to differ
Schlosser (2005) does present evidence that trends in pre-existing employment were statistically
indistinguishable in her treatment and comparison areas. However, this could be due in part to small
samples. Also, she only has a few years of pre-treatment data, so it may still be the case that there is a
deviation from longer-run trend employment in the years preceding the intervention.

2

6

dramatically from that of women in other countries, making it difficult to generalize prior DD
studies—even if unbiased for the parameter estimated—to the U.S. context. Moreover, the
parameter of interest in this paper is arguably an upper bound on the positive employment effect
of modern-day preschool expansion. Because of increases over time in women’s labor force
participation (particularly that of married women), the child care subsidy implicit in public
schooling is today more likely to be inframarginal.

III.

Identification Strategy

A.

State Kindergarten Funding Initiatives
Table 1 shows the year of first state funding for kindergartens in the United States,

focusing on states that did not have funding regimes in place by the mid-1960s (hereafter referred
to as the “treated states” or the “treated region”). 3 The vast majority of initiatives passed over
the subsequent decades incorporated kindergartens into school foundation aid programs; the
remaining initiatives were special appropriations. Most initiatives were passed in the late 1960s
and early 1970s, though there is considerable variation in timing across states.
The typical school district in the treated region, which essentially consisted of the South
and West, relied heavily on state funding for education, so the grants covered a substantial
fraction of the costs of operating kindergartens.4 Not surprisingly, school districts responded
rapidly to funding availability, and as a result, there was widespread variation across states and
over time in kindergarten supply. Figure 1 shows this in a manner consistent with the Decennial
Census data, plotting the fraction of school districts with kindergartens by year and decade of the

See Cascio (2004) for sources.
For example, in 1965, the average Southern school district derived 53 percent of its revenue from state
grants (U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 1968).

3
4

7

initiative.5 The role of state funding is particularly apparent for the 1970s and 1980s adopters,
which exhibited similar trends in public school kindergarten provision in the 1960s, but widely
divergent trends thereafter. It is less clear for the states that funded kindergarten for the first
time during the 1960s. However, most states in this group passed initiatives late in the decade,
and take-up by all districts in a state usually took three or four years (Cascio 2004).

B.

Empirical Models
My empirical strategy takes advantage of the state-time variation in kindergarten supply

induced by the funding initiatives. Given the observations from Figure 1, my preferred policy
variable is the share of the previous four years that a kindergarten funding regime has been in
place, rather than just an indicator for the presence of a regime. This measure allows me to
exploit differences in initiative timing that would otherwise be impossible using data on ten-year
intervals. 6 I do not employ the kindergarten supply measure of Figure 1 directly, because the
pace at which school districts implemented kindergartens was likely to have been a reflection of
demand.
I begin with a DD model that is otherwise similar to those previously estimated in the
literature:
(1)

y ist = θ share st + β ′ X ist + α s + γ t + ε 1ist ,

The trends in Figure 1 were calculated using state panel data on the fraction of primary school districts
offering kindergarten. Annual averages are weighted with contemporaneous state enrollment in first
grade. The data are described in the Data Appendix.
6 It took around four years for full take-up of the funding initiatives, as discussed in reference to Figure 1.
(See also Cascio 2004.) States which have had their funding initiatives in place for four years or less at a
given point in time are therefore likely to exhibit a lot of variation in kindergarten supply. As suggested by
Figures 2 and 3 (below), results are nonetheless qualitatively similar when I use an indicator for the
presence of state funding for kindergarten. These findings are available from the author upon request.
5

8

where y ist is some employment measure for mother i in state s in Census year t; X ist is a vector
of controls (discussed below); and α s and γ t represent state and year fixed effects, respectively.
The α s remove fixed differences across states in maternal employment (for example, due to
differences in norms), while the γ t account for common shocks to maternal employment (for
example, due to federal programs). As described above, share st is the fraction of years over t - 4
to t - 1 that the initiative has been in place in state s; thus, share s 1970 = 0.75 for states that passed
initiatives in 1967, share s 1970 = 0.5 for states that passed initiatives in 1968, etc.7
The parameter of interest in (1) is θ , which is the change in maternal employment
associated with full implementation (4+ years) of the state’s kindergarten funding program. It is
important to note that a one unit increase in share st does not necessarily mean that a state went
from having no kindergartens to universal availability. Instead, full implementation of the
funding program, so defined, was associated with a 61 to 65 point percentage point increase in
kindergarten supply in the average state.8 Some localities operated kindergarten programs before
state funding was made available, and since no mandate for kindergarten provision accompanied
the initiatives, other districts may have taken more than four years to respond.
I am primarily interested in estimating (1) for mothers of five year olds. Estimates of θ
will be identified if the introduction of funding for kindergarten programs was not otherwise
related to their employment, conditional on the fixed effects and observables. Given that current

The Census is taken in the spring of the year, so the relevant academic year begins the prior fall.
These estimates come from a regression of the fraction of school districts in a state with kindergarten
programs on share using data from 1966 (the first available year), 1969, 1979, and 1989. In a model with
state and year fixed effects, full implementation of the program is associated with a 0.646 increase in the
fraction of school districts operating kindergarten programs (standard error of 0.157). In a model that
also includes state-specific linear trends, full implementation of the program is associated with a 0.608
increase in the fraction of school districts operating kindergarten programs (standard error of 0.199).
(Data are described in the Data Appendix. Standard errors are clustered on state of residence.)

7
8

9

(and expected) maternal employment could have played a role in the decision of states to pass
initiatives, this may be a very strong assumption.9 However, there are several ways to examine its
credibility. For example, if share st does not predict ε 1ist , it should also not predict maternal
observables which are directly related to employment, X ist , as suggested above. The funding
initiatives should also not be associated with the employment of mothers without kindergarteneligible children, or shocks to employment before they are passed, as also noted in the previous
section.
I implement each of these specification tests below, and the results suggest that estimates
of θ from (1) would be biased for at least some subpopulations under consideration. I confront
this problem in two ways. I first add smooth state-specific trends to (1). Because a linear trend
appears too restrictive over the long time period under consideration, I include a state-specific
quadratic in year:
(2)

y ist = θ share st + β ′ X ist + α s + γ t + δ 1s t + δ 2 s t 2 + ε 2 ist

This model removes biases from unobservable determinants of kindergarten supply and
employment that are trending smoothly over time within states.10 Of course, estimates of θ
from (2) will only be identified if the smooth state trend is sufficient for all remaining sources of
bias. I examine this assumption using the same specification tests described above.
My second approach is to estimate a DDD model on a broader sample of mothers:
(3)

y ist = θ share st five i + θ 2 share st + β 1′X ist + β 2′ X ist five i
+ α 1s + α 2 s five i + γ 1t + γ 2 t five i + ε 3ist

9 State legislative records suggest that, if anything, the belief that kindergartens would provide free child
care was an impediment to the funding initiatives being passed. Instead, the stated goal of the most state
kindergarten programs was to reduce grade repetition and other early signs of school failure (Cascio 2004).
10 Results are qualitatively similar when I include a cubic. I only have five years of Census data, however,
so the estimates become somewhat noisy.

10

where five i is an indicator for whether mother i has a five-year-old child. Below, I focus on
estimates of (3) using two different comparison groups: mothers of slightly younger children
(ages three and four) and mothers of slightly older children (ages seven and eight). Estimates of

θ – the difference in DD estimates of the treatment and comparison groups – are identified
provided that there are no employment shocks that both coincide with the initiatives and are
unique to women with kindergarten eligible children. A more general version of (3) replaces

θ 2 share st with a state-by-year fixed effect. I estimate this version of the model as another
robustness check. I also conduct all feasible specification tests, but in triple-difference form.

C.

Extensions
Throughout the paper, I present separate estimates by marital status of the mother and

age of her youngest child. Because of differences in preferences and the constraints facing these
women, the introduction of kindergartens might have had different effects on their employment
decisions. For example, as well documented for more recent years (Anderson and Levine 1999;
Blau and Currie 2004; Rosenbaum and Ruhm 2005) the fraction of family income devoted to
child care is much higher for single women. The same appears to have held during the period of
interest, suggesting that the introduction of kindergartens would have generated a larger relative
price shock for single mothers.11 Similarly, mothers of five year olds with no younger children
would have experienced a relatively large reduction in child care costs.
I also estimate models similar to those above for the public and private school enrollment
status of matched children. These models serve several purposes. First, they help to
demonstrate that the kindergarten programs introduced in response to the initiatives did indeed
For example, using data on formal child care costs from Coelen et al. (1976), Gelbach (2002) concludes
that availability of kindergarten would have provided at least a 13 percent increase in the typical single
(working) mother’s effective hourly wage in 1980, provided that she would have paid for child care.
11

11

represent a shock to the price of child care, which would not have been the case if there were
already very inexpensive child care options deemed highly substitutable. Unfortunately, data on
child care use, cost, and quality are very limited for this period.12 In the very least, however, the
introduction of free kindergartens should have induced an exodus of five year olds from private
schools to public schools. Second, and related, these models are useful in quantifying the extent
to which universal preschools “crowd out” child care options on the private market. Finally, the
models for public school enrollment are useful in establishing that kindergarten availability only
affected the enrollment of age-eligible children.

IV.

Data

A.

Sample and Key Variables
The primary data for this analysis are drawn from the 1950 to 1990 Decennial Census

Public Use Microdata (PUMS). These data are comparable over the period spanning the
kindergarten funding initiatives, allowing me to construct consistent repeated cross sections on
maternal labor supply and child enrollment status. Because the Census includes entire
households, not just individuals, I am also able to conduct separate analyses by the age structure
of children in a family, as described above. The Census also offers large samples and information
on state of residence, which are lacking in higher frequency data for this period.13

However, the existing evidence (largely from supplements to the Current Population Survey) supports
the claim that kindergartens lowered the price of some fixed quality of care. For example, in early 1975,
nearly a quarter of working mothers (and nearly a third of full-time working mothers) used formal day care
or care from a non-relative when their five year olds were not in school (Waite 1976). Care by other
relatives – the most common alternative – was also not always free: in the late 1970s, for instance, well
over half of working mothers with young children paid for child care from other relatives (Lueck, Orr,
and O’Connell 1982).
13 For example, while annual, the Current Population Survey lacks complete information on state of
residence prior to 1977. Sample sizes are also considerably smaller than those available in the Census.
12

12

I use the one-percent samples from 1950 and 1960 Census PUMS, the one-percent Form
2 state PUMS from 1970, and the five-percent PUMS from 1980 and 1990. All means and
regressions are weighted so as to be representative of the population.14 My primary sample
includes five and six year olds and their mothers, for whom there is no allocation in key
employment variables (described below) or in the ages of any matched children, ages 0 to 17.15 I
create analogous samples of women without five or six year olds but with children of other ages
(three and four, and seven and eight) for the DDD analyses.16 Because of their relative similarity,
I limit the analysis to mothers and children residing in the treated region.17
Because of how age is measured in the Census, I consider both five and six year olds to
be eligible for kindergarten. In particular, age in the Census is measured as of April 1, though in
most states, school entry regulations require entering kindergartners to reach age five by some
specified date between September and January. 18 As a result, some children aged five as of April
1 (those born in the second and third quarters of the year) and some children aged six as of April
1 (those born in the fourth and first quarters of the year) would have been eligible to start
kindergarten the prior fall.19 Below, I refer to the samples of five and six year olds as “five year
olds” or “eligible” children for ease of exposition.

In the employment regressions, I use maternal person weights (1950 and 1990 only). In the child
enrollment regressions, I use child person weights (1950 and 1990 only). The samples from 1960, 1970,
and 1980 are self-weighting.
15 My primary reason for dropping allocated data is to remove noise in the labor supply estimates.
However, because the outcomes are either binary (the employment indicator) or bounded (hours worked),
measurement errors are “non-classical,” with the signal (negatively) correlated with the noise. As a result,
using allocated employment data would also tend to bias the least squares coefficients (Hausman 2001).
16 The vast majority of mothers in the sample are either household heads or the wives of household heads;
the remaining mothers are in subfamilies.
17 When I include women from non-treated states in the analysis, the specification tests conducted below
fail much more frequently and with much greater strength.
18 Ideally, I would redefine age to be more consistent with the year in which a child would have entered
school. However, this approach is not feasible for this application, since data on quarter of birth are only
available in the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Censuses.
19 On the other hand, some five and six year olds would not have been eligible to enter kindergarten,
biasing downward the reduced-form estimates of the effect of the funding initiatives on maternal
14

13

My analysis focuses on two measures of current employment that are observed in all
Census years: an indicator for whether a mother was working and hours worked, both measured
as of the week prior to the Census.20 My regressions include controls for maternal race
(indicators for black and other race), quadratics in the number of children each mother has in
different age categories (ages zero to four, age five, age six, ages seven to 12, and ages 13 to 17),
and a quadratic in maternal age. I do not control for maternal education, because it is not
available in the person records of the 1950 Census.21 However, for most subpopulations and
specifications, the initiatives cannot predict maternal education where observed, as shown below.
Limiting the analysis to data from 1960 and later and controlling for education also yields results
very similar to those presented below.

B.

Summary Statistics and Preliminary Specification Tests
Table 2 shows trends in the employment of women with five year olds, by marital status

and the presence of younger children in the family. As mentioned above, the samples are limited
to women residing in treated states. The sample replicates the well-known rise in labor supply of
married mothers that began in the early 1970s. In 1970, the employment rate of married women
with no children under age five was 37 percent, having risen only 7 percentage points over the
previous decade. By 1990, their employment rate had risen to 64 percent and was nearly at parity
to that of single women with no younger children. Increases in the employment rate of married

employment. However, the indirect least squares effect of child enrollment on maternal employment (the
parameter estimated in Gelbach (2002)) remains identified under the assumptions laid forth above.
20 In 1960 and 1970, hours worked are presented in intervals. To make the hours variable comparable
across years, I first create the same intervals using the continuous hours variables in 1950, 1980, and 1990.
In each year, I then assign each mother the 1980 sample mean hours worked from her respective interval.
These conditional means are calculated using data from only the estimation sample. The estimates are
similar when I apply conditional mean hours worked from 1950.
21 Education is available in the “sample line” records of the 1950 Census. However, the number of
sample line respondents is quite small.

14

mothers with younger children were even more dramatic, rising from more than two-fold from
only 23 percent in 1970 to 48 percent in 1990. For single mothers, increases in employment over
the same period were much less striking. Nonetheless, like married women, single mothers with
no children under five experienced a relatively large increase in employment during the 1970s,
when many of the kindergarten funding initiatives went into effect.
The remaining columns of Table 2 test whether there were significant shocks to maternal
employment before the kindergarten funding initiatives were passed—one of the three
specification tests discussed above. In particular, column (6) presents coefficients (robust
standard errors) on pre st from the model:
(4)

y ist = θ share st + τ pre st + β ′ X ist + α s + γ t + ε 4 ist ,

where pre st is an indicator for the Census year immediately prior to a state’s initiative.22 The
estimates in column (7) are from a version of equation (4) that includes quadratic state trends.23
If anything, the evidence of prior shocks to employment is stronger in the second model.
Married women with no children under five were significantly more likely to be working and
worked significantly more hours in the Census year pre-initiative; point estimates on pre st for
single women are of a similar magnitude, but not precise. A state’s decision to fund public
school kindergartens thus appears to have come in part in response to a (potentially temporary)
positive shock to demand.
The next two tables present average maternal background characteristics by Census year
and test whether they can be predicted by the funding initiatives—another specification check
discussed above. As in Table 2, estimates in column (6) are from a model that only includes
Thus, for states which passed initiatives in the 1960s, pre s 1960 = 1 and pre st = 0 for t ≠ 1960 ; for states
which passed initiatives in the 1970s, pre s 1970 = 1 and pre st = 0 for t ≠ 1970 , etc.
23 These regressions are weighted by population weights, and standard errors are consistent for
heteroskedasticity and correlation in the error terms over time within state.
22

15

state and year fixed effects, while estimates in column (7) add a quadratic state trend. For single
mothers of five year olds with no younger children (Table 3), I find no significant relationships
between background characteristics and the funding initiatives. For single women with five year
olds and younger children (also Table 3), there are some significant associations – particularly in
column (6) – in part because estimates are more precise. Significant relationships between
observables and the program arise with similar frequency for married mothers of five year olds
(Table 4), suggesting that there may also be unobservable factors confounding the DD estimates.
This preliminary analysis suggests that the DD specifications – even those with smooth
state trends – are likely to yield biased estimates of the program’s effect. The remaining columns
of Tables 2 through 4 present analogous specification tests for the DDD models. For example,
the last two columns of Table 2 show the difference in estimated τ 's (from model (4)) between
the treatment and comparison groups. Column (8) shows this difference when the comparison
group consists of women with three and four year olds, while column (9) shows it when the
comparison group consists of mothers of seven or eight year olds.24 Similarly, the last two
columns of Tables 3 and 4 test whether the each of these comparison groups experienced the
same trends in observables as the treatment group when the initiatives were passed.
For two of the four subpopulations under consideration, the DDD models appear
unambiguously to provide for better comparisons. For married women with no younger
children, treatment-comparison differences in pre-initiative employment shocks are small and no
longer statistically significant (Table 2). Moreover, the observable characteristics of treated
mothers appear to have been trending quite similarly to those of at least one of the comparison
groups – married women with three or four year olds (Table 4, column (8)). For single mothers
Throughout, comparison groups are defined to be as similar as possible to the subpopulation under
consideration. For example, when considering single mothers with no younger children, a comparison
group would consist of single mothers with seven or eight year olds, no five or six year olds, and no
younger children.
24

16

with no younger children, mothers of seven or eight year olds appear to provide a relatively good
comparison group, with pre-initiative shocks to hours worked (Table 2, column (9)) and trends in
observables (Table 3, column (9)) being nearly identical.
By contrast, for mothers of five year olds with younger children, the DDD models at best
perform as well as the DD models and at worst are more biased. For example, mothers of seven
and eight year olds appear to provide a relatively decent comparison group for single women with
children who are kindergarten eligible and younger. However, the positive pre-initiative shocks
to employment are persistent for this group (column (9) of Table 2), suggesting that mean
reversion may still be a problem. For married women with younger children, neither comparison
group appears to provide for less biased estimates than the DD models.

V.

Results
I begin this section with the findings for single women. I then discuss the results for

married women. Throughout, regressions are weighted by population weights, as noted above,
and standard errors are consistent for heteroskedasticity and correlation of error terms within
states over time. All regressions also include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a vector of
maternal background controls.25 For completeness, I present all specifications for each
subpopulation.

A.

Effects for Single Women
Table 5 presents estimates of the effect of kindergarten availability on the employment of

single women with kindergarten eligible children. For those without any other children younger

This vector includes indicator variables for whether the mother is black or of another race (not white), a
quadratic in maternal age, quadratics in the number of (own) children in different age categories (zero to
four, five, six, seven to 12, and 13 to 17).
25

17

than five (upper panel), estimates of the effect of state funding are quite similar across
specifications. In the DD model with trends (column (3)), full implementation of the program is
associated with an 8.1 percentage point increase in the likelihood of working and 3.23 more
hours worked in the prior week – effects that are only slightly larger than those from the DD
model without trends (column (2)). None of the DD estimates are statistically significant.
However, the DDD estimates are quite similar in magnitude and in general more precisely
estimated. For example, when compared to single mothers with seven or eight year olds and no
younger children – argued above to be the better of the two comparison groups for this
subpopulation – the program is associated with a marginally significant 7.3 to 7.6 percentage
point increase in employment and a significant 3.1 to 3.3 hour increase in weekly hours worked
(columns (6) and (7)).26
There are several different ways to interpret the magnitude of these estimates. When
compared to pre-initiative means, they imply a 13 percent increase in the likelihood of
employment and a 14.7 percent increase in hours worked. However, this does not imply that the
elasticity of employment with respect to the price of childcare is -0.13 to -0.147, as not all
mothers with eligible children and on the extensive employment margin received a 100 percent
price subsidy for child care from the program. Instead, given the estimated effect of the
initiatives on kindergarten supply (Section III), a lower bound on the child care price elasticity for
this subpopulation is -0.2.27 Using the estimated effect of the program on enrollment (Table 6)
and assuming 100 percent take-up of new kindergarten seats, I calculate an upper bound elasticity

The second DDD specification includes state-year fixed effects instead of a direct effect of share.
As discussed earlier, full implementation of the funding program was associated with a 61 to 65
percentage point increase in kindergarten supply. Assuming that 65 percent of mothers received a 100
percent subsidy for child care price subsidy on the extensive margin of employment (or the average
mother received a 65 percent subsidy), the price elasticity of employment would be equal to 13/65, or
approximately 0.2.
26
27

18

of -0.55. 28 These elasticity estimates are on the upper end of those found in the literature on
child care costs and maternal labor supply more generally (see Anderson and Levine 1999; Blau
and Currie 2004).
Another way of interpreting the estimates is to calculate the effect of enrollment – or
take-up of the child care subsidy implicit in kindergarten provision – on maternal employment,
the parameter presented in Gelbach (2002). To that end, Table 6 shows how full implementation
of the funding program affected the school enrollment of children with single mothers. 29
Columns (2) and (3) present estimates of the DD models with and without trends, while columns
(4) and (5) present DDD models using seven and eight year olds (with no five or six year old
siblings) as a comparison group. The initiatives increased the public enrollment rates of five year
olds with no younger siblings by 19 to 24 percentage points (39 to 50 percent). Thus, for every
ten eligible children enrolled in public school as a result of the initiatives, about three single
mothers with no children under five entered the workforce (0.073/0.238≈0.30), and enrollment
of a five year old in public school allowed the typical single mother with no younger children to
work 13 more hours per week (3.133/0.238≈13).30
These effect sizes are larger than those found by Gelbach (2002) for this subpopulation
using Census data from 1980, but a different research design. The specification tests conducted
As shown in the last column of Table 6, full implementation of the program was associated with a 23.8
percentage point increase in the public school enrollment of five and six year olds. Assuming that 23.8
percent of mothers received a 100 percent subsidy for child care price subsidy on the extensive margin of
employment, the price elasticity of employment would be equal to 13/23.8, or approximately 0.55.
29 In 1950, enrollment information is limited to “sample line” respondents. The 1950 enrollment question
also does not distinguish between public and private schools. In 1960, enrollment data are only available
for children age five and over as of the Census. As a result, I limit the enrollment regressions to children
aged five and over who are observed between 1960 and 1990. Because I use 1950 data in the employment
regressions and women with three and four year olds as an additional comparison group, I do not present
instrumental variables results.
30 Suppose that there was no effect on hours for women already working. (I do not estimate the effect on
hours conditional on employment because of concerns about sample selection bias.) In this case, the
estimates would imply that, for every ten children enrolled as a result of the funding initiatives, three single
mothers entered the labor force full time (0.3 * 40 hours = 12 hours). This does not seem unreasonable,
given that a large fraction of the kindergartens founded in response to the initiatives were full day.
28

19

above nonetheless suggest that my estimates are credible. Table 7 (upper panel) further supports
this conclusion, testing whether the funding initiatives were associated with changes in
employment and child enrollment in the non-treated population. DD estimates of the program’s
effect on employment of single mothers of three and four year olds (and no five or six year olds)
are relatively close to zero in magnitude (columns (2) and (3)). The same is true for mothers of
seven and eight year olds, but no younger children (columns (5) and (6)). For the latter group, it
is also possible to estimate the effect of the program on enrollment of matched children. As
expected, the kindergarten funding initiatives exhibit no association with enrollment of older
children.
Figure 2 provides graphical support of these findings, plotting employment and public
school enrollment rates for this subpopulation by Census year and decade of kindergarten
funding adoption. Panel B shows that trends in the public school enrollment rates of five year
olds mirror trends in kindergarten supply, shown in Figure 1. Although noisier, trends in
employment of single mothers with no children under five do as well: As shown in Panel A, the
decade in which a state began funding kindergartens was met with a relatively large gain in
employment. This is particularly noticeable for the 1960s and 1970s adopters, who receive most
of the weight in the estimates. However, it is not the case for single mothers in either of the
comparison groups (Panels C and D).
The labor supply responses to the program for these mothers came at least in part from
how kindergartens changed the price of child care. In particular, increases in the public school
enrollment of five year olds were met with large movements away from private programs (Table
6). The implied substitution of public for private programs was near complete: Full
implementation of the kindergarten funding initiatives was associated with reductions in private
school enrollment of 9.5 to 10.2 percentage points on a base of 11 percent (upper panel). Thus,

20

even in a subpopulation where public interventions in the child care market matter a lot on the
extensive employment margin, public child care options appear to crowd out private ones.
For single mothers of five year olds with younger children, there is no evidence that the
introduction of public school kindergartens raised labor supply. As shown in Table 5, estimates
of the program’s effect are negative and statistically insignificant, even in the more credible
specifications for this group. For example, in the DDD models using mothers of seven and eight
year olds as a comparison group (lower panel, columns (6) and (7)), point estimates on share are
-0.026 for employment and -0.319 to -0.440 for hours worked. Moreover, it is possible to rule
out positive effects that are probable for single mothers without younger children. On the
employment estimate, the upper bound of the (robust) 95 confidence interval is 0.066; on the
hours estimate, it is 3.15. Although these estimates could be biased downward from mean
reversion or from the use of inadequate comparison groups, the suggestion that this group
exhibits no behavioral response to the program is not unreasonable. Gelbach (2002) also finds
no labor supply response for this subpopulation.

B.

Effects for Married Women
Tables 8 through 10 are analogous to Tables 5 through 7, but pertain to married women.

Consider first the reduced-form employment estimates for married women with eligible children
but no children under five (upper panel of Table 8). For this group, the DDD estimates using
the comparison group of mothers with three or four year olds are the most credible of the
specifications, as argued above. As shown in columns (4) and (5), these estimates are positive,
but statistically insignificant and very small. Specifically, the kindergarten funding initiatives were
associated with a 0.3 to 0.8 percentage point increase in employment and a 0.092 to 0.286
increase in hours worked.

21

The magnitude of these estimates can be interpreted with the same metrics used above.
When compared to pre-initiative means (Table 8 column (1)), for example, the estimates imply
only 0.7 to 2.2 percent increases in both employment measures. These estimates and their
counterparts for public school enrollment (Table 9, upper panel) also imply that, for every one

hundred children enrolled in public school fewer than four married women with no younger children
entered the labor force – an effect size smaller than that found by Gelbach (2002) for the same
subgroup. The estimates are also precise enough to rule out effects as large as those found for
single women with no younger children—another way in which the estimates of this paper differ
from those in Gelbach (2002). In particular, robust 95 percent confidence intervals on the labor
supply estimates suggest that increases in employment and hours exceeding 10 percent of the
pre-initiative mean are highly improbable. On the same account, it also highly unlikely that more
than two mothers entered the labor force for every ten children who enrolled in school as a result
of the initiatives.
Figure 3 makes clear why there is no effect of the program on labor supply for this
subpopulation. Whereas the employment rates of single women with five year olds and no
younger children rose relatively quickly in the decade of first state funding for kindergarten, the
same is not true for married mothers. As shown in Panel A, trends in the employment rates of
married women with eligible and no younger children were quite similar across adoption decades.
Their employment trends also look very similar to those of the comparison groups (Panels C and
D), despite the fact that public school enrollment of matched five year olds responded to the
program (Panel B).
For married women with younger children, the most credible estimates of the program’s
effect are, if anything, smaller. Recall that for this subpopulation, neither of the comparison
groups for the DDD models appeared to be valid. Indeed, there were significant differences in

22

pre-initiative shocks to employment between the treatments and comparisons (columns (8) and
(9) of Table 2), suggesting that the DDD estimates could be biased by mean reversion.
Consistent with this, I find positive DDD estimates that are larger in magnitude for this group
than for married mothers of five year olds without younger children (columns (6) and (7)) – a
behavioral response that would not have been predicted by economic theory. The DD estimates
(column (2), Table 8) for this subpopulation are also not credible, as the same specification
predicts negative effects for the comparison groups (columns (2) and (5), lower panel of Table
10). Instead, the DD estimates with trends (column (3), Table 8) are perhaps the most
believable. These estimates are essentially zero (-0.003 for the likelihood of employment and
-0.036 for hours worked the previous week).
In addition to the lack of employment responses to the program from married women,
the introduction of kindergarten programs appears to have significantly crowded out private child
care and education. Table 9 shows that increases in public enrollment and reductions in the
private enrollment of their children are quite similar to those observed for the children of single
mothers of five year olds with no younger children. Full implementation of the program raised
the public enrollment rates of children in intact families by at least 23 percentage points (53
percent), and reduced their private enrollment rates by at least 9.3 percentage points (72 percent).

VI.

Discussion
This paper has demonstrated how the introduction of kindergarten programs into

American public schools affected the labor supply of women with five-year-old children. I have
improved upon recent work in this area by employing a very large data set, which has yielded
ample pre-initiative data and narrowly-defined comparison groups, and by performing a number
of specification checks that have been generally been neglected. My research design also

23

provides an alternative set of estimates to Gelbach (2002), which is to my knowledge the only
other paper examining how public preschools affect maternal labor supply in the United States.
I find that single mothers with a kindergarten eligible child and no younger children
exhibited a strong employment response to the program. For this subpopulation, reduced-form
effects of the state kindergarten funding initiatives are consistent with a child care price elasticity
of employment between -0.2 and -0.55, and a 30 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
employment with the enrollment of an eligible child in public school. By contrast, I find no
evidence that opening public school kindergartens raised the employment of married mothers of
five year olds, or of single mothers with children under the age of five. For nearly all
subpopulations, however, there is evidence that universal public kindergartens led to significant
crowd-out of private care and education.
These results differ from those in Gelbach (2002), who finds significant employment
effects of kindergarten eligibility among married women, regardless of the ages of other children
in the family. His estimates for married women and for single women with no younger children
are also quite similar in magnitude, which is not the case in the present study. The differences in
our findings may result from the fact that I am using variation in kindergarten availability
beginning in the mid-1960s, while Gelbach (2002) only uses variation in kindergarten eligibility in
the 1980 cross-section. However, differences in our findings could also arise from biases that are
present in one study but not the other. On this front, it is worth noting that my estimates are
heavily weighted toward responses on extensive margin of employment and as a result, should if
anything be larger than those presented in Gelbach (2002), particularly for married mothers.
The questions of whether and how public schooling affects maternal labor supply are
critical to understanding the relative merits of universal, as opposed to targeted, preschool
programs. Indeed, in the vast majority of states, the debate today is not over whether to fund pre-

24

kindergarten programs, but rather which children should be eligible to attend.31 Universal
programs are likely to involve a reallocation of resources away from the neediest children, for
whom the social benefits of preschool are arguably relatively great. The present study implies
that the labor supply responses to preschool availability are also relatively great among their
mothers, particularly when there are no other younger children in the household. As a result,
continuing to target state-financed preschool programs toward children in credit-constrained
families – and perhaps widening their age eligibility limits – may be a more socially desirable
alternative to universal access.

Data Appendix

Census Samples
The data used in this paper were drawn from the 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990
Decennial Census Public-Use Microdata Samples (PUMS). The raw data were downloaded from
ICPSR. I use the 1950 PUMS (ICPSR Study No. 8251), the 1960 one-percent sample (ICPSR
Study No. 7756), the 1970 Form 2 State sample, which is also a one percent sample of the
population (ICPSR Study No. 18), the 1980 State (A) five percent sample (ICPSR Study No.
8101), and the 1990 five percent sample (ICPSR Study No. 9952).
I begin by limiting the samples to households residing in one of the 24 states that passed
a kindergarten funding initiative after 1965 (listed in Table 1). Children between the ages of 0 and
17 were then matched to their mothers in each Census year. A child was classified as either a
child of the householder or a child in a subfamily. The first type of child was matched to either
the spouse of the householder or to the householder herself. The second type of child was
Today, forty-three states have pre-K programs in operation, and state programs serve at least 900,000
children—as many three and four-year-olds as served by the federal Head Start program. The vast
majority of these programs are indeed targeted toward at-risk groups, but several states (such as Georgia
and Oklahoma) have universal programs.

31

25

matched to either the wife or primary individual within the same subfamily. For the analysis, the
matched sample was limited to children between the ages of 3 and 8 and their mothers.

Data on Kindergarten Supply
Data on grade span were used to construct the fraction of districts offering kindergarten
programs in Figure 1. These data were drawn from both published tabulations and computercoded microdata. Published, state-specific tabulations of grade span based on the universe of
school districts were drawn from Education Directory: Public School Systems (1967/68-1970/71).
Microdata for the universe of public school districts was available at ICPSR for various academic
years from 1972/73 forward: Elementary and Secondary General Information System (ELSEGIS): Public

School District Universe Data (1972/73-1979/80, not including 1974/75), Common Core of Data: Public
School Districts (1980/81-1983/84), Common Core of Data: Elementary/Secondary Education Agencies
(1985/86), and Common Core of Data: Public Education Agency Universe (1986/87-1990/91). The
universe of education directory microdata consists of all public school districts beginning in
academic year 1969/70; the data is not, however, available in computer-coded format until
1972/73.
To create the longest possible consistent series, the published tabulations of grade span
for 1967/68 through 1970/71 were replicated using the microdata for later years. Specifically, the
published tabulations included the following grade span categories: K-6, 1-6, K-8, 1-8, K-9, 1-9,
K-12, 1-12, 7-12, 9-12, and other. School districts were similarly categorized by grade span at the
state level from 1972/73 through 1990/91. For each state in a given year, the number of school
districts offering kindergarten is coded as the sum of districts in each of the following categories:
K-6, K-8, K-9, and K-12. The rate of kindergarten availability is then the proportion of all
primary school districts in the state that offer kindergarten, so defined, where primary school
26

districts are those operating either kindergarten or first grade. In years where grade span data is
not available (1971/72, 1974/75, and 1984/85), the rate of kindergarten availability is estimated
through linear interpolation, which should tend to smooth over trend breaks in state-level series.
Starting in 1967/68, comparable data on enrollment are supposedly given in the prior year’s

version of the publication from which I draw enrollment aggregates (see above). However,
instructions for completing the relevant survey form (Appendix A in published versions of the
data from 1971/72 forward) indicate that a state is to update its grade span (but not necessarily
project its enrollment) for the current (reported) academic year. It is unclear whether all districts
updated their grade span in this way, or if the updated data was indeed reflected in the microdata.
As a result of this uncertainty, I lag the kindergarten availability series by one year. Thus, the
series discussed above spans the academic years 1966/67 through 1989/90.

References
Anderson, Patricia M. and Philip B. Levine. 1999. “Child Care and Mother’s Employment
Decisions.” NBER Working Paper 7058. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1991. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4): 979-1014.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. 2005. “Universal Child care, Maternal
Labor Supply and Family Well-Being.” NBER Working Paper 11832. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barnett, W. Steven. 1995. “Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Programs on Cognitive and
School Outcomes.” The Future of Children 5(3): 25-50.

27

Berlinski, Samuel and Sebastian Galiani. 2005. “The Effect of a Large Expansion of Pre-Primary
School Facilities on Preschool Attendance and Maternal Employment.” Institute for Fiscal

Studies Working Paper 04/30.
Bound, John and David A. Jaeger. 2000. “Do Compulsory School Attendance Laws Alone
Explain the Association Between Quarter of Birth and Earnings?” In Research in Labor

Economics, Vol. 19, ed. Solomon Polachek, 83-108. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bound, John, David Jaeger, and Regina Baker. 1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation When the Correlation Between and Instruments and the Endogenous
Explanatory Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90(430): 443450.
Blau, David and Janet Currie. 2004. “Preschool, Day Care, and After School Care: Who’s
Minding the Kids?” NBER Working Paper 10670. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. 2004. “Schooling Attainment and the Introduction of Kindergartens into
Public Schools.” Manuscript, University of California at Davis.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ethan G. Lewis. 2006. “Schooling and the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test: Evidence from School Entry Laws.” Forthcoming, Journal of Human Resources 41(2).
Coelen, Craig, Frederic Glantz, and Daniel Colore. 1979. Day Care Centers in the U.S.: A
National Profile, 1976-1977. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates, Inc.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2005.
“Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” IZA Discussion Paper 1675.
Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor.
Currie, Janet. 2001. “Early Childhood Education Programs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(2):
213-238.

28

Gelbach, Jonah B. 1999. “How Large an Effect Do Child Care Costs Have on Single Mothers’
Labor Supply? Evidence Using Access to Free Public Schooling.” Manuscript, University
of Maryland at College Park.
----. 2002. “Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply.” American

Economic Review 92(1): 307-322.
Hausman, Jerry. 2001. “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the
Right and Problems from the Left.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(4): 57-68.
Karoly, Lynn A. and James H. Bigelow. 2005. The Economics of Investing in Universal Preschool

Education in California. Santa Monica: RAND Corporation.
Karoly, Lynn A., Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Hoube, M. Rebecca Kilburn, C.
Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, and James Chiesa. 1997. Investing in Our Children: What

We Know and Don’t Know About the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa
Monica: RAND Corporation.
Lueck, Marjorie, Ann C. Orr, and Martin O’Connell. 1982. Trends in Child care Arrangments of

Working Mothers. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Magnuson, Katherine A. and Jane Waldfogel. 2005. “Early Childhood Care and Education:
Effects on Racial and Ethnic Gaps in School Readiness.” The Future of Children 15(1):
169-196.
McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2005. “The Effect of Maternal Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Day of Birth,”
Manuscript, University of Michigan.
Rosenbaum, Dan T. and Christopher Ruhm. 2005. “The Cost of Caring for Young Children.”
IZA Discussion Paper 1860. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor.

29

Schlosser, Analía. 2005. “Public Preschool and the Labor Supply of Arab Mothers: Evidence
from a Natural Experiment.” Manuscript, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. 1968. Digest of Educational Statistics.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Waite, Linda J. 1976. Daytime Care of Children: October 1974 and February 1975. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

30

Table 1
Year of First State Funding for Kindergarten
Decade: Year

States

Prior to 1960

All states not listed below

The 1960s:
1966
1967
1968
1969

AK
MD, MO
DE, FL, NH, VA
OK

The 1970s:
1971
1973
1974
1975
1977
1978

AZ, WV
AR, NC, OR, SC, TN, TX
MT
NM, ID
AL, KY
GA

The 1980s:
1980
1983

ND
MS

Source: Cascio (2004)

Table 2
Employment of Women with Five or Six Year Olds in Treated States, 1950-1990

1950
(1)

Mean by Census Year
1960
1970
1980
(2)
(3)
(4)

1990
(5)

Single, No Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.52

0.56

0.59

0.65

0.67

Hours Last Week

20.8

20.4

22.5

24.7

25.8

N

1041

807

1276

11955

19248

Single, With Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.33

0.38

0.43

0.42

0.45

Hours Last Week

12.5

13.1

15.4

15.5

16.7

N

1252

1109

1152

7091

12620

Married, No Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.18

0.30

0.37

0.51

0.64

Hours Last Week

6.7

10.5

12.9

17.9

22.7

10248

7457

9753

45139

48076

Married, With Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.10

0.17

0.23

0.34

0.48

Hours Last Week

3.3

5.7

8.0

11.5

16.3

19977

12243

9453

38454

41628

N

N

Coefficient (Standard Error) on:
pre
pre * five
Trends
Has 3 or 4 yo Has 7 or 8 yo
No trends
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.007
(0.020)
0.234
(0.890)
34327

0.008
(0.026)
0.995
(1.031)
34327

-0.026
(0.037)
-0.712
(1.714)
65168

-0.023
(0.028)
0.057
(1.196)
66787

0.047
(0.041)
1.400
(1.631)
23224

0.039
(0.026)
1.069
(1.075)
23224

0.058
(0.038)
1.377
(1.540)
36422

0.002
(0.073)
0.921
(2.529)
36107

-0.002
(0.013)
0.033
(0.538)
120673

0.023 **
(0.009)
0.985 **
(0.387)
120673

0.008
(0.009)
0.268
(0.375)
226088

-0.002
(0.009)
-0.313
(0.447)
230368

-0.007
(0.020)
-0.404
(0.404)
121755

0.007
(0.012)
0.236
(0.416)
121755

-0.021 *
(0.011)
-0.629
(0.384)
191585

-0.025 **
(0.010)
-0.861 **
(0.376)
189108

Notes: See text and Data Appendix for description of samples. All means and regressions are weighted by population weights, and standard errors are
consistent for heteroskedasticity and error correlation within states over time. Each regression includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and share .
The models in (7) also include quadratic state trends, and the models in (8) and (9) also include state * five fixed effects, year * five fixed effects, direct
effects of pre and five . The comparisons in (8) are mothers of three and four year olds and in (9) are the mothers of seven and eight year olds.
***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 3
Background Characteristics of Single Women with a Five or Six Year Old: Treated States, 1950-1990

Mean by Census Year
1960
1970
1980
(2)
(3)
(4)

1990
(5)

-

0.35

0.50

0.67

0.76

White (=1)

0.71

0.65

0.61

0.59

0.58

# Children Aged 7 to 12

0.84

1.01

1.13

0.66

0.62

# Children Aged 13 to 17

0.41

0.36

0.51

0.28

0.22

Age

34.9

35.2

33.7

30.8

31.8

N

1041

807

1276

11955

-

0.25

0.36

White (=1)

0.53

0.48

# Children Aged 4 and Under

1.47

# Children Aged 7 to 12

1950
(1)
Single, No Younger Children
High School Degree (=1)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on:
share
share * five
Trends
Has 3 or 4 yo Has 7 or 8 yo
No trends
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.039
(0.031)
-0.023
(0.041)
0.084
(0.055)
0.065
(0.065)
-0.446
(0.565)

0.057
(0.040)
0.000
(0.033)
0.080
(0.074)
0.113
(0.090)
0.554
(0.821)

0.024
(0.029)
0.033
(0.062)
0.066
(0.081)
0.036
(0.076)
0.167
(0.576)

0.005
(0.046)
0.030
(0.045)
0.030
(0.071)
0.060
(0.080)
0.063
(0.455)

19248

34327

34327

65168

66787

0.56

0.65

0.46

0.46

0.50

1.68

1.42

1.27

1.30

1.04

1.06

1.05

0.51

0.47

# Children Aged 13 to 17

0.39

0.26

0.36

0.14

0.11

Age

31.3

30.4

29.6

27.7

28.4

0.027
(0.049)
-0.062 **
(0.030)
-0.014
(0.027)
-0.021
(0.047)
-0.074 *
(0.042)
-0.537
(0.540)

0.025
(0.046)
-0.046
(0.028)
0.000
(0.052)
0.022
(0.054)
-0.094 **
(0.046)
-0.039
(0.460)

0.051
(0.053)
-0.049
(0.051)
-0.027
(0.041)
-0.042
(0.083)
-0.046
(0.068)
0.436
(1.145)

0.017
(0.072)
-0.036
(0.046)
-0.019
(0.055)
0.052
(0.081)
-0.153 **
(0.058)
-0.376
(0.631)

N

1252

1109

1152

7091

12620

23224

23224

36422

36107

Single, With Younger Children
High School Degree (=1)

Notes: See text and Data Appendix for description of samples. All means and regressions are weighted by population weights, and standard errors are
consistent for heteroskedasticity and error correlation within states over time. Each regression includes state fixed effects and year fixed effects. The
models in (7) also include quadratic state trends, and the models in (8) and (9) also include state * five fixed effects, year * five fixed effects, direct
effects of share and five . The comparisons in (8) are mothers of three and four year olds and in (9) are the mothers of seven and eight year olds.
Models for high school degree only use data from 1960 - 1990.
***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 4
Background Characteristics of Married Women with a Five or Six Year Old: Treated States, 1950-1990

Mean by Census Year
1960
1970
1980
(2)
(3)
(4)

1990
(5)

-

0.52

0.61

0.75

0.85

White (=1)

0.89

0.90

0.89

0.85

0.83

# Children Aged 7 to 12

0.91

1.05

1.18

0.82

0.80

# Children Aged 13 to 17

0.45

0.37

0.50

0.32

0.26

Age

34.7

34.9

33.9

32.5

33.9

10248

7457

9753

45139

-

0.45

0.57

White (=1)

0.80

0.81

# Children Aged 4 and Under

1.55

# Children Aged 7 to 12

1950
(1)
Married, No Younger Children
High School Degree (=1)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on:
share
share * five
Trends
Has 3 or 4 yo Has 7 or 8 yo
No trends
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.025
(0.019)
-0.037 **
(0.018)
0.060
(0.033)
0.031
(0.022)
0.095
(0.165)

-0.044 **
(0.018)
-0.020
(0.014)
0.035
(0.037)
-0.028
(0.024)
-0.216
(0.218)

-0.012
(0.017)
-0.011
(0.013)
0.034
(0.031)
-0.019
(0.022)
-0.154
(0.351)

-0.026 **
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.011)
0.056 **
(0.025)
0.001
(0.028)
-0.227
(0.275)

48076

120673

120673

226088

230368

0.74

0.83

0.84

0.82

0.84

1.61

1.35

1.24

1.22

1.03

0.98

0.85

0.43

0.40

# Children Aged 13 to 17

0.39

0.23

0.23

0.09

0.08

Age

31.2

30.4

29.5

29.0

30.6

-0.006
(0.014)
-0.073 ***
(0.022)
0.065 ***
(0.021)
0.079
(0.040)
0.014
(0.020)
-0.273
(0.290)

0.017
(0.013)
-0.073 **
(0.014)
0.025
(0.028)
-0.014
(0.037)
-0.027
(0.024)
-0.475
(0.314)

0.005
(0.021)
-0.009
(0.010)
0.049
(0.030)
0.022
(0.036)
-0.008
(0.020)
0.085
(0.262)

0.018
(0.026)
-0.031 **
(0.012)
0.038
(0.024)
0.057 **
(0.027)
-0.057
(0.042)
-0.413
(0.456)

19977

12243

9453

38454

41628

121755

121755

191585

189108

N
Married, With Younger Children
High School Degree (=1)

N

Notes: See Table 3.
***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table 5
Kindergarten Availability and Maternal Employment: Single Women with a Five or Six Year Old, 1950-1990

Dependent Variable

Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(1)
(2)
(3)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on share * five
Comparison Group:
Comparison Group:
Has 3 or 4 Year Old
Has 7 or 8 Year Old
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Has 5 or 6 Year Old, No Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.575

0.062
(0.050)

0.081
(0.058)

0.085
(0.052)

0.072
(0.050)

0.076
(0.043)

0.073
(0.044)

Hours Last Week

21.82

2.263
(2.086)

3.230
(2.235)

2.560
(2.129)

1.965
(2.008)

3.288
(1.536)

3.133
(1.541)

34327

34327

65168

65168

66787

66787

N

Has 5 or 6 Year Old and Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.430

-0.016
(0.027)

-0.051
(0.056)

-0.057
(0.039)

-0.045
(0.035)

-0.026
(0.045)

-0.026
(0.044)

Hours Last Week

15.29

-0.541
(1.099)

-2.333
(2.219)

-1.425
(1.529)

-1.117
(1.458)

-0.319
(1.748)

-0.440
(1.735)

23224

23224

36422

36422

36107

36107

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

N
Controls:
State Trends (Quadratic)
State * five Fixed Effects
Year * five Fixed Effects
State * Year Fixed Effects

X

Notes: See text and Data Appendix for description of samples. Pre-initiative means are calculated using data from the Census year
prior to the initiative. Each entry in columns (2) through (7) represents a coefficient from a different regression. All regressions
include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a vector of maternal background characteristics (indicator variables for black and
other race, a quadratic in maternal age, and quadratics in the number of own children between the ages of 0 and 4, age 5, age 6,
between the ages of 7 and 12, and between the ages of 13 and 17). All means and regressions are weighted by population weights,
and standard errors consistent for heteroskedasticity and error correlation within states over time.

Table 6
Kindergarten Availability and School Enrollment: Five and Six Year Olds with Single Mothers, 1960-1990

Dependent Variable

Pre-initiative
mean
(1)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on Coefficient (Standard Error) on
share
share * five †
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
5 or 6 Years Old, No Younger Siblings

Public School (=1)

0.489

0.239
(0.048)

0.189
(0.037)

0.241
(0.055)

0.238
(0.056)

Private School (=1)

0.115

-0.095
(0.022)

-0.096
(0.020)

-0.100
(0.025)

-0.102
(0.024)

35322

35322

68827

68827

N

5 or 6 Years Old, With Younger Siblings
Public School (=1)

0.452

0.152
(0.038)

0.117
(0.037)

0.122
(0.031)

0.108
(0.032)

Private School (=1)

0.062

-0.005
(0.023)

-0.001
(0.026)

0.015
(0.025)

0.014
(0.025)

23520

23520

36755

36755

X
X

X
X
X

N
Controls:
State Trends (Linear)
State * five Fixed Effects
Year * five Fixed Effects
State * Year Fixed Effects

X

Notes: See text and Data Appendix for description of samples. Pre-initiative means are calculated using data
from the Census year prior to the initiative. Each entry in columns (2) through (7) represents a coefficient
from a different regression. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a vector of
maternal background characteristics (see Table 5). All means and regressions are weighted by population
weights, and standard errors are consistent for heteroskedasticity and error correlation within state over time.
† Comparison group consists of 7 and 8 year olds with no 5 or 6 year old siblings.

Table 7
Kindergarten Availability, School Enrollment, and Maternal Employment:
Single Women without a Five or Six Year Old, 1950-1990

Dependent Variable

Mothers of 3 and 4 Year Olds
Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(1)
(2)
(3)

Mothers of 7 and 8 Year Olds
Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(4)
(5)
(6)

Without Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.565

-0.024
(0.023)

0.015
(0.046)

0.632

-0.015
(0.028)

0.021
(0.028)

Hours Last Week

21.48

-0.297
(0.882)

1.332
(2.104)

23.72

-1.025
(1.406)

0.879
(1.130)

30841

30841

32460

32460

-

-

-0.002
(0.012)

0.001
(0.016)

-

-

33505

33505

N
Child in Public School (=1)

-

N

0.912

With Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.360

0.041
(0.042)

0.080
(0.068)

0.453

0.010
(0.041)

0.006
(0.055)

Hours Last Week

13.53

0.884
(1.789)

2.005
(2.915)

16.33

-0.222
(1.617)

0.949
(2.111)

13198

13198

12883

12883

-

-

0.030
(0.022)

0.030
(0.023)

-

-

13235

13235

N
Child in Public School (=1)
N
Controls:
Smooth State Trends

-

X

0.924

X

Notes: See text and Data Appendix for description of samples. Each entry in columns (2), (3), (5), and (6) represents
a coefficient from a different regression. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a vector of
maternal background characteristics (see Table 5). Where noted, employment regressions include quadratic state
trends, while enrollment regressions include linear state trends. Enrollment regressions use data from 1960 to 1990
only, and the child is the unit of observation. All means and regressions are weighted by population weights, and
standard errors consistent for heteroskedasticity and error correlation within state over time.

Table 8
Kindergarten Availability and Maternal Employment: Married Women with a Five or Six Year Old, 1950-1990

Dependent Variable

Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(1)
(2)
(3)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on share * five
Comparison Group:
Comparison Group:
Has 3 or 4 Year Old
Has 7 or 8 Year Old
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Has 5 or 6 Year Old, No Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.366

-0.029
(0.017)

0.006
(0.022)

0.003
(0.013)

0.008
(0.013)

-0.028
(0.013)

-0.025
(0.013)

Hours Last Week

12.73

-1.245
(0.740)

0.296
(0.878)

0.092
(0.489)

0.286
(0.484)

-0.925
(0.576)

-0.809
(0.581)

120673

120673

226088

226088

230368

230368

N

Has 5 or 6 Year Old and Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.214

-0.021
(0.011)

-0.003
(0.012)

0.017
(0.014)

0.016
(0.014)

0.017
(0.018)

0.017
(0.016)

Hours Last Week

7.37

-0.981
(0.345)

-0.036
(0.426)

0.319
(0.506)

0.310
(0.494)

0.584
(0.597)

0.622
(0.559)

121755

121755

191585

191585

189108

189108

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

N
Controls:
State Trends (Quadratic)
State * five Fixed Effects
Year * five Fixed Effects
State * Year Fixed Effects
Notes: See Table 5.

X

Table 9
Kindergarten Availability and School Enrollment: Five and Six Year Olds with Married Mothers, 1960-1990

Dependent Variable

Pre-initiative
mean
(1)

Coefficient (Standard Error) on Coefficient (Standard Error) on
share
share * five †
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
5 or 6 Years Old, No Younger Siblings

Public School (=1)

0.437

0.262
(0.024)

0.233
(0.024)

0.244
(0.021)

0.242
(0.021)

Private School (=1)

0.149

-0.112
(0.020)

-0.107
(0.020)

-0.100
(0.016)

-0.100
(0.016)

116891

116891

225028

225028

N

5 or 6 Years Old, With Younger Siblings
Public School (=1)

0.409

0.282
(0.031)

0.264
(0.031)

0.257
(0.038)

0.257
(0.039)

Private School (=1)

0.130

-0.108
(0.017)

-0.102
(0.018)

-0.093
(0.024)

-0.094
(0.023)

107394

107394

169514

169514

X
X

X
X
X

N
Controls:
State Trends (Linear)
State * five Fixed Effects
Year * five Fixed Effects
State * Year Fixed Effects

X

Notes: See Table 6.
† Comparison group consists of 7 and 8 year olds with no 5 or 6 year old siblings.

Table 10
Kindergarten Availability, School Enrollment, and Maternal Employment:
Married Women without a Five or Six Year Old, 1950-1990

Dependent Variable

Mothers of 3 and 4 Year Olds
Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(1)
(2)
(3)

Mothers of 7 and 8 Year Olds
Pre-initiative Coefficient (Standard Error)
on share
mean
(4)
(5)
(6)

Without Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.337

-0.032
(0.020)

-0.021
(0.024)

0.400

-0.001
(0.016)

0.019
(0.018)

Hours Last Week

11.92

-1.337
(0.724)

-0.991
(0.832)

14.11

-0.320
(0.625)

0.371
(0.749)

105415

105415

109695

109695

-

-

0.018
(0.010)

0.019
(0.010)

-

-

108137

108137

N
Child in Public School (=1)

-

N

0.907

With Younger Children
Worked Last Week (=1)

0.195

-0.038
(0.014)

-0.023
(0.022)

0.252

-0.039
(0.019)

-0.023
(0.019)

Hours Last Week

6.67

-1.301
(0.501)

-0.663
(0.829)

8.54

-1.565
(0.634)

-0.521
(0.716)

69830

69830

67353

67353

-

-

0.025
(0.018)

0.026
(0.015)

-

-

62120

62120

N
Child in Public School (=1)
N
Controls:
Smooth State Trends
Notes: See Table 7.

-

X

0.888

X

Fraction of School Districts with Kindergartens

1960-69 Adopters
1980-89 Adopters

1970-79 Adopters

1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
1969

Year

1979

1989

Figure 1
Kindergarten Supply by Year and Decade of First State Funding
Sources: See Data Appendix.
Notes: The underlying unit is the state-year fraction of primary school districts that offer
kindergarten programs. Annual averages are calculated weighting by current first grade enrollment.

1970-79 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

1960-69 Adopters

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

Fraction in Public School

Fraction Employed Last Week

1960-69 Adopters

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1980-89 Adopters

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

1950

Census Year
A. Employment of Treatment Group: Has 5 or 6 Year Old
1960-69 Adopters

1970-79 Adopters

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
B. Enrollment of Treatment Group: 5 and 6 Year Olds
1960-69 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

1970-79 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

0.8
Fraction Employed Last Week

0.8
Fraction Employed Last Week

1970-79 Adopters

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
C. Employment of Comparison Group: Has 3 or 4 Year Old

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
D. Employment of Comparison Group: Has 7 or 8 Year Old

Figure 2
Employment and Child Enrollment: Single Mothers of Five and Six Year Olds with No Younger Children

1970-79 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

1960-69 Adopters

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7
Fraction in Public School

Fraction Employed Last Week

1960-69 Adopters

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

1980-89 Adopters

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.0

0.0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

1950

Census Year
A. Employment of Treatment Group: Has 5 or 6 Year Old
1960-69 Adopters

1970-79 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

1960-69 Adopters

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
B. Enrollment of Treatment Group: 5 and 6 Year Olds

Fraction Employed Last Week

Fraction Employed Last Week

1970-79 Adopters

1970-79 Adopters

1980-89 Adopters

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
C. Employment of Comparison Group: Has 3 or 4 Year Old

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Census Year
D. Employment of Comparison Group: Has 7 or 8 Year Old

Figure 3
Employment and Child Enrollment: Married Mothers of Five and Six Year Olds with No Younger Children

