NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DIFFUSION OF THE INTERNET AND THE GEOGRAPHY
OF THE DIGITAL DIVIDE IN THE UNITED STATES
Shane Greenstein
Jeff Prince
Working Paper 12182
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12182
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

Forthcoming in R. Mansell, C. Avgerou, D. Quah and R. Silverstone (eds) Oxford Handbook on ICTs.
Oxford University Press. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Shane Greenstein and Jeff Prince. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Diffusion of the Internet and the Geography of the Digital Divide in the United States
Shane Greenstein and Jeff Prince
NBER Working Paper No. 12182
April 2006
JEL No. O3, L8, R0
ABSTRACT
This paper analyses the rapid diffusion of the Internet across the United States over the past decade
for both households and firms. We put the Internet's diffusion into the context of economic diffusion
theory where we consider costs and benefits on the demand and supply side. We also discuss several
pictures of the Internet's physical presence using some of the current main techniques for Internet
measurement. We highlight different economic perspectives and explanations for the digital divide,
that is, unequal availability and use of the Internet.
Shane Greenstein
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Jeffrey Prince
Cornell University
433 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
jtp35@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
The Internet is unlike any communications network that came before it. It is a
complex technology embedded in a multi-layered network, and many different
participants operate its pieces. The National Science Foundation (NSF) began to
commercialize the Internet in 1992. Within a few years there was an explosion of
commercial investment in Internet infrastructure in the United States. By October of
2003, 61.5 million (54.6 per cent) homes in the United States had Internet connections
(NTIA 2004).

As with any new technology, the diffusion of the Internet follows predictable
regularities. For example, it always takes time to move a frontier technology from a
small cadre of enthusiastic first users to a larger majority of potential users. In this sense
the economic patterns found throughout the early diffusion of the Internet are general.
The diffusion of the Internet also possesses some unique features. It has thus far
proceeded in two waves. There is a clear difference between low-speed/dial-up
connection and high-speed/hard-wire connection. In the early 1990s, those with dial-up
connection were considered at the frontier, but by the turn of the millennium, dial-up
connection had clearly become a nonfrontier technology, with the new frontier
consisting of high-speed connections, mainly through xDSL and cable.

This experience raises pressing policy issues. A pessimistic view emerged in the
mid 1990s, one that became affiliated with the notion labelled ‘the digital divide.’ It
forecast that the Internet was diffusing disproportionately to urban areas with their

2

complementary technical and knowledge resources for supporting personal computers
(PCs) and other computing, leaving rural areas behind. A related recent concern
highlights the uneven use of frontier technologies in the second wave, in this case,
broadband access and related complementary applications.

This chapter provides an overview of the economic processes underlying the
geographic digital divide. This involves two goals - to analyse a specific phenomenon,
and to communicate general lessons. We provide a survey of the growing and detailed
literature concerning the diffusion of the Internet in the United States during its first two
waves. This is a specific story told about a specific technology in a particular time
period, and, at the same time, throughout this chapter we use this story to understand
broader questions about the economic workings of diffusion processes. In addition, we
will conceive the Internet as a general purpose technology (GPT), using it to build a
framework about the economic determinants of its diffusion.

2. Brief history of the Internet
The digital divide did not arise overnight, nor did the Internet. What became the Internet
began in the late 1960s as a research project of the Advanced Research Projects
Administration of the United States Department of Defense, the ARPANET. From these
origins sprang the building blocks of a new communications network. By the mid1980s, the entire Internet used Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
(TCP/IP) packet-switching technology to connect universities and defence contractors.

Management for large parts of the Internet was transferred to the National

3

Science Foundation, or NSF, in the mid-1980s. Through NSFNET, the NSF was able to
provide connection to its supercomputer centres and a high-speed backbone, from which
to develop the Internet. Since use of NSFNET was limited to academic and research
locations, Alternet, PSInet, and SprintLink developed their own private backbones for
corporations looking to connect their systems with TCP/IP (Kahn 1995).

By the early 1990s the NSF had developed a plan to transfer ownership of the
Internet out of government hands and into the private sector. When NSFNET was shut
down in 1995, only for-profit organizations were left running the commercial backbone.
Thus, with the Internet virtually completely privatized, its diffusion path within the
United States was dependent on market forces and economic incentives (Greenstein
2005).

Unlike many other technologies embedded in a single type of durable good, the
Internet is a malleable technology whose form is not fixed across time and location. As
with malleable GPTs, to create value, the Internet must be embedded in investments at
firms that employ a suite of communication technologies, TCP/IP protocols, and
standards for networking between computers. Often organizational processes also must
change to take advantage of the new capabilities.

3. The diffusion process
Because of the unusual origins of the Internet, it is not immediately obvious that
economic theories of diffusion provide an effective guide for analysing the geographical
diffusion of the Internet. According to such economic diffusion theory, the rate of

4

adoption of a new technology is jointly determined by consumers’ willingness to pay
for the new product, and suppliers’ profitability from entering the new market. Both
typical users and typical suppliers change over time. We consider each of these factors
in turn.

Standard diffusion analysis
We begin our analysis with simple definitions. Any entity (household, individual, or
firm) is considered to be connected to the Internet if it has the capability of
communicating with other entities (information in and/or information out) via the
physical structure of the Internet. We will defer discussion about connections coming at
different speeds (56K dial up versus broadband) and from different types of suppliers
(AOL versus a telephone company).

With regard to consumers, it is the heterogeneity of adopters that generally
explains differences in the timing of adoption (Rogers 1995). When a technology first
reaches the frontier, a group of risk-taking innovators adopts first and, over time, the
technology moves down the hierarchy to mainstream users seeking pragmatic gains. If
these groups are not evenly dispersed geographically, there will be an uneven rate of
adoption across regions of the country.

In addition, a good deal of heterogeneity in user response in this case is the
direct result of another technology’s diffusion - that of PCs. The Internet is a ‘nested
innovation’ in that heterogeneity among its potential adopters depends heavily on the
diffusion process of PCs (Jimeniz and Greenstein 1998). In addition to this nesting,

5

within the class of PC users there are also differences in their willingness to experiment
and the intensity of their use.2 There are differences in types of adopters across regions
in terms of the following five attributes of a new technology widely considered as the
most influential for adoption speed across different types of users: relative advantage,
compatibility, complexity, trialability, and observability. Any increase in the relative
advantage over the previous technology, the compatibility of the new technology with
the needs of potential adopters, the ability of adopters to experiment with the new
technology, or the ability of users to observe the new technology will speed up the
diffusion process. Similarly, any decrease in technological complexity will also speed
up the diffusion process (Rogers 1995).

The Internet has relative advantages along many dimensions. It provides written
communication faster than postal mail, allows for purchases online without driving to
the store, and dramatically increases the speed of information gathering. The Internet is
also easy to try out (perhaps on a friend’s PC or at work), easy to observe, and
compatible with many consumer needs (information gathering, fast communication);
and its complexity has been decreasing consistently.

The above attributes hold across the United States, but the degree to which they
hold is not geographically uniform. Specifically, we see differences between rural and
urban areas. For example, people living in rural areas might find greater relative
advantage since their next-best communication is not as effective as that of their urban
counterparts. Also, they might find the Internet more difficult to try or observe, and
possibly more complex if they have less exposure to or experience with PCs.

6

GPT framework
Within general diffusion theory there can be much dispute as to why the adoption of a
new technology is actualized in a specific way. Here, we apply a GPT framework to our
study of the diffusion of the Internet. Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995) define a GPT as
a capability whose adaptation to a variety of circumstances raises the marginal returns
to inventive activity in each of these circumstances. GPTs are often associated with high
fixed costs and low marginal costs to use. The invention of the Internet follows this
pattern, in the sense that the technology was largely invented and refined by the early
1990s (Bresnahan and Greenstein 2001).

The GPT framework further predicts that additional benefit from the technology
comes from co-invention of additional applications. Co-invention costs are the costs
affiliated with customizing a technology to particular needs in specific locations at a
point in time. These costs can be quite low or high, depending on the idiosyncrasy and
complexity of the applications, as well as the economies of scale within locations. They
may also depend on regulatory rules over access to network. For example, in the case of
dial-up access, Internet service providers (ISPs) faced comparatively low incremental
costs because they were complementary to the telephone system. In contrast,
particularly in the case of broadband, provision of the Internet in a region involves high
fixed costs of operating switches, lines, and servers.

We expect to see firms wishing to minimize fixed costs or exploit economies of
scale by serving large markets. Also, the cost of ‘last mile’ connection (for example,

7

xDSL or cable) in rural areas is far greater due to their longer distance from the
backbone. This basic prediction frames much of the research on the diffusion of the
Internet. There will necessarily be a margin between those who adopt and those who do
not. What factors are correlated with the observed margin? We can divide these factors
into those associated with raising or lowering the costs of supply or the intensity of
demand.

The marginal PC adopter
According to the NTIA (2004) study, as of 2003, approximately 61.8 per cent of
American homes owned a PC, with Internet participation rates at 54.6 per cent. These
adoption rates suggest that the diffusion of each technology is moving into the late
majority category of adopters, though there is considerable disagreement about how to
portray the rate of adoption for the remaining households. As mentioned above, the
Internet is a nested innovation whose adoption at home strongly depends on adoption of
a PC.3 Since the vast majority (87.6 per cent) of PC owners have home Internet access,
the marginal Internet adopter looks very similar to the marginal PC adopter and, related,
it is natural to hypothesize that the determinants of adoption among non-adopters will
differ from its determinants in the late 1990s.

Prince (2005) conducts a structural analysis of the demand for (desktop) PCs in
2001 in the United States. A main objective of the paper is to model two very different
looking demand curves - PC demand for households already owning a PC (repeat
purchasers), and PC demand for households that have never owned a PC (first time
purchasers). His data indicate a large difference between these two groups: the

8

likelihood of buying a new PC in 2001 was more than two times greater for a repeat
purchaser than for a first time purchaser. The demand for first time purchasers is
especially relevant since it represents the marginal adopters for PCs, and therefore,
strongly resembles the marginal adopters of the Internet.

In his paper, Prince describes three main determinants of the ‘divide’ in PC
ownership: heterogeneity (in the marginal utility of PC quality and PC holdings), startup costs,4 and dynamics. His results indicate that the marginal utility of PC quality is
strongly increasing in income and education, and strongly decreasing in age. Further,
forward-looking behavior also affects the demand for PCs. As prices fall and quality
rises over time, the decision about whether to buy a new PC is complicated by the
decision of when to buy a new PC. The results show that households’ expectations
about what PCs will be available in the future affect current demand. Finally, regarding
the two demand curves, the paper finds that first time purchasers are more price
sensitive than repeat purchasers, and face large start-up costs.

These results show that, as the diffusion of the PC moves deeper into
mainstream use, the marginal PC adopter is a household with low marginal value for PC
quality, high start-up costs, significant price sensitivity, and potential difficulty in
determining when (not necessarily if) to buy. These findings show why the early
experience in the adoption of the Internet provides little help for understanding user
adoption in later periods. Quite a different set of factors shapes later adoption than
shaped early adoption.

9

Demand by households
Data from 2001 (NTIA 2002) show Internet usage to be positively correlated with
household income, employment status, and educational attainment. With regard to age,
the highest participation rates were among teenagers, while Americans in their prime
working ages (20-50 years of age) were also well connected (about 70 per cent) (NTIA
2002). Although there did not appear to be a gender gap in Internet usage, there did
appear to be a significant gap in usage between two widely defined racial groups: (1)
whites, Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders (approximately 70 per cent); and (2) Blacks
and Hispanics (less than 40 per cent) (NTIA 2002). Much of this disparity in Internet
usage can be attributed to observable differences in education and income. For example,
at the highest levels of income and education there are no significant differences in
adoption and use across ethnicities.

In general, Internet and PC demanders have much in common, and differences in
adoption rates across the above variables are similar for both technologies. However,
specific to the Internet, a great deal of literature points to a digital divide between rural
and urban areas, contending that rural residents are less connected to the Internet than
urban ones. Some argue that rural citizens are less prone to use computers and digital
networks because of exacerbating propensities arising from lower income, less
education, and less technological skills (on average) than those living in the city. The
evidence for this hypothesis is mixed, however, with many rural farm households using
the Internet at high rates (USDA 2000). In addition, over the two-year span from 1998
to 2000, Internet access went from 27.5 per cent to 42.3 per cent in urban areas, 24.5 per
cent to 37.7 per cent in central cities, and 22.2 per cent to 38.9 per cent in rural areas.

10

Thus, there was at least a narrowing of the gap in participation rates between rural and
urban areas; and there certainly was no evidence of the gap widening on any front.5

Furthermore, when we divide American geography into three sections - rural,
inner city urban, and urban (not inner city) - we see lower participation in the first two
categories; inner city participation also being low potentially due to a greater percentage
of citizens with lower income and education levels. With the higher concentration of
Blacks and Hispanics in the inner city, there then arises the correlation between
education and income and socioeconomics. As we previously stated, ethnicity is not the
cause of lower adoption rates; instead, lower education and income levels, which in turn
are caused by socioeconomic factors, create lower adoption rates in the inner cities
(Strover 2001). There is also increasing evidence that there is considerable variance in
the abilities and skills to take advantage of what the technology has to offer. While this
variance correlates somewhat with socioeconomic factors, it also raises a distinct set of
issues.6

It has been argued that the benefits of adoption are greater for rural areas,
because rural residents can use the Internet to compensate for their distance from other
activities. Adopting the Internet improves retail choices, information sources, education
options, and job availability more than for urban residents (Hindman 2000; Sinai and
Waldfogel 2004). However, these benefits may or may not be translated into actual
demand, depending on many factors, such as income, education, local support services,
or a host of social factors.

11

Demand for business purposes
Businesses adopt different aspects of Internet technology for a variety of reasons. In the
standard framework for analysing diffusion, the decision to adopt or reject the Internet
falls within three categories: (1) optional, where the decision is made by the individual;
(2) collective, where it is made by consensus among members; or (3) authoritative,
where it is made by a few people with authority (Rogers 1995). For businesses, the
decision process generally falls under one of the latter two categories.

Business adoption of the Internet came in a variety of forms. Implementation for
minimal applications, such as email, was rather straightforward by the late 1990s. It
involved a PC, a modem, a contract with an ISP and some appropriate software. In
contrast, investment in the use of the Internet for an application module in a suite of
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software, for example, was anything but routine
during the latter half of the 1990s. Such an implementation included technical
challenges beyond the Internet’s core technologies, such as security, privacy, and
dynamic communication between browsers and servers. Usually organizational
procedures also changed.

A further motivating factor will shape business adoption: competitive pressure.
As Porter (2001) argues, there are two types of competitive motives behind Internet
adoption. First, the level of ‘table stakes’ may vary by region or industry. That is, there
may be a minimal level of investment necessary just to be in business. Second, there
may be investments in the Internet that confer competitive advantage vis-à-vis rivals.
Once again, these will vary by location, industry, and even the strategic positioning of a

12

firm (for example, price leader, high service provider) within those competitive
communities. The key insight is that such comparative factors shape competitive
pressure.

Several recent studies look empirically at determining factors for Internet
adoption by firms and the possible existence of a digital divide among them.
Premkumar and Roberts (1999) test the former by measuring the relevance of ten
information technology attributes for the adoption rate of small rural businesses. The ten
attributes are: relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, cost-effectiveness, top
management support, information technology expertise, size, competitive pressure,
vertical linkages, and external support. They found that relative advantage, costeffectiveness, top management support, competitive pressure, and vertical linkages were
significant determinants for Internet adoption decisions.

Forman (2005) examines the early adoption of Internet technologies at 20,000
commercial establishments from a few select industries. He concentrates on a few
industries with a history of adoption of frontier Internet technology and studies the
microeconomic processes shaping adoption. He finds that rural establishments were as
likely as their urban counterparts to participate in the Internet and to employ advanced
Internet technologies in their computing facilities to enhance their computing facilities.
He attributes this to the higher benefits received by remote establishments, which
otherwise had no access to private fixed lines for transferring data. Forman, Goldfarb,
and Greenstein (2002, 2003a,b) measured national Internet adoption rates for medium
and large establishments from all industries.7 They distinguish between two purposes

13

for adopting, one simple and the other complex. The first purpose, labelled
participation, relates to activities such as email and web browsing. This represents
minimal use of the Internet for basic communications. The second purpose, labelled
enhancement, relates to investment in frontier Internet technologies linked to computing
facilities. These latter applications are often known as e-commerce, and involve
complementary changes to internal business computing processes. The economic costs
and benefits of these activities are also quite distinct; yet, casual analysis in the trade
press tends to blur the lines between the two.

Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein examined business establishments with 100
or more employees in the last quarter of 2000. They show that adoption of the Internet
for purposes of participation is near saturation in most industries. With only a few
exceptional, laggard industries, the Internet is everywhere in medium to large business
establishments. Their findings for enhancement contrast sharply. There is a strong urban
bias towards the adoption of advanced Internet applications. The study concludes,
however, that location, per se, does not handicap adoption decisions. Rather, the
industries that ‘lead’ in advanced use of the Internet tend to be disproportionately
located in urban areas.

They conclude that a large determinant of the location of the Internet in ecommerce was the preexisting distribution of industrial establishments across cities and
regions. This conclusion highlights that some industries are more information intensive
than others and, accordingly, make more intensive use of new developments in
information technologies, such as the Internet, in the production of final goods and

14

services. Heavy Internet technology user industries have historically been banking and
finance, utilities, electronic equipment, insurance, motor vehicles, petroleum refining,
petroleum pipeline transport, printing and publishing, pulp and paper, railroads, steel,
telephone communications and tyres (Cortada 1996).

Forman, Goldfarb and Greenstein (2005) find evidence consistent with the
‘urban leadership’ hypothesis. In this view the infrastructure necessary for the
geographic diffusion of the Internet, such as the equipment to enable high-speed
Internet access, initially appeared to be difficult to deploy and use. Technically difficult
technologies favour urban areas, where there are thicker labour markets for specialized
engineering talent. Similarly, close proximity to thick technical labour markets
facilitates the development of complementary service markets for maintenance and
engineering services. Labour markets for technical talent were relevant to the diffusion
of new technologies in the Internet. As with many high-tech services, areas with
complementary technical and knowledge resources are favoured during the early use of
technology.

These findings raise an open question. Early use of advanced technology favours
growth in a few locations, such as Silicon Valley, the Boston area, or Manhattan - for a
time at least, particularly when technologies are young. But will it persist? This depends
on how fast the technology matures into something standardized that can be operated at
low cost in areas with thin supply of technical talent.

Furthermore, complex Internet applications are linked to computing facilities,

15

which are often known as e-commerce or e-business. Most often, these technologies
involve inter-establishment communication and/or substantial changes to business
processes. Cross-establishment Internet technologies, in contrast, represent Internet
investments that involve communication among establishments within the value chain
(for example, an extranet) or between an establishment and its end consumers.
Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2005) hypothesize that geographically isolated
establishments will have higher gross benefits from communicating with external
suppliers and customers. Changes in location size and density will primarily influence
costs (and not benefits) for communication within an establishment, but, on the other
hand, such changes will influence both costs and benefits of communicating with
external parties. They found evidence consistent with these views. That is, controlling
for other factors, advanced Internet applications for communication outside the
establishment had a higher propensity at rural establishments than Internet applications
for communications within an establishment.

Supply by private firms
Since the Internet privatization in 1995, private incentives have driven the supply side
of Internet access. ISPs are divided into four classes: (1) transit backbone ISPs’ (2)
downstream ISPs; (3) online service providers (for example, AOL); and (4) firms that
specialize in Web-site hosting. Provision incentives are profit based, and for a
technology with significant economies of scale, profits will likely be higher in markets
with high sales quantity. Thus, we see high numbers of ISPs in regions with high
population concentrations (Downes and Greenstein 1998, 2002).

16

The ISPs also decide on the services they provide (for example, value-added
services) and the price at which they provide them. Greenstein (2000a,b) highlights two
types of activities other than basic access in which ISPs partake - high-bandwidth
applications, and services that are complementary to basic access. He notes that
differences in firm choices are due to ‘different demand conditions, different quality of
local infrastructure, different labor markets for talent,’ or differing qualities of inherited
firm assets.

Geography plays a role in these differences and can explain much of the
variation in quality of access. We expect the local infrastructure quality to be higher in
urban areas. The quality of ISP service will be higher there as well. In addition, rural
ISPs often have less incentive to improve due to lack of competition, that is, they are the
only provider in their area and thus there is little incentive to enhance their service.

Supply by regulated telephone firms
Every city in the United States has at least one incumbent local telephone provider. The
deregulation of local telephony has been proceeding in fits and starts in many parts of
the United States, since the AT&T divestiture in the early 1980s. By the mid 1990s
there had been significant attempts at and success in allowing competitive access
providers to enter local markets to provide alternative local access paths, predominantly
for data communications and large volume voice users in business. This movement is an
attempt to increase the number of potential providers of local voice services beyond the
monopoly incumbent and, in so doing, increase the competitiveness of markets for a
variety of voice and data services. This form of deregulation became indirectly linked to

17

the growth of broadband because the rules affecting telephony shaped the entry of
potential broadband suppliers. Deregulation also had an indirect impact on the Internet’s
deployment because it altered the organization of the supply of local data services,
primarily in urban areas.8

For our purposes here, the key question is, did the change in regulations shape
the geographic diffusion of Internet access across the United States? The answer is
almost certainly, yes, at least in the short run. However, the answer is more ambiguous
in the long run. By the end of the millennium the largest cities in the United States had
dozens of potential and actual competitive suppliers of local telephone service that
interconnected with the local incumbent. By the end of 2000, over 500 cities in the
United States had experience with at least a few competitive suppliers of local
telephony, many of them focused on providing related Internet and networking services
to local businesses, in addition to telephone service (New Paradigm Research Group
2000).

Prior to the commercialization of the Internet, decades of debate in telephony
had already clarified some regulatory rules for interconnection with the public switch
network for what the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) defined as an
enhanced information service (Canon 2001). This set of rules applied to dial-up ISPs,
but there would be considerable debate about applying them to broadband suppliers. In
the dial-up era this set of rules eliminated some potential local delays in implementing
this technology on a small scale. In treating ISPs as enhanced service providers and not
as competitive telephone companies, the FCC did not pass on access charges to them,

18

which effectively made it cheaper and administratively easier to be an ISP (Oxman
1999).9

The new competitor for the deregulated network is known as a Competitive
Local Exchange Company, or CLEC for short. No matter how it is deployed, every
CLEC has something in common: each offers phone service and related data carrier
services that interconnect with the network resources offered by the incumbent provider
(for example, lines, central switches, local switches). In spite of such commonalities,
there are many claims in the contemporary press and in CLEC marketing literature that
these differences produce value for end users. In particular, CLECs and incumbent
phone companies offer competing versions of (sometimes comparable) DSL services
and networking services.

Something akin to CLECs existed prior to the 1996 Telecommunications Act,
the watershed federal bill for furthering deregulation across the country. These firms
focused on providing high-bandwidth data services to business in high volume
situations, as noted. After the passage of this bill, however, CLECs grew even more and
quickly became substantial players in local networks, accounting for over twenty billion
dollars a year in revenue in 2000.10 More to the point, CLECs became the centre of
focus of the deregulatory movement. Many CLECs grew very rapidly and often took the
lead in providing solutions to issues about providing the last mile of broadband,
particularly to businesses and targeted households. In addition, many CLECs already
were providing direct line (for example, T-1) services to businesses (as was the
incumbent local phone company). After the ‘telecom meltdown’ in 2001, however, the

19

biggest hopes for CLECs did not become reality. The market capitalization of the entire
sector declined even as the number of customers served increased. Instead of
developing new initiatives, many firms simply repackaged the Incumbent Local
Exchange Providers services.11

The incumbent delivered services over the switch, and so did CLECs. In
recognition of the mixed incentives of incumbents, regulators tried to set rules for
governing the conduct of the transactions and these were challenged in court. As
directed by the 1996 Telecommunications Act, this included setting the prices for
renting elements of the incumbent’s network, such as the loops that carried the DSL
line.12 However, interpreting and implementing this area of regulation become one of
the most contentious chapters in the United States’ telecommunications policy. Legal
challenges continued for some time, altering both the rules for unbundling and,
eventually, the definition of the boundary between an information service and a
telecommunications service. By 2005 Incumbent Local Exchange Providers were no
longer obligated to make most DSL service available on a wholesale basis.13

Though short lived and constantly changing, this opportunity extended to
virtually all cities with a population of more than 250,000, and even to many cities with
a population under 100,000. Very few rural cities, however, were afforded this
opportunity except for those in the few states that promoted it. So, at the outset, if there
were any effects at all, the entry of CLECs only moderately increased broadband supply
(and in only urban locations, and in these, primarily to business), if at all.

20

Due to the uneven availability of the Internet in some locations, local
government authorities also intervened to speed deployment, during both the first (dialup) and second (broadband and wireless) waves of diffusion. Local governments acted
as agents for underserved demanders by motivating broadband deployment in some
neighbourhoods through select subsidies or the granting of rights of way (Strover and
Berquist 2001). Public libraries often received help; the presence of a federal subsidy
enables even the poorest rural libraries to have Internet access at subsidized rates
(Bertot and McClure 2000). There is considerable variance in these practices over time
and across locations, depending on local political circumstances and ever-shifting
interpretations of national policy (see, for example, Gillett, Lehr, and Osario 2004).

Because CLECs did not play a large role in household markets, the second wave
of diffusion, involving broadband, ultimately looked somewhat different from the first
wave.14 Provision to business continued to involve a wide mix of providers, as
described above. In contrast, both existing cable firms and incumbent local telephone
companies became the dominant providers of high speed broadband services to homes
in the United States. The only exceptions occurred in dense urban environments, such as
Manhattan, where private carriers could provide connections to businesses as well as
apartment buildings or condominiums (see Crandall and Waverman 2002).

Altogether, CLECs had two effects, on availability of Internet services and on
costs/prices for services related to the Internet, such as broadband. During the diffusion
of dial-up the costs of operating an ISP were brought down by the presence of CLECs in
urban areas, a factor that surely sped up adoption. Due to the ambiguities of and

21

frequent changes to regulatory rules, however, the effect of CLECs on prices in the
second wave of diffusion is much more indirect and, therefore, more ambiguous.

4. Mapping the Internet’s dispersion
A number of alternative methods have been devised for measuring the Internet’s
presence, or its adoption in a location. None is clearly superior, as they are all valid
ways of measuring the diffusion of the technology across geographic regions.

Backbone
The commercial Internet is comprised of hubs, routers, high-speed switches, points of
presence (POPs), and high-speed high-capacity pipes that transmit data. These pipes and
supporting equipment are sometimes collectively referred to as the backbone. The
backbone is comprised mostly of fibre-optic lines of various speeds and capacity.
However, no vendor can point to a specific piece of fibre and call it ‘backbone’. This
label is a fiction, but a convenient one. Every major vendor has a network with lines that
go from one point to another, but it is too much trouble to refer to it as ‘transmission
capacity devoted primarily to carrying traffic from many sources to many sources.’

Comparing the backbones in different regions is not straightforward. Its
presence depends on many things such as population size, type of local industry, and
other facets of local demand. Its maximum flow rate is only exploited at peak times, not
most of the day, so statistics about capacity must be interpreted with care. Moreover,
nobody would expect connection and bandwidth to be equally distributed across
geographic space, so the appropriate benchmark for assessing the geographic dispersion

22

of backbone is subject to debate.15

Despite this inherent interpretive ambiguity, there is intense policy interest in
understanding the geography of commercially supplied backbone. There are concerns
that some areas (for example, small towns) are underserved while others (for example,
major cities) are served too well. There are also concerns that the industry is too
concentrated, as well as nearly the opposite, that the competitive situation motivated
firms to make impertinent and redundant investments.

One common theme in almost every article addressing the Internet’s backbone is
the following: a handful of cities in the United States dominate in backbone capacity,
and, by extension, dominate first use of new Internet technology. Specifically, San
Francisco/Silicon Valley, Washington, DC, Chicago, New York, Dallas, Los Angeles,
and Atlanta account for the vast majority of backbone capacity (Moss and Townsend
2002, 2000). As of 1997, these seven cities accounted for 64.6 per cent of total capacity,
and the gap between this group and the rest remained even during the intense
deployment of new networks and capacity between 1997 and 1999. By 1999, even
though network capacity had quintupled over the previous two years, the top seven still
accounted for 58.8 per cent of total capacity.

In addition, the distribution of backbone capacity does not perfectly mimic
population distribution, since metropolitan regions such as Seattle, Austin, and Boston
have a disproportionately large number of connections (relative to their populations),
whereas larger cities such as Philadelphia and Detroit have disproportionately fewer

23

connections (Townsend 2001a, 2001b). Overall, the largest metropolitan areas are well
served by the backbone, while areas such as the rural south have few connections (Warf
2001).

Domain name registrations
Domain names are used to help map intuitive names (such as
www.northwestern.edu) to the numeric addresses computers use to find each other on
the network. This address system was established in the mid-1990s and diffused rapidly
along with the commercial Internet.

The leaders in total domain names are New York and Los Angeles; however,
Chicago - normally considered along with New York and Los Angeles as a global city only ranks a distant fifth, far behind the two leaders. Furthermore, when ranking
metropolitan areas according to domain names per 1,000 persons, of these three cities,
only Los Angeles ranks among the top 20 (17th). The full ranking of domain name
density indicates that medium-sized metropolitan areas dominate, while global cities
remain competitive, and small metropolitan areas show very low levels of Internet
activity (Townsend 2001a).

Moss and Townsend (2002) looked at the growth rate for domain name
registrations between 1994 and 1997. They distinguish between global information
centres, and global cities and find that global information centres, such as Manhattan
and San Francisco, grew at a pace six times the national average. In contrast, global
cities such as New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago grew only at approximately one to

24

two times the national average.

Kolko (2000) examines domain names in the context of questioning whether the
Internet enhances the economic centrality of major cities in comparison to
geographically isolated cities.16 He argues, provocatively, that reducing the ‘tyranny of
distance’ between cities does not necessarily lead to proportional economic activity
between them. That is, a reduction of communications costs between locations has
ambiguous predictions about the location of economic activity in the periphery or the
centre. Lower costs can reduce the costs of economic activity in isolated locations, but it
can also enhance the benefits of locating coordinative activity in the central location. As
with other researchers, Kolko presumes that coordinative activity is easier in a central
city where face-to-face communications take place.

Kolko (2000) documents a heavy concentration of domain name registrations in
a few major cities. He also documents extraordinary per capita registrations in isolated
medium-sized cities. He argues that the evidence supports the hypothesis that the
Internet is a complement to, not a substitute for face-to-face communications in central
cities. He also argues that the evidence supports the hypothesis that lowering
communication costs helps business in remote cities of sufficient size (that is, mediumsized, but not too small).

Hosts, Internet service providers, points of presence
Measurements of host sites, ISPs, and POPs also have been used to measure the
Internet’s diffusion. Indeed, the growth of the Internet can be directly followed in the

25

successive years of Boardwatch Magazine. The earliest advertisements for ISPs in
Boardwatch Magazine appear in late 1993, growing slowly until mid-1995, at which
point Boardwatch began to organize their presentation of pricing and basic offerings.
There was an explosion of entries in 1995, with thousands being present for the
subsequent few years. Growth only diminished after 2001.

Internet hosts are defined as computers connected to the Internet on a full-time
basis. Host-site counting may be a suspect measurement technique due to its inability to
differentiate between various types of equipment, and to the common practice of firms
not to physically house Internet-accessible information at their physical location.
Nevertheless, we do see results similar to those found with other measurement
techniques, since, as of 1999, five states (California, Texas, Virginia, New York, and
Massachusetts) contain half of all Internet hosts in the United States (Warf 2001).

Downes and Greenstein (2002) analyse the presence of ISPs throughout the Unites
States. Their results show that, while low entry into a county is largely a rural
phenomenon, more than 92 per cent of the United States population had access by a
short local phone call to seven or more ISPs as of 1997. Strover, Oden, and Inagaki
(2002) look directly at ISP presence in areas that have traditionally been underserved by
communications technologies (for example, the Appalachian region). They examine
areas in the states of Iowa, Texas, Louisiana, and West Virginia. They determine the
availability and nature of Internet services from ISPs for each county and find that rural
areas suffer significant disadvantages in relation to Internet service (see, also, Strover
2001).

26

Measurements of POPs help to identify ‘urban and economic factors spurring
telecommunication infrastructure growth and investment’ (Grubesic and O’Kelly 2002:
260). The POPs are locations where ISPs maintain communication equipment for
network access. This is often a switch or router that allows Internet traffic to enter or
proceed on commercial Internet backbones. Through POP measurement, Grubesic and
O’Kelly derived similar results to those concerning the backbone, namely the top seven
cities, Chicago, New York, Washington, DC, Los Angeles, Dallas, Atlanta, and San
Francisco provide the most POPs. Furthermore, Boston and Seattle are emerging
Internet leaders.

Grubesic and O’Kelly (2002) use POPs to measure which metropolitan areas are
growing the fastest. Their data indicate that such areas as Milwaukee, Tucson,
Nashville, and Portland saw major surges in POPs at the end of the 1990s. They provide
several explanations for these surges: (1) proximity to major telecommunication centres
(for example, Tucson and Milwaukee); (2) intermediation between larger cities with
high Internet activity (for example, Portland); and (3) centralized location (for example,
Nashville). Greenstein (2005) offers an additional interpretation of these findings,
arguing that hub-and-spoke economics for networks in geographic space explains the
general patterns for many advantageously-located large and medium sized cities.

Content, E-commerce
Zook (2000, 2001) proposes two additional methods for measuring the presence of the
Internet. The first measures the Internet by content production across the United States.

27

Zook (2000: 412; 2001) defines the content business as enterprises involved in the
creation, organization, and dissemination of informational products to a global
marketplace where a significant portion of the business is conducted via the Internet. He
plotted the location of each firm with a .com Internet address and found that San
Francisco, New York, and Los Angeles are the leading centres for Internet content in
the United States with regard to absolute size and degree of specialization.17

The second method looks at the locations of the dominant firms in e-commerce.
Again, Zook (2000, 2001) finds the top Internet companies based on electronically
generated sales and other means and their location. His analysis shows San Francisco,
New York, and Los Angeles as dominant in e-commerce, with Boston and Seattle
ranking 4th and 5th. When measured on a scale relative to the number of Fortune 1000
companies located in the region, his results indicate greater activity on the coasts
(especially the West coast) with many Midwestern cities such as Detroit, Omaha,
Cincinnati, and Pittsburgh lagging.

5. Diffusion of advanced Internet access
Internet connection generally comes in two forms: (1) dial-up (technology now behind
the frontier); and (2) broadband (the new frontier technology).

Provision and adoption
While dial-up connection has moved past the frontier stage and is approaching
saturation point in the United States, broadband access is still at the frontier. For a few
years it was far from ubiquitous, though that is changing as of this writing.18 However,

28

as the volume and complexity of traffic on the Internet increases dramatically each year,
the value of high-capacity and universal ‘always on’ broadband service is constantly
increasing. Furthermore, broadband access will enable providers to offer a wider range
of bundled communications services (for example, telephone, email, Internet video,
etc.) as well as promote more competition between physical infrastructure providers
already in place.

In the earliest years of diffusion to households - that is, prior to 2003 - the
diffusion of broadband Internet access was very much supply-driven in the sense that
supply-side issues were the main determinants of Internet availability and, hence,
adoption. Cable firms and telephone firms needed to retrofit existing plant, and this
constrained availability in many places. In these years the spread of broadband service
was much slower and less evenly distributed than that of dial-up service. Highly
populated areas were more profitable due to economies of scale and lower last mile
expenses. As building has removed these constraints, demand-related factors - such as
price, speed, and reliability - should play a more significant role in determining the
margins between who adopts and who does not.

As of October 2003, 37.2 per cent of Internet users possessed a high-speed
connection; the dominant types of broadband access were cable modems and xDSL. In
addition, broadband penetration has been uneven, as 41.2 per cent of urban and 41.6 per
cent of central city households with Internet access used broadband compared to a rate
of only 25.3 per cent for rural households. Consistent with the supply-side issues, the
FCC estimates that high-speed subscribers were present in 97 per cent of the most

29

densely populated zip codes at the end of 2000, whereas they were present in only 45
per cent in the zip codes with the lowest population density (NTIA 2002). Research by
Prieger (2003) shows that high speed access and rural location are negatively correlated
even after controlling for demographic variables, lending further support to the
argument that the supply side is driving lower rural broadband adoption.

Most of the additional empirical evidence comes from these earliest years. For
example, Augereau and Greenstein (2001) analyse the evolution of broadband provision
and adoption by looking at the determinants of ISP’s upgrade decisions. Although their
analysis only looks at upgrades from dial-up service to 56K modem or ISDN service
occurring by 1997, it addresses issues related to the provision of high-speed service and
warrants mention as an empirical paper with the earliest evidence on ISP upgrade
behaviour. In their model, they look for firm-specific factors and location-specific
factors that affect firms’ choices to offer more advanced Internet services. Their main
finding is that ‘the ISPs with the highest propensity to upgrade are the firms with more
capital equipment and the firms with propitious locations’ Augereau and Greenstein
2001: 1099). The most expansive ISPs locate in urban areas. They further argue that this
could lead to inequity in the quality of supply between ISPs in high-density and lowdensity areas.

Grubesic and Murray (2002) look at differences in xDSL access for different
regions in Columbus, Ohio. They point out that xDSL access can be inhibited for some
consumers due to the infrastructure and distance requirements. The maximum coverage
radius for xDSL is approximately 18,000 feet from a central switching office (CO),

30

which is a large, expensive building.19 Furthermore, the radius is closer to 12,000 feet
for high-quality, low-interruption service. Therefore, those living beyond this radius
from the COs already built before xDSL was available, will more likely suffer from lack
of service. As a counterintuitive result, such affluent areas as Franklin County in Ohio
might lack high-speed access, which is contrary to the usual notion of there being a
socioeconomic digital divide (Grubesic and Murray 2002). However, this does give
more insight into why many rural residents (those living in places with more dispersed
populations) might also lack high-speed access.

Gillett and Lehr (1999) compiled a database of communities in the United States
where cable modem service is offered, and linked it to county-level demographic data.
They found that broadband access is not universal. Only 43 per cent of the population
lives in counties with available cable modem service.20 Broadband access is typically
available in counties with large populations, high per capita income, and high
population density; and there is a notable difference in the strategies of cable operators,
with some being more aggressive than others.

In a very data-intensive study, Gabel and Kwan (2001) examine deployment of
DSL services at central switches throughout the United States and provide a thorough
census of upgrade activity at switches. They examine the choice of providers to deploy
advanced technology - to make broadband services available to different segments of
the population. The crucial factors in the decision to offer service are listed as: (1) cost
of supplying the service; (2) potential size of the market; (3) cost of reaching the
Internet backbone; and (4) regulations imposed on Regional Bell Operating Companies

31

(RBOCs).21 They find that advanced telecommunications service is not being deployed
in low-income and rural areas.

In summary, even before considering the impact of geographic dispersion on
demand, the issues involved in the cost of supply guaranteed that the diffusion process
of broadband would differ from dial-up. The earliest broadband ISPs, primarily cable
companies and telephone companies, found highly dense areas more profitable due to
economies of scale in distribution and lower expenses in build-out. Moreover, the buildout and retrofit activities for broadband are much more involved and expensive than
was required for the build-out of dial-up networks. So within urban areas, there was
uneven availability during the earliest years of the build-out.

The underlying economic situation has shaped this outcome. As long as prices
for broadband are much higher than for dial-up, users face a price/quality trade-off, and
different preferences over that trade-off shape the margin between adopter and nonadopter. If prices decline and become much closer to dial-up prices, then broadband’s
superior qualities should diminish the importance of that trade-off. In addition,
providers of broadband may put together bundles of services (for example, voice, video,
and Internet service) that have marketing appeal. Finally, and more speculatively, if a
low-cost wireless solution for providing high-bandwidth applications emerges, then it
may have features that might induce adoption where none has yet occurred. For a
number of years one should expect next generations of Internet access to grow primarily
by taking market share from dial-up, and secondarily by inducing first time adoption.
There is little evidence to suggest that broadband will induce anything other than slow

32

adoption by households who had not experienced the Internet by 2003.

Rural versus urban divides
We can make several key observations concerning a geographical divide. First, a divide
for basic dial-up Internet services is generally nonexistent, or, at worse, it is relegated to
a very small part of the population. Due to the preexisting telephone service
infrastructure, the cost of provision is relatively low; thus, we see over 92 per cent of
households just a local call away from Internet connection. Furthermore, as of 2001,
52.9 per cent of rural residents were using the Internet, not much lower than the national
average of 57.4 per cent (NTIA 2002).

Businesses participate at high rates, over 90 per cent for medium and large
establishments (over 100 employees). While we do see lower basic participation rates in
rural areas, this essentially is due to the type of industries we find there (that is,
industries deriving less relative benefit from Internet connection). Thus, in this
particular case, we see that it is not necessarily availability of Internet access, but
largely the private incentives of the adopters (commercial businesses) that is
determining the adoption rate.

Augereau and Greenstein (2001) warn of the possibility of the divide in
availability worsening as large firms in large cities continue to upgrade their services
rapidly while smaller firms in smaller cities move forward more slowly. Now that basic
service is available almost everywhere in the country, the real issue of concern is the
evolution of quality of service geographically, as well as value per dollar. Several

33

authors warn that we may be headed down a road of bifurcation where large urban areas
get better service at a faster pace, while smaller cities and urban areas fall behind.
Greenstein (2000a: 408) suggests that urban areas get more new services due to two
factors: “(1) increased exposure to national ISPs, who expand their services more often;
and (2) the local firms in urban areas possess features that lead them to offer services
with propensities similar to the national firms.”

Along a different line of argument, Strover (2001) arrives at a similarly
pessimistic assessment, one shared by many observers.22 She points out that the cost
structure for ISPs is unfavourable because of their dependence on commercial
telecommunications infrastructure providers, which are reluctant to invest in rural areas
due to the high costs necessary to reach what often are relatively few customers. A lack
of competition in rural areas among telephone service providers serves to exacerbate the
low incentives. Furthermore, the fact that the economics of small cities are shaped more
by the private sector than government initiatives, makes small cities less prone to
initiating plans to develop telecommunications (Alles, Esparza, and Lucas 1994).

Many studies place a much greater emphasis on other variables along which they
find the divide is much more pronounced. Hindman (2000) suggests that there is no
strong evidence of a widening gap between urban and rural residents’ use of
information technologies, but that such predictors as income, education, and age have
become even more powerful in predicting usage over the years (specifically from 1995
to 1998).

34

Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2002, 2003a,b) find that, as of December
2000, 12.6 per cent of establishments engage in some form of Internet enhancement
activities. Furthermore, they find much higher enhancement adoption rates in large
cities (consolidated metropolitan statistical areas) as the top ten ranges from Denver at
18.3 per cent to Portland at 15.1 per cent. In addition, enhancement adoption rates in
large urban counties (metropolitan statistical areas) is 14.7 per cent, while that of small
counties is only 9.9 per cent on average. However, they also find that the industries of
“management of companies and enterprises” (NAICS 55) and “media,
telecommunications, and data processing” (NAICS 51) had enhancement adoption rates
of 27.9 per cent and 26.8 per cent, respectively - rates far exceeding all other
industries.23 This strongly points to the idea that geographical differences may largely
be explained by the preexisting geographical distribution of industries.

6. Overview
What happened during the first wave of diffusion?
It was unclear at the outset which of several potential maturation processes would occur
after commercialization. If advancing Internet infrastructure stayed exotic and difficult
to use, then its geographic distribution would depend on the location of the users most
willing to pay for infrastructure. If advancing Internet infrastructure became less exotic
for a greater number of users and vendors, then commercial maturation would produce
geographic dispersion over time, away from the areas of early experimentation.
Similarly, as advanced technology becomes more standardized, it is also more easily
serviced in outlying areas, again contributing to its geographic dispersion.

35

As it turned out, the first wave of the diffusion of the Internet (from 1995 to
2000) did not follow the most pessimistic predictions. The Internet did diffuse to urban
areas with their complementary technical and knowledge resources, but the location of
experiments was necessarily temporary, an artifact of the lack of maturity of the
applications. As this service matured - as it became more reliable and declined in price
so that wider distribution became economically feasible - the geographic areas that were
early leaders in technology lost their comparative lead or ceased to be leaders. As such,
basic ISP technology diffused widely and comparatively rapidly after
commercialization. On-the-margin users in urban areas had a better experience than
users in rural areas, but many of these differences arose for straightforward economic
reasons, such as the cost of provision and the lack of economies of scale brought about
by thin demand.

Open questions remain as the next wave proceeds. There is little experience with
uncoordinated commercial forces developing a high-speed communication network with
end-to-end architecture. This applies to the many facets that make up advanced
telecommunications services for packet switching, such as switching using frame relay
or Asynchronous Transfer Mode, as well as Synchronous Optical Network equipment or
Optical Carrier services of various numerical levels (Noam 2001).

The spread of broadband service has been seemingly slower and almost certainly
much less evenly distributed than that of dial-up. This is not a surprise once their basic
economics is analysed and it may be an artifact of early limitations on availability. The
broadband ISPs find highly dense areas more profitable due to economies of scale in

36

distribution and lower expenses in build-out. Moreover, the build-out and retrofit
activities for broadband are much more involved and expensive than was required for
the build-out of the dial-up networks.

Open questions about the second wave
How will the Internet’s geographic characteristics shape economic growth during the
second wave of diffusion? The answer is not clear for a variety of reasons. First, it is not
clear whether new technologies for delivering the Internet will alter the bilateral
relationship between geography and the Internet. For example, will Internet connection
via satellite emerge as the connection of choice, and if so, how much would this dampen
the argument that location matters? Will another fixed wireless solution emerge for
delivery of high-speed data services, and will it exhibit low enough economies of scale
to spread to suburban areas? Second, and perhaps more speculatively, the Internet will
affect the diffusion of other new products. As the majority of American homes become
hard-wired, how drastic will the effect be on local media, such as local newspapers (see,
for example, Chyi and Sylvie 2001)? If individuals can access any radio station in the
country at any time, how can all incumbent stations possibly stay in existence? These
were mostly rhetorical questions about hypothetical scenarios during the earliest years
of the Internet’s diffusion, but have become less so with increasing numbers of Internet
users. The Internet has diffused to a sufficiently large population that researchers have
begun to accumulate evidence based on actual firm behaviour (for example, see Ting
and Wildman 2002).

Third, it is not clear whether the digital divide will accelerate or decelerate, as

37

new technologies diffuse on the existing network. Consider the following: use of some
peer-to-peer technologies, such as ICQ and Napster and Skype, spread very fast
worldwide because these were nested within the broader use of the Internet at the time.
Was their speed of adoption exceptional, a by-product of the early state of the
commercial Internet, or something we should expect to see frequently? There are related
questions about the spread of new technologies supporting improvements in the delivery
of Internet services. Will the diffusion of IP.v6 occur quickly because its use is nested
within the structure of existing facilities? Will various versions of XML spread quickly
or slowly due to the interrelatedness of all points on the Internet? What about standards
supporting IP telephony? Will 802.11b (aka Wi-Fi) diffuse to multiple locations because
it is such a small scale technology, or will its small scale interfere with a coordinated
diffusion?

As we speculate about future technologies, two overriding lessons from the past shape
our thinking. First, once the technology was commercialized, private firms tailored it in
multiple locations in ways that nobody had foreseen. Indeed, the eventual shape, speed,
growth, and use of the commercial Internet was not foreseen within government circles
(at NSF), despite (comparatively) good intentions and benign motives on the part of
government overseers, and despite advice from the best technical experts in the world.
Second, Internet infrastructure grew because it is malleable, not because it was
technically perfect. It is better thought of as a cheap retrofit on top of the existing
communications infrastructure. No single solution was right for every situation, but a
TCP/IP solution could be found in most places. The US telephone system provided
fertile ground because backbone used existing infrastructure when possible. What

38

existing infrastructure will the next generation of Internet use?

References
Alles, P., Esparza, A., and Lucas, S. (1994). ‘Telecommunications and the Large CitySmall City Divide: Evidence from Indiana cities’. Professional Geographer, 46: 30716.
Atrostic, B. K. and Nguyen, S.V. (2002). ‘Computer Networks and US Manufacturing
Plant Productivity: New Evidence from the CNUS Data’. Working Paper #02-01,
Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau, Washington, DC.
Augereau, A. and Greenstein, S. (2001). ‘The Need for Speed in Emerging
Communications Markets: Upgrades to Advanced Technology at Internet Service
Providers’. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19: 1085-1102.
Bauer, J. M. (2005). ‘Unbundling Policy in the United States: Players, Outcomes and
Effects’. Communications and Strategies, 57: 59-82.
Bertot, J. and McClure, C. (2000). Public Libraries and the Internet, 2000, Report
prepared for National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, Washington,
DC, http://www.nclis.gov/statsurv/2000plo.pdf.
Boardwatch Magazine (Various years). Directory of Internet Service Providers,
Littleton, CO.
Bresnahan, T. and Greenstein, S. (2001). ‘The Economic Contribution of Information
Technology: Towards Comparative and User Studies’. Evolutionary Economics, 11: 95118.
Bresnahan, T. and Trajtenberg, M. (1995). ‘General Purpose Technologies: “Engines of
Growth”’? Journal of Econometrics, 65(1): 83-108.

39

Castells, M. (2002). The Internet Galaxy, Reflections on the Internet, Business and
Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chyi, H. I. and Sylvie, G. (2001). ‘The Medium Is Global, the Content Is Not: The Role
of Geography in Online Newspaper Markets’. Journal of Media Economics, 14(4): 23148.
Cortada, J. W. (1996). Information Technology as Business History: Issues in the
History and Management of Computers. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Crandall, R. W. and Alleman, J. H. (2002). Broadband: Should We Regulate HighSpeed Internet Access? Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory
Studies.
Dodge, M. and Kitchin, R. (2001a). Atlas of CyberSpace. London: Addison Wesley.
–––(2001b). Mapping CyberSpace. London: Routledge.
Downes, T. and Greenstein, S. (1998). ‘Do Commercial ISPs Provide Universal
Access?’ in S. Gillett and I. Vogelsang (eds) Competition, Regulation and
Convergence: Current Trends in Telecommunications Policy Research. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 195-212.
–––(2002) ‘Universal Access and Local Internet Markets in the U.S.’ Research Policy,
31: 1035-52.
Forman, C. (2005). ‘The Corporate Digital Divide: Determinants of Internet Adoption’.
Management Science, 51(4): 641-54.
Forman, C., Goldfarb, A., and Greenstein, S. (2002). ‘Digital Dispersion: An Industrial
and Geographic Census of Commercial Internet Use’. Working Paper, NBER,
Cambridge, MA.
–––(2003a). ‘The Geographic Dispersion of Commercial Internet Use’, in S. Wildman

40

and L. Cranor (eds) Rethinking Rights and Regulations: Institutional Responses to New
Communication Technologies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 113-45.
–––(2003b). ‘Which Industries use the Internet?’, in M. Baye (ed.) Organizing the New
Industrial Economy. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 47-72.
–––(2005). ‘How did Location Affect Adoption of the Internet by Commercial
Establishments? Urban Density versus Global Village’. Journal of Urban Economics,
58(3): 389-420.
Gabel, D. and Kwan, F. (2001). ‘Accessibility of Broadband Communication Services
by Various Segments of the American Population’, in B. Compaine and S. Greenstein
(eds) Communications Policy in Transition: The Internet and Beyond. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 295-320.
Garcia, D. L. (1996). ‘Who? What? Where? A Look at Internet Deployment in Rural
America’. Rural Telecommunications, Nov./Dec.: 25-9.
Gillett, S. E., and Lehr, W. (1999). ‘Availability of Broadband Internet Access:
Empirical Evidence’, http://itel.mit.edu/itel/docs/MISC/LehrGillettTPRC99_0523.doc,
accessed 17 Mar. 06.
–––, Lehr, W. H., and Osorio, C. (2004). ‘Local Government Broadband Initiatives’.
Telecommunications Policy 28: 537-58.
Goolsbee, A. and Klenow, P. (1999). ‘Evidence on Learning and Network Externalities
in the Diffusion of Home Computers’. Working Paper # 7329, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Gorman, S. P. and Malecki, E. J. (2000). ‘The Networks of the Internet: An Analysis of
Provider Networks in the USA’. Telecommunications Policy, 24(2): 113-34.
Greenstein, S. (2000a). ‘Building and Delivering the Virtual World: Commercializing
Services for Internet Access’. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 48(4): 391-411.

41

–––(2000b). ‘Empirical Evidence on Commercial Internet Access Providers'Propensity
to Offer new Services’, in B. Compaign and I. Vogelsang (eds) The Internet Upheaval,
Raising Questions and Seeking Answers in Communications Policy. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 253-76.
–––(2005). ‘The Economic Geography of Internet Infrastructure in the United States’, in
M. Cave, S. Majumdar, and I. Vogelsang (eds) Handbook of Telecommunications
Economics, Vol. II. Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing, 289-374.
––– and Mazzeo, M. (2006 forthcoming). ‘Differentiated Entry into Competitive
Telephony,’ Journal of Industrial Economics.
Grubesic, T. H. and Murray, A. T. (2002). ‘Constructing the Divide: Spatial Disparities
in Broadband Access’. Papers in Regional Science, 81(2): 197-221.
––– and O’Kelly, M. E. (2002). ‘Using Points of Presence to Measure Accessibility to
the Commercial Internet’. Professional Geographer, 54(2): 259-78.
Hargettai, E. (2003). ‘The Digital Divide and What To Do About It’, in D. C. Jones
(ed.) The New Economy. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 822-38.
Hindman, D. B. (2000). ‘The Rural-Urban Digital Divide’. Journalism and Mass
Communication Quarterly, 77(3): 549-60.
Jimeniz, E. and Greenstein, S. (1998). ‘The Emerging Internet Retailing Market as a
Nested Diffusion Process’. International Journal of Innovation Management, 2(3): 281308.
Kahn, R. (1995). ‘The Role of Government in the Evolution of the Internet,’ in National
Academy of Engineering (ed.) Revolution in the U.S. Information Infrastructure.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 13-24.
Kende, M. (2000). ‘The Digital Handshake: Connecting Internet Backbones,’ Working

42

Paper No. 32., Federal Communications Commission, Office of Planning and Policy,
Washington, DC.
Kitchin, R. M. (1998). ‘Towards Geographies of Cyberspace’. Progress in Human
Geography, 22(3): 385-406.
Kolko, J. (2000). ‘The Death of Cities? The Death of Distance? Evidence from the
Geography of Commercial Internet Usage’, in I. Vogelsang and B. Compaine (eds) The
Internet Upheaval: Raising Questions, Seeking Answers in Communications Policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 73-98.
–––(2002). ‘Silicon Mountains, Silicon Molehills, Geographic Concentration and
Convergence of Internet Industries in the U.S.’ Economics of Information and Policy.
14(2): 211-32.
Malecki, E. J. (2002). ‘The Economic Geographic of the Internet’s Infrastructure’.
Economic Geography, 78(4): 399-424.
––– and Gorman, S. (2001). ‘Maybe the Death of Distance, But not the End of
Geography: The Internet as a Network’, in T. Leinbach and S. Brunn (eds) Worlds of ECommerce: Economic, Geographical and Social Dimensions. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 87-105.
Moss, M. L. and Townsend, A. M. (1999). ‘How Telecommunications Systems are
Transforming Urban Spaces’, in J. O. Wheeler and Y. Aoyama (eds) Cities in the
Telecommunications Age. New York: Routledge, 31-41.
–––(2000). ‘The Internet Backbone and the American Metropolis’. Information Society,
16(1): 35-47.
–––(2002). ‘The Role of the Real City in Cyberspace: Measuring and Representing
Regional Variations in Internet Accessibility’, in D. Janelle and D. Hodge (eds)

43

Information, Place, and Cyberspace. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 171-86.
Mowery, D. C. and Simcoe, T. S. (2002). ‘The Origins and Evolution of the Internet,’ in
R. Nelson, B. Steil, and D. Victor (eds) Technological Innovation and Economic
Performance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 229-64.
NTIA (National Telecommuncations and Information Administration) (2004). ‘A
Nation Online: Entering the Broadband Age’, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html.
———(2002). ‘A Nation Online: How Americans Are Expanding Their Use Of The
Internet’, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html, assessed 17 Mar. 06.
———(1998). ‘Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide’,
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html, assessed 17 Mar. 06.
———(1997). ‘Falling Through the Net: Defining the Digital Divide’,
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html, assessed 17 Mar. 06
–––(1995). ‘Falling Through the Net: A Survey of the ‘Have Nots’ in Rural and Urban
America’, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports.html, assessed 17 Mar. 06.
New Paradigm Resources Group (2000). CLEC Report, Chicago, IL.
Noam, E. (2001). Interconnecting the Network of Networks. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Nuechterlein, J. E. and Weiser, P. J. (2005). Digital Crossroads: American
Telecommunications Policy in the Internet Age, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Oxman, J. (1999). ‘The FCC and the Unregulation of the Internet,’ Working paper 31,
Federal Communications Commission, Office of Planning and Policy, Washington, DC.
Parker, E. B. (2000). ‘Closing the Digital Divide in Rural America’.
Telecommunications Policy, 24(4): 281-90.
Porter, M. (2001). ‘Strategy and the Internet’. Harvard Business Review. 79(3): 62-78.

44

Premkumar, G. and Roberts, M. (1999). ‘Adoption of New Information Technologies in
Rural Small Businesses’. Omega-International Journal of Management Science, 27(4):
467-84.
Prieger, J. E. (2003). ‘The Supply Side of the Digital Divide: Is There Equal
Availability in the Broadband Internet Access Market?’ Economic Inquiry, 41(2): 34663.
Prince, J. (2005). ‘Measuring the Digital Divide: Structural Estimation of the Demand
for Personal Computers’, mimeo, Cornell University.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.
Rosston, G. and Wimmer, B. (2001). “‘From C to Shining C” Competition and CrossSubsidy in Communications’, in B. Compaine and S. Greenstein (eds) Communications
Policy in Transition: The Internet and Beyond. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 241-64.
Sinai, T. and Waldfogel, J. (2004). ‘Geography and the Internet: Is the Internet a
Substitute or a Complement for Cities?’ Journal of Urban Economics 56(1): 1-24.
Stafford, T. F. (2003). ‘Differentiating between Adopter Categories in the Uses and
Gratifications for Internet Services’, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
50(4): 427-35.
Strover, S. (2001). ‘Rural Internet Connectivity’. Telecommunications Policy, 25(5):
331-47.
Strover, S. and Berquist, L. (2001). ‘ping Telecommunications Infrastructure: State and
Local Policy Collisions’, in B. Compaine and S. Greenstein (eds) Communications
Policy in Transition: The Internet and Beyond. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 221-40.
Strover, S., Oden, M., and Inagaki, N. (2002). ‘Telecommunications and Rural
Economies: Findings from the Appalachian Region’, in L. F. Cranor and S. Greenstein

45

(eds) Communication Policy and Information Technology: Promises, Problems,
Prospects. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 317-46.
Ting, C. and Wildman, S. (2002) ‘The Economics of Internet Radio,’ paper presented at
the 30th Telecommunications Policy Research Conference, Alexandria, VA, 29 Sept.
Townsend, A. M. (2001a). ‘Network Cities and the Global Structure of the Internet’.
American Behavioral Scientist, 44(10): 1697-716.
———(2001b). ‘The Internet and the Rise of the New Network Cities, 1969-1999’.
Environment and Planning B-Planning & Design, 28(1): 39-58.
USDA (US Department of Agriculture) (2000) Advanced Telecommunications in Rural
America, The Challenge of Bringing Broadband Communications to All of America,
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/ruralbb42600.pdf
vanDijk, J. A. G. M. (2005). The Deepening Digital Divide: Inequality in the
Information Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Warf, B. (2001). ‘Segue Ways into Cyberspace: Multiple Geographies of the Digital
Divide’. Environment and Planning B-Planning and Design, 28(1): 3-19.
Weinberg, J. (1999). ‘The Internet and Telecommunications Services, Access Charges,
Universal Service Mechanisms, and Other Flotsam of the Regulatory System’, in S.
Gillett and I. Vogelsang (eds) Competition, Regulation and Convergence: Current
Trends in Telecommunications Policy Research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 297-316.
Werbach, K. (1997). A Digital Tornado: The Internet and Telecommunications Policy.
Working Paper 29, Federal Communication Commission, Office of Planning and
Policy, Washington, DC.
Woroch, G. (2001). ‘Local Network Competition’, in M. Cave, S. Majumdar, and I.

46

Vogelsang (eds) Handbook of Telecommunications Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Publishing, 642-716.
Zook, M. A. (2000). ‘The Web of Production: the Economic Geography of Commercial
Internet Content Production in the United States’. Environment and Planning A, 32(3):
411-26.
———(2001). ‘Old Hierarchies or New Networks of Centrality? The Global
Geography of the Internet Content Market’. American Behavioral Scientist, 44(10):
1679-96.

47

1

Northwestern University, Department of Management and Strategy, Kellogg School of

Management, and Cornell University, Department of Applied Economics and
Management, respectively. We thank the Kellogg School of Management for financial
support. We thank an anonymous reviewer and the editors for extensive comments. All
errors contained here are our responsibility.
2

For more on the diffusion of PCs, see Goolsbee and Klenow (1999), United States

Department of Agriculture (2000), or NTIA (1995, 1997, 1998, 2002).
3

As of 2003, approximately 1% of households accessed the Internet using a mobile

telephone or some other home Internet access device. More than this, only 14.2% of
Internet users did not have home access, further highlighting the strong relationship
between Internet use and home adoption (NTIA, 2004).
4

These are the one-time costs of learning how to use a PC and all its peripherals.

5

For the full historical trend, see also NTIA (1995, 1997, 1998).

6

This is a large topic and outside the scope of this review. See, for example, Hargettai

(2003) or vanDijk (2005).
7

See, also, Atrostic and Nguyen (2002), who look at establishments in manufacturing.

To the extent that they examine adoption, their study emphasizes how the size of
establishments shapes the motives to adopt networking for productivity purposes.
8

For a comprehensive review of the literature, see Woroch (2001).

9

The FCC’s decision was made many years earlier for many reasons, and extended to

ISPs in the mid-1990s with little notice at the time, since most insiders did not
anticipate the extent of the growth that would arise. As ISPs grew in geographic
coverage and revenues and threatened to become competitive voice carriers, these

48

interconnection regulations came under more scrutiny (Werbach 1997, Kende 2000,
Weinberg 1999).
10

See Crandall and Alleman (2002).

11

Some ISPs operated as CLECs and vice versa, but many did not. This is a complex

topic, still changing as of this writing. See www.alts.org, New Paradigm Resources
Group (2000), or Greenstein and Mazzeo (2005).
12

For a review of the determinants of pricing within states, see Rosston and Wimmer

(2001).
13

This is a complex topic that necessarily strays into matters outside the scope of this

review. For extensive description and analysis of these disputes and their resolution, see
e.g., Bauer (2005) or Nuechterlein and Weiser (2005).
14

For example, Greenstein and Mazzeo (forthcoming) find that most CLECs explicitly

targeted their services at businesses and few CLECs offered only household service. In
low density areas the CLECs were largely existing phone companies who tried to cream
skim business customers in neighbouring small towns. With only a few exceptions, in
the major urban areas those CLECs that targeted households did so in conjunction with
their business services and only when the costs of doing so were not cost-prohibitive,
such as in a high density location like Manahattan, or in downtown Chicago, or Boston,
or San Francisco.
15

For a variety of perspectives, see Kitchin (1998), Moss and Townsend (1999), Dodge

and Kitchin (2001a, 2001b), Castells (2002), Malecki and Gorman (2001), Gorman and
Malecki (2002) and reviews in Malecki (2002) and Greenstein (2005).
16

See, also, Kolko (2002).

49

17

Degree of specialization is measured by relating the number of .com domains in a

region relative to the total number of firms in a region to the number of .com domains in
the United States relative to the total number of firms in the United States (Zook 2000).
18

Broadband is defined by theFCC as the capability of supporting at least 200 Kbps in

at least one direction (supplier and/or consumer), http://www.fcc.gov.
19

This is the non-amplified radius; with amplifiers the signal could reach further.

However, the 18,000 feet only applies to service of up to 1.5 Mbps; for higher speeds,
the radius is even more limited. For example, for speeds of 8 Mbps, the limit is 9,000
feet and for VDSL, which could supply up to 55 Mbps, the limit is a mere 1,000 feet.
20

They point out that this population is actually closer to 27% (as was stated by Kinetic

Strategies), but explain that their data are not fine enough to show this measurement.
21

Data were obtained concerning wire centres; also data on DSL and cable modem

service availability were collected via web sites and calling service providers. They
supplemented it with Census data.
22

23

See also Garcia (1996), Parker (2000), Hindman (2000).
NAICS stands for the North American Industry Classification System.

50

