                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PEER EFFECTS IN EUROPEAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS:
                               EVIDENCE FROM PIRLS

                                       Andreas Ammermueller
                                        Jörn-Steffen Pischke

                                         Working Paper 12180
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12180


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




We thank David Autor, Per-Anders Edin, Edwin Leuven, Eric Maurin, Sandra McNally, Matt Pritsker, Kjell
Salvanes, and Gylfi Zoega for helpful comments. Ammermueller gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Fritz Thyssen Foundation under the project “Bildungschancen zwischen Grundschule und
Sekundarstufe” and would like to thank the Center for Economic Performance for their hospitality during
his stay in London, during which the main work on this paper was completed. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Andreas Ammermueller and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Peer Effects in European Primary Schools: Evidence from PIRLS
Andreas Ammermueller and Jörn-Steffen Pischke
NBER Working Paper No. 12180
April 2006
JEL No. I21, J24

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate peer effects for fourth graders in six European countries. The identification relies on
variation across classes within schools. We argue that classes within primary schools are formed
roughly randomly with respect to family background. Similar to previous studies, we find sizeable
estimates of peer effects in standard OLS specifications. The size of the estimate is much reduced
within schools. This could be explained either by selection into schools or by measurement error
in the peer background variable. When we correct for measurement error we find within school
estimates close to the original OLS estimates. Our results suggest that the peer effect is modestly
large, measurement error is important in our survey data, and selection plays little role in biasing peer
effects estimates. We find no significant evidence of non-linear peer effects.

Jörn-Steffen Pischke
Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
s.pischke@lse.ac.uk

Andreas Ammermüller
Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung GmbH
L 7,1 Postfach 103443
D-68034 Mannheim
GERMANY
ammermueller@zew.de
1 Introduction

Learning in schools takes place in a group setting, and the composition of the group possibly
affects individual outcomes.      There has been a lot of interest in these types of social
interactions in economics recently, and in peer effects in school in particular. We revisit this
issue in this paper, drawing on a previously unexploited data set in this context, the Progress
in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) for fourth graders. Our analysis covers six
European countries, Germany, France, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden.


Peer effects are of interest for a variety of reasons. From the policy perspective, it is
important to know how students should be grouped in schools and class rooms in order to
maximize achievement, or to achieve certain equity goals. Tracking policies, the explicit
grouping of students into classes by ability is widespread in many countries.            Policies
increasing school choice and school competition are being discussed or implemented in many
countries. These policies will influence student outcomes through peer effects, if there is
increased sorting of students as a result of these policies. Understanding peer effects is
therefore an important ingredient in evaluating many education policies.


One of the main challenges in the literature on peer effects is the feature that schools and class
rooms are not formed randomly.            School and class composition typically reflects
neighborhood characteristics, and therefore the family background of students. The estimated
peer effect may capture unobserved aspects of an individual student’s performance if this
problem is ignored. We exploit the fact that the PIRLS data sample multiple class rooms
within a single school. This allows us to estimate peer effects within schools. Since we study
students in primary schools, there is no explicit tracking in any of the countries in our sample.
We argue that classes within schools are in fact formed more or less randomly with respect to
family background characteristics (other than immigrant status). The variation in our peer
variable therefore most likely reflects that there will be small differences in composition when
multiple groups are formed out of a small population (in essence the absence of the law of
large numbers). Hence, our research design allows for a relatively credible identification of
peer effects on student test scores.




                                                1
The existing literature, of which some recent studies are summarized in Table 1, has used a
wide variety of approaches to identify peer effects. The papers closest in spirit to ours are the
ones by Hoxby (2000) for the US and Gould et al. (2005) for Israel. These papers similarly
rely on differences in the compositions of individual classes within a school, which come
about by chance. Hanushek et al. (2003) and McEwan (2003) also use within school variation
to identify peer effects. However, it is more difficult to believe that differences in class
composition are random in their cases. We will compare our methodology in detail to the
existing literature in the next section. A number of recent studies have also used explicit
random assignment to classes or schools, or other natural experiments. However, none of
these studies is for European countries.


An important issue in our context is the fact that our peer measure is self-reported by the
students’ parents and that the sample does not include all students in a class room. These
features will lead to measurement error in both the individual and peer level variables in the
regression, and hence to biased estimates. Moreover, the size of the bias will differ in the
OLS and within school estimates. We address these issues by using alternative variables for
family background as instruments, and adjusting our estimates for the sampling error in our
measure of the peer variable.


On average across countries, we find that a one standard deviation change in our measure of
peer composition leads to a 0.11 standard deviation change in reading test scores, and this
estimate is marginally significant. The size of this effect is slightly larger than most estimates
reported in the literature.     However, the confidence interval for our measurement error
corrected estimates is fairly large.


The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses our
methodology and compares our approach to the existing literature. Section 3 describes the
PIRLS data. In section 4, we investigate the issue of whether classes are formed randomly
within schools. Section 5 presents our preliminary estimates of peer effects, and section 6
discusses measurement error problems and how we deal with them. Section 7 converts our
estimated peer effects to effect sizes and compares the results with the literature.      A final
section concludes.




                                                2
2 Empirical framework and existing literature
A peer effects study typically starts from a specification of an education production function
like


y ics = α + β X ics + γS cs + δ X ( − i ) cs + φ y ( − i ) cs + µ cs + ε ics                                 (1)


where yics is a student outcome, like a test score, for student i in class room c and school s, Xics
are student or family characteristics, like sex, family background, etc., Scs are school or class
level characteristics, like class size, teacher experience, characteristics of the municipality,
etc., X (− i ) cs are the average characteristics of the peers of student i, and y (− i ) cs is the average

outcome of the peers. In addition, µcs and εics are a class level and an individual level error
term.


In the language of Manski (1993), the coefficient δ reflects exogenous or contextual effects, φ
reflects endogenous effects, and µcs reflects correlated effects. Exogenous effects arise when
individuals learn more because the group of peers is more favorable in terms of their
predetermined characteristics. Correlated effects arise when the group of peers is subject to a
common influence, which is not modeled directly. These effects will give rise to a bias if
they are correlated with peer group composition. For example, consider a remedial class
room with relatively poorly performing children.                               This class room may be assigned a
particularly able teacher but the exceptional characteristics of this teacher are not observable.
Removing the potential bias from contextual effects is one of the main challenges in the peer
effects literature, and we will discuss this issue shortly. Endogenous effects arise when
individuals learn more because peers are learning more.


Even if the requisite data are available, eq. (1) cannot be estimated directly because of the
well known reflection problem (see Manski, 1993). Student i influences his or her peers, and
the peers influence student i in turn through the coefficient φ, if a symmetric equation to (1)
holds for every student in the class. This implies that εics will be mechanically correlated
with y (− i ) cs , leading to a classic simultaneity problem. It is very difficult to overcome the

reflection problem without severe restrictions on the model. The literature has therefore
basically resorted to estimating the reduced form equation

                                                                  3
          α                           δ + βφ
y ics =         + βX ics + γS cs +           X ( − i ) cs + µ cs + ε ics                     (2)
          1−φ                          1−φ
= α ′ + β X ics + γS cs + λ X ( − i ) cs + µ cs + ε ics


which is the approach we will follow as well. In eq. (2), it is not possible to distinguish
endogenous and exogenous effects anymore; either one would give rise to a positive
coefficient λ on the peer variable X (−i ) cs . While distinguishing endogenous and exogenous
effects may be of interest from a theoretical perspective, for policy purposes it will often not
matter which give rise to peer effects. Hence, identifying the reduced form parameter is still
of substantial interest.


Now consider the problem arising from the presence of correlated effects in eqs. (1) and (2).
If some relevant school or class room characteristics are not controlled, the estimated peer
effect λ will be biased. Random assignment of students and teachers to class rooms solves
this problem, because random assignment breaks the link between peer characteristics and
extraneous effects on the class, like unobserved teacher quality. Boozer and Cacciola (2001)
and Graham (2004) exploit the random assignment in the Tennessee STAR experiment on
class size. Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2003) use lotteries at oversubscribed Chicago public
schools. However, their paper does not focus on the issue of peer effects.


True random assignment variation is rare in an education context, and unavailable in many
countries. Hence, researchers have to resort to other strategies utilizing the existing data. In
this paper, as in a variety of related studies, we use variation within schools in order to
identify the peer effect. This means that we estimate


y ics = α s + β X ics + γS cs + λ X ( − i ) cs + µ cs + ε ics                                (3)


instead of eq. (2). αs is a set of dummy variables for each school. Alternatively, we also
introduce peer variables at the school level directly into equation (2). Both approaches lead to
very similar results.




                                                                4
The idea behind these strategies is the observation that different schools draw students from
different neighborhoods, and hence family backgrounds.                      Hence, the unobserved
characteristics µcs will be systematically related to X (−i ) cs at the school level. However,
students are not generally grouped into classes on the basis of ability or family background in
primary school. Although some countries, like Germany, track students into a rigid system of
separate schools at the secondary level, there is no system wide tracking at the primary level.
In fact, classes in primary schools with multiple class rooms at the same grade level are
typically formed more or less on a random basis. In this case, X (− i ) cs will be uncorrelated
with the class level shocks µcs conditional on a set of school fixed effects, or the
characteristics of school peers. The bias from correlated effects is thus removed and λ can be
estimated consistently.


In order to make this argument more precise, consider the following simple model generating
student characteristics:


X ics = η cs + vics                                                                                  (4)


I.e. student characteristics consist of a common class room level mean ηcs and an
idiosyncratic, mean zero student level component vics, which is uncorrelated with ηcs. The
peer mean is


X ( − i ) cs = η cs + v( − i ) cs                                                                    (5)


Correlated effects arise whenever cov(ηcs, µcs) ≠ 0. Estimates of both β and λ will therefore
be biased in the estimation of equation (2). Our basic identifying assumption is ηcs = ηs, i.e.
the systematic component of the student background characteristic arises only at the school
level but not at the class level. Random assignment of students and resources to classes
within schools would ensure that this condition is met. Hence, peer characteristics within
schools are X ( − i ) cs = v( − i ) cs , i.e. variation in the peer measure comes only from the fact that

v( − i ) cs ≠ 0 in small groups. A necessary condition for the within school estimation to work is,

of course, that there is sufficient variance in peer composition of a class room within a school.
We will demonstrate that this is true in our data in section 4.


                                                   5
Our identification strategy is most closely related to that of McEwan (2003). He studies peer
effects for 8th graders in Chile. However, random assignment to classes within schools is
much less likely to happen at the secondary level because schools in many countries,
including Chile, track students to at least some degree. If there is tracking on the basis of
(unobserved) ability, estimates of λ are still confounded by correlated effects.


Gould et al. (2005), Hanushek et al. (2003), and Hoxby (2000) also use within school
variation to identify peer effects. The Gould et al. and Hoxby studies are most similar in
spirit to ours. We use comparisons across class rooms within the same grade for the same
cohort of students.   Hoxby uses comparisons between classes in the same grade across
adjacent cohorts and years. Hence, she identifies peer effects from variation arising from the
composition of subsequent cohorts. For example, one cohort may have more girls and the
next cohort fewer for purely random reasons. Gould et al. also use data on multiple cohorts in
the same grade. They condition on the student composition of the grade across years.
Effectively, like Hoxby, they therefore exploit year to year variation in the composition of a
cohort of students. However, these studies tend to focus on different peer group measures
than ours. Hoxby looks at gender and race composition of the class room and performance by
opposite gender and race groups, while Gould et al. look at the share of immigrants.


Hanushek et al. (2003) focus on a peer measure more similar to ours. They also control for
school by grade effects like Hoxby and Gould et al. However, they track the same cohort of
students over time, rather than different cohorts, and they control for student fixed effects.
This means that they effectively only consider changes in the peer group, which come about
through student mobility, because classes are typically kept together in primary schools. This
means that an individual’s peer group only changes if the individual herself or some peers
move in or out of the classroom. But student mobility might well be related to unobserved
time and grade specific shocks. For example, if a class is about to be assigned a particularly
bad teacher, the parents of the best students may move their children to other schools. Peer
quality in the class would fall. Student achievement may also subsequently fall in the class
room but this might simply be due to the poor teacher, not the poor peers. Hence, controlling
for student fixed effects may lead to an upward bias in the estimates. In fact, Hanushek et al.
find an increase in the peer coefficient when they control for individual student effects
compared to a similar specification without individual effects.


                                                6
Table 1 summarizes these and other recent studies on peer effects in schools. These previous
literature finds peer effects which range from close to zero (Angrist and Lang, 2004, and
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt, 2003) to relatively large (Hoxby, 2000).




3 Data and descriptive statistics
Thirty-five countries participated in the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
(PIRLS). This study was conducted by the International Association for the Evaluation of
Educational Achievement (IEA) in 2001 and nine- and ten-year-olds in reading literacy. In the
data, extensive information on home and school environment is available through student,
parent, teacher and school questionnaires. With 150,000 students tested, PIRLS 2001 is the
first in a planned 5-year cycle of international trend studies in reading literacy (Mullis et al.,
2003).


The data are collected in a two-stage stratified sampling design. First, participating schools
were chosen. Therefore, the schools are the primary sampling units and not the classes or
students. Within each school, a sample of classes from the targeted grade was drawn. The
targeted grade is the upper of the two grades with the most 9 year-olds at the time of testing.
This is always the fourth grade in our sample of countries. Within each class, in principle, all
students are sampled. In practice, the number of sampled students can be smaller than the
actual class size, because of student non-participation. We use all European countries with a
sufficient number of schools with at least two classes. These are France, Germany, Iceland,
the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden.


Student performance is measured by test scores in reading literacy, which is the most
important basic competency needed to acquire further skills and knowledge and to
successfully participate in social life (Mullis et al., 2003). The test scores are plausible values
that are drawn from an estimated proficiency distribution. Plausible values are imputed scores
based on the students’ answers to the test items (cf. Mislevy, 1991). The scores have then
been standardized to an international mean of 500 and a standard deviation of 100, which
facilitates the comparison across countries.




                                                7
Table 2 provides information on mean reading scores and sample sizes in PIRLS at the
student, class and school level. Students, classes and schools can be directly identified.
Missing values of student background, class, and school variables are a serious problem in the
data set. For parents’ education, 36 percent of all values are missing. Instead of parents’
education, we use the number of books at home as our indicator of family background.
Among the variables reflecting family background, this is the one with best item response
rate. In addition, this is an appealing variable in its own right. It is clearly correlated with
parental income, education and origin. Table A3 in the appendix presents the weighted means
of student background variables by categories of the books at home variable. The variable
also reflects whether the parents value literary skills. Parents who own many books most
likely will also promote reading among their children. In fact, Woessmann (2004) found the
number of books to be the single most important predictor of reading skills among various
family background variables in the Third International Math and Science Study (TIMSS) and
Ammermueller (2005) in PIRLS and the Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA) data. As an alternative peer measure, we use an index of parents’ highest educational
attainment and report the results in the Appendix.


Table 2 demonstrates that the sample size, conditioning on non-missing student background
and school variables, shrinks to about 40 to 75 percent of the original. Row 6 in the table
gives the sizes of the samples we actually use. All figures from row 6 onward refer to the
sample with no missing values. Reading scores in the selected samples are slightly higher
than in the overall sample. Some sample schools have only one class. Our within school
estimates will only be utilizing the schools with two or more classes. Information on the
students, classes, and schools with more than one class can be found in the bottom rows of
Table 2. Means and standard deviations of all the variables are reported in Table A1, while
Table A2 presents the percentage of missing values for each variable in the original data.
Both these tables are contained in the Appendix. The peer effects estimations have also been
performed including all observations for which test scores are reported. Missing values have
been replaced by zeros and dummy variables for missing values for each variable have been
added to the regressions. The estimated peer effects are comparable to the evidence presented
in section five and are available from the authors upon request.


The home questionnaire asked parents to report the number of books in their home in five
categories: none or few books (0 – 10), enough to fill one shelf (11 – 25), enough to fill one


                                               8
bookcase (26 – 100), enough to fill two bookcases (101 – 200), enough to fill three or more
bookcases (more than 200).1 In order to form a single measure of students’ background, after
some experimentation, we chose a simple index which assigns 1 to the lowest category (0 –
10), and 5 to the highest category (more than 200). The median parent reports 26 – 100 or
101 – 200 books, and the mean of the indices range from about 3.3 to 4, depending on the
country (see Table 3 below and Table A1).


We generated peer variables as the class average of five student background variables:
number of books at home, student’s sex and age, whether at least one parent was born abroad,
and whether a foreign language is spoken at home. There is an argument in the literature on
peer effects whether class rooms or schools (or possibly even neighborhoods) are the more
appropriate unit of peer interactions. Of course, peer interactions may occur at each of these
levels, and it is an open question which is the most important. We focus on the class room
level for the pragmatic reason that we want to analyze differences within schools. In the
within school estimates, all peer interactions with students from other classes in the school
will be absorbed into the school fixed effects. However, peer effects in the class room are
clearly of interest, since classes are the basic unit where learning takes place. It is therefore
natural to expect that a large fraction of total peer effects should arise at the class room level.


The peer averages are formed using information for all students who report a value for this
specific variable in the data set, not just those students in the final sample. In Table 3, we
decompose the total variance in these class averages into the parts of the variance within and
between schools using the relationship


    1 S Cs
            (      )      1 S Cs
                                  (         ) + N1 ∑ C (x                    )
                                                      S

      ∑∑ cs                 ∑∑ xcs − x s
                      2                      2                               2
                x − x   =                                       s   s   −x                                     (6)
    N s =1 c =1           N s =1 c =1                s =1




where x is the specific variable we are interested in, s = 1, 2, …, S is a school indicator, c = 1,
2, …, CS is a class indicator, and there are CS classes in school s. N is the total number of
classes across all schools in our sample.2



1
 Using instead the number of books at home reported by students yields comparable results.
2
 For the variance decomposition to add to the total variance in an unbalanced panel, it is necessary to weight the
between component by the number of classes in the sample. This is not what, for example, the Stata xtsum
command calculates.

                                                            9
Table 3 presents the total, between and within school variance of the peer variables. The
variation for the average reading test score is shown as well. It is obvious that most of the
variance in all of these measures is between schools. Between 7 and 18 percent of the
variance in the index for the number of books at home is within schools. The fraction is
higher for the reading test scores. However, 70 percent or more of the test score variation is
also between schools. This suggests that a large part of the variation in all these measures is
accounted for by school effects. Nevertheless, there is also some non-negligible amount of
variance left within schools.




4 Selection in class room formation
In this section we will discuss the assignment of students both between and within schools.
We start by presenting some basic information on primary schooling in the countries we
study. We then go on to present some evidence from the PIRLS data to shed light on the
question whether classes are formed (more or less) randomly, and whether different class
rooms systematically get different resources.


In all six countries in our sample, students attend a single track primary school from school
enrolment to at least grade four, in which students have been tested in PIRLS.3 While
students are assigned to various school types after grade four in Germany, they stay on for at
least two more years in primary school in most other countries (France, Iceland, the
Netherlands, and Sweden) or go on to a single tracked secondary school (Norway). School
choice for primary school is free in some countries (Germany and the Netherlands) and
depends on the place of living in the other countries. However, parents have some means to
influence the choice of schools also in these countries. In practice, most parents choose the
nearest school for convenience in all countries (or live near the school of their choice). The
heads of the school are responsible for the assignment of students to classes within schools.
Most countries have legal rules on maximum class size and some school systems provide
extra resources for schools with a high share of migrant students. The final responsibility lies
with the heads of school, however. Grouping of students seems to happen in some cases based
on the migration background of students. We have found no direct evidence that primary


3
  The information on the schooling systems is taken from Eurybase, the database in the information network on
education in Europe, http://www.eurydice.org.

                                                      10
schools in any of the sample countries use any systematic ability grouping or sorting by
family background in grade four.4


The PIRLS data asked in the schools questionnaire whether the school forms sample classes
on the basis of ability. The last row in Table 2 reports the fraction of students in schools that
report some ability grouping at the class level. This fraction is very low except in France and
the Netherlands, where it reaches in the order of 30 percent. While we do not find much
evidence that the classes in these tracked schools look very different from classes in other
schools, we also show results excluding these schools which report some tracking.


We investigate two separate and distinct questions about class room formation with the
PIRLS data. The first question is whether class rooms which differ in composition, for
random or non-random reasons, receive different resources. The second question is whether
the data are consistent with classes being formed randomly. In order to shed light on the first
question, we ran a set of regressions of the peer variables described in the previous section on
class room, teacher, and school characteristics. The observable characteristics of class rooms
and schools which we use are class size, teacher gender, education, and experience, size of the
town or city, instruction hours per day, and the degree of shortages of staff, materials, or
rooms that the school reports.


Table 4 illustrates these regressions for Germany. For books at home, the only significant
variable is shortage of rooms in the school, while none of the class level variables are
individually significant.         The other peer characteristics are also typically unrelated to class
room and school characteristics, with coefficients usually being small and insignificant. The
only exception is immigrants and non-native speakers, who tend to be clustered in more urban
schools. Classes with more immigrants also tend to have better educated teachers.


Table 5 shows p-values for the corresponding F-tests on the joint significance of the variables.
The first three rows of this table refer to simple OLS regressions of the type run in Table 4,
which include both class room and school characteristics. F-tests for the class room level
variables, the school level variables, and both groups together are reported. The fourth row
reports the F-tests for the class level variables from a regression including school fixed
effects. For our family background variable of interest, the number of books at home, the

4
    We consulted researchers in each of the sample countries and they also confirmed this impression.

                                                        11
class and school variables are typically insignificant, with a few exceptions. School level
variables seem to matter in the Netherlands and Norway. This may simply indicate that
students from more favorable backgrounds are not randomly allocated to schools. There is no
correlation with class level variables, however. So this should not affect our conclusions
when we look at within school results. There is some evidence for class level variables being
related to family background in Iceland and in Sweden. In the case of Iceland, this only
appears in the fixed effects regressions. It turns out that this correlation is solely driven by a
single class room with a teacher with 20 years of experience (while all other teachers in
Iceland have 10 or fewer years of experience). We discount this result as spurious. In the
case of Sweden this seems indeed to indicate a non-random allocation of class room resources
to classes with students from different background, even within schools. In particular, there is
evidence that class size increases with average background of students in a class. The
coefficients for the other class and school variables are not significant.


We also find some evidence that class rooms differ for students by age (in Germany, Iceland,
and Norway) and by student sex (in Iceland, the Netherlands, and Norway). It also seems
fairly clear that classes are different for immigrant students in all our sample countries. The
higher the share of immigrant students in a class, the lower is teacher’s education in Germany
and Norway. Instead, teacher’s education increases with the share of immigrants in France. In
Sweden, there is weak evidence for an allocation of immigrant students to larger classes.


In order to test whether class rooms are formed randomly with respect to a particular student
characteristic, we perform a series of Pearson Chi² tests. If classes are formed randomly, the
student characteristic under study and the class the student is assigned to should be
statistically independent. For example, consider student sex. The Pearson Chi² test asks
whether there are more females in a particular class than is consistent with independence,
given the number of students in the school. Formally, for each school the test statistic is
given by



P = ∑∑
             (n
              cj   − nˆ cj )
                            2

                                                                                              (7)
     c   j         nˆ cj




                                                12
where ncj is the number of students with characteristic j in class room c, c = 1, …, C, j = 1,
…, J. Define


                                                                                             nc• n• j
n c• = ∑ ncj                      n• j = ∑ ncj                                   n̂cj =
       j                                 c                                                 ∑∑ n
                                                                                             c       j
                                                                                                         cj




where n̂cj is the predicted number of students with characteristic j in class room c when

characteristic and class room are independent.          Then, under the null hypothesis of
independence, P ∼ χ2 with (C – 1)(J – 1) degrees of freedom.


We further assume that the S schools in a country are independent. In this case, we can
simply add up the S test statistics to get an aggregate test statistic with   [∑ (C   s          ]
                                                                                          − 1) ( J − 1)

degrees of freedom (see, e.g. DeGroot, 1984, p.384). Obviously, the test can only be carried
out on the sub-sample of schools with two or more class rooms. These test statistics are
shown in the fifth row of each panel in Table 5. We found in a small Monte Carlo experiment
that the test generally performs well but rejects somewhat too often under the null hypotheses
in samples of our size.


Figure 1 shows the histograms of the school specific p-values for this test for Germany.
Under the null hypothesis of random assignment to classrooms, the p-values should be
(roughly) uniformly distributed. A policy of deliberate balancing of students’ characteristics
across classrooms (e.g. making sure that the same fraction of girls are in each class) would
lead to a left-skewed distribution, while an assignment of similar students to the same
classroom would lead to a right-skewed distribution (cf. Graham, 2004). Figure 1 suggests
that students are roughly randomly assigned to classes on the basis of family background and
sex. However, there is clustering of immigrant and non-native language students in certain
classes, as low p-values predominate for these tests.


Table 5 confirms these results. The p-values of the aggregate tests for books at home and sex
are 0.24 and 0.12, respectively. However, the p-values are only 0.016 for foreign born, and
0.050 for non-German speaking children. We also find evidence of non-random assignment
of immigrant children for the Netherlands and Sweden. In addition, there seems to be some
evidence that children of a similar family background are grouped together in Sweden.

                                                 13
Recall that principals in a significant number of schools in France and the Netherlands report
ability grouping in their schools. The p-values presented in Table 5 differ only slightly
between these schools and those that report no tracking in France and the Netherlands. One
exception is the evidence for sorting by age within the 19 schools that may be tracked in
France.


Our results largely confirm that classes in the sample countries seem to be formed roughly
randomly within schools.       There is little evidence that students of different family
backgrounds are more likely to be grouped in certain classes conditional on the school they
attend, or that classes with different compositions receive different (observable) resources.
This is comforting for our analysis. The only country, where this does not seem to be the
case, is Sweden. Hence, the Swedish results may have to be taken with a grain more of salt.
In addition, immigrant children, which are an important group in all of the sample countries,
also seem to be non-randomly assigned and given different teaching resources.




5 Basic results on peer effects
We now turn to our results on peer effects. Table 6 reports results for Germany, which is the
country with the biggest sample, and, in particular, with the largest number of schools with at
least two classrooms. We report results for two versions of the peer variable on books at
home and two versions of the individual level regressor on books at home. Since the variable
takes on five categories, the most nonparametric way to use the variable is to use the fraction
of peers in four of the categories. Alternatively, we use the 1 – 5 index we created from these
five categories. In each case, the peer variable for student i used in the regressions is the
leave-out mean for the classroom, omitting the value of the variable for student i from the
calculation of the mean.


In the upper part of Table 6, four dummy variables are used as the individual level control
variable, while the index is used in the lower part of the table. In each case, only the
coefficients on the peer variable are shown in the table. Column 1 shows results when we
only control for student level characteristics (gender, age, immigrant status, language at home,
household size as well as the control for the number of books in the home of the student).
Going from a classroom where all peers have 26-100 books to a classroom where all peers

                                              14
have 101-200 books, a change of about a two standard deviations of the peer composition
across classrooms, is associated with a 19 point increase in the test score. This is about 32
percent of the student level standard deviation in test scores. We find a very similar result in
the specification with the single index measure for peers’ books at home.          This is not
surprising since in practice most of the variation in the index variable occurs in the range
between the 26-100 and the 101-200 books categories. Results are very similar, no matter
how books at home are controlled for at the individual level.


In column (2) of Table 6, we add class and school level covariates to the regression. Adding
these covariates does little to the results. This is not surprising, since we found in Tables 4
and 5 above that the class and school level covariates are basically uncorrelated with our
measure of peer quality. In column (4) we add a school level measure of the peer group. This
changes the results dramatically. The coefficient on the index variable drops from about 18 to
zero and is insignificant. When the peer effects are measured by the fraction of peers in each
category, the peer effects are no longer monotonic now. However, these effects are also
imprecisely estimated. Finally, in columns (5) and (6), we add a full set of school fixed
effects, leading to comparable results as for the school peer measures. The exclusion of
schools that reported to form classes on the basis of student ability in column (6) hardly
changes the results. Using the categories or the index for the individual books variable leads
to very similar estimated peer effects. Using the peer’s index of books at home seems a
useful summary. Standard errors for the categorical measure of the peers’ variable are often
so high as to make it difficult to draw any conclusions from the results.          For ease of
interpretation, we will therefore only present results which use the index of books at home for
both the individual level and the peer variable.


Table 7 summarizes the results for all the six countries. We find a relatively consistent
pattern of results for all six countries in our sample. The size of the estimated peer effect is
similar across the specifications with and without school and class level variables, and is in
the order of 15 to 22 for moving peer quality to the next higher category. Only in Norway
does the peer coefficient fall when school level covariates are added to the regression. Once
we include school peer measures in column (3) or school fixed effects in column (4), the
effect always falls, although the amount of the change is different across countries. In
Germany, Iceland, and Norway the peer effect weakens the most in these specifications, while
there is little change in France. Excluding schools that form classes based on student ability


                                               15
predictably only changes the results in France and the Netherlands, the two countries with
moderate shares of students in schools which form classes based on ability (see Table 2).
Curiously, estimated peer effects are larger when the schools which report tracking are
excluded for the Netherlands.


One reason for the high variation in the coefficients from the fixed effects models is that the
standard errors of these estimates are reasonably large, so that the effects for each individual
country cannot be estimated very precisely. If we believe that the peer effects are the same in
each country then it makes sense to combine the estimates into a single estimate. The average
of the six coefficients in the fixed effects specification in column (4), weighted by the inverse
of the sampling variance, is 8.5. If the variation in country level estimates around this overall
mean is only due to sampling variation, then the standard error for the meta-estimate is 3.3.5
This estimate is much more precise than the country level estimates, and it is significant at the
5 percent level. One concern is with the results for Sweden, because we found some evidence
for non-random assignment and targeted class room resources for Sweden above. The meta-
estimate for the countries without Sweden is only slightly lower.


Our results show that standard OLS estimates of the peer effect may be biased upward
substantially if the within school results are indeed reliable estimates of the true peer effect.
This is true even after controlling for the typically available measures of class room and
school characteristics. One reason why even the fixed effects estimates may be biased is the
presence of immigrant children. We showed above that immigrant children are often not
randomly assigned to classes within schools, and the classes with many immigrant children
may get different resources. Since immigrants in these countries tend to be of lower SES (the
index for books at home is on average 3.15 for immigrant families in the six countries but
3.56 for non-immigrant families), part of the peer effect may be explained by the non-random
allocation of immigrants.


In order to probe this, we reran the regressions in Table 7 including the fraction of foreign
born children in the class, and the fraction of children speaking a foreign language at home.




5
    The sampling variance of the mean is obtained as v =   [∑ v ]
                                                              −1 −1
                                                              c     ,   where vc is the sampling variance of the
estimate for country c. One interpretation of this calculation is that the country average is the minimum distance
estimate of the common peer effect across countries.

                                                       16
This attenuates the estimated peer effects at most very slightly.6 We also experimented with
regressions on the sub-sample of schools with few immigrant children. However, most
sample countries have enough immigrants that there are relatively few such schools leading to
small samples, and hence imprecise estimates. These results indicate that the effect of
immigrant children in a class may be relatively well captured by our family background
variable.


A further question is whether peer effects vary across students. This could give insights into
the optimal assignment of students to classes. When students from a lower social background
profit more from their peers’ background than students from a high social background, more
heterogeneous classes would benefit overall performance (Glewwe, 1997). To investigate
this, we add interaction effects between the peer variable and the individual variable books at
home to the regressions presented in Table 7. Since about half the students have more than
100 books at home, we interact the peer average with a dummy indicating whether the
individual reports more than 100 books at home. The results are presented in Table 8. Peer
effects seem to be stronger for students with a higher social background in France and the
Netherlands, while they are stronger for students with a lower social background in Sweden
and Norway. The meta-estimates are small and insignificant.




6       Measurement Error
Survey reports are subject to a lot of measurement error. In our case, measurement error in
the books at home variable implies that there is measurement error in both the individual and
the peer level regressor. In addition, the peer measure is not based on all students in a class
because some students have not been sampled and others have not responded to the respective
question. This problem will also arise in many studies based on administrative data, which
frequently use lagged test scores as peer measure, since test taking may be incomplete or
lagged scores cannot be matched to all students. Both these measurement problems will
interact in leading to biased estimates of the peer effect in a non-standard way.




6
  Including measures from the school questionnaire on the share of economically disadvantaged students or the
share of students leaving before the end of the academic year as alternative school level variables did not change
the results.

                                                       17
In order to investigate the impact of measurement error in this setup we will return to the
model we outlined in equations (2), (4), and (5) above. In order to focus on the variables of
interest, consider a simplified version of equation (2) with only the individual level and the
peer group regressor but no other variables:


y ics = βX ics + λ X ( − i ) cs + ε ics                                                                                            (8)


The student background variable Xics is still given by equation (4) but this variable is not
directly observed. Instead we observe


~
X ics = X ics + u ics = η cs + vics + u ics                                                                                        (9)


where uics is a classical measurement error. Our argument above has been that the correlated
shocks ηcs only arise at the school level. Hence, we can think of our standard OLS results
corresponding to those with σ η2 > 0 and the within school results to σ η2 = 0 .


In this setup, the OLS estimate of λ will converge to


                                                                    ncs − 1 2 2
                                 (ncs − 1)σ u2σ η2                  N −1
                                                                                    (                   )
                                                                           σ v σ η + σ v2 + σ u2 + (ncs − 1)σ η2 σ v2 + σ u2 (           )
p lim λˆOLS = β                                                  + λ cs
                     (σ   2
                          v         )(
                              + σ u2 ncsσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2   )                      (           )(
                                                                               σ v2 + σ u2 ncsσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2         )
                                                                                                                                   (10)


as we show in the appendix. Ncs is the actual number of students in classroom c in school s
and ncs is the number of students in the sample. In order to understand the different sources of
measurement error and the sign of the bias, it is instructive to look at some special cases.
First, consider the case where all students in each class are sampled, so the only problem is
classical measurement error. In this case


                                 (N cs − 1)σ u2σ η2                          σ v2 (N csσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2 ) + ( N cs − 1)σ η2σ u2
p lim λˆOLS = β                                                   +λ
                     (σ   2
                          v         )(
                              + σ u2 N csσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2   )        σ v2 (N csσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2 ) + σ u2 (N csσ η2 + σ v2 + σ u2 )
                                                                                                                                   (11)



                                                                   18
It is easy to see in this formulation, that the second term implies an attenuation bias of λ if

there is classical measurement error in Xics. This measurement error will carry over to X ( − i ) cs ,
and lead to the standard attenuation.           Since λ is likely positive, this will imply an
underestimate of λ. Returning to equation (10), it becomes clear that the attenuation is
greater, when some students in the class are not sampled. If σ η2 > 0 a second component of

the bias arises, and this is captured by the first term in equation (11). The individual level
regressor Xics is also subject to error and hence will lead to an attenuation of the estimated β̂ .

Since the peer variable contains X ( − i ) cs information on ηcs, part of the signal in the individual
level regressor will load on to the peer coefficient. This term is positive, and hence yields an
upward bias.


Because of these two conflicting sources of bias it is impossible to tell what the net effect of
the bias on λ̂OLS is. The first term can dominate when β is sufficiently larger than λ. Hence

measurement error may not lead to an underestimate of the peer effect in the standard OLS
specification. Since the within school model corresponds to the case where σ η2 = 0 , the first

term in equation (10) and (11) vanishes, and the peer effect is now underestimated. Hence,
measurement error alone may explain why we find lower peer effects in the fixed effects
estimates in Table 7.


In order to address the measurement error problem, we rely on the standard remedy by using
instruments for both Xics and X ( − i ) cs . Recall that in our case the background variable Xics is the
parents’ report of the number of books at home. The same question was asked of the students
as well, so we use the students’ report of the number of books at home as our instrument for
the parents’ report, and the peer mean of the students’ report as instrument for the peer
variable. A second plausible instrument is parents’ education. However, books at home may
not be a sufficient statistic for the way family background affects students’ reading skills, and
parents’ education may affect students independently. Hence, we also re-estimate the IV
models with only the student variable on books.


If the instrument is valid, the IV estimate of λ will converge to




                                                  19
                ⎛ n − 1 ⎞ N csσ η + σ v
                                   2     2

p lim λˆIV = λ ⎜⎜ cs       ⎟⎟              .                                                                (12)
                ⎝ N cs − 1 ⎠ ncsσ η + σ v
                                  2     2




This is the same as the expression in equation (10) with σ u2 = 0 , so IV solves the standard

measurement error problem. It does not resolve the attenuation in the peer effect that arises
due to the fact that we do not sample all the students in a class. When σ η2 = 0 , equation (12)

becomes


                ⎛ n −1 ⎞
p lim λˆIV = λ ⎜⎜ cs       ⎟⎟.                                                                              (13)
                ⎝ N cs − 1 ⎠


This suggests that the within school IV estimate is simple to adjust for the sampling bias since
Ncs and ncs is known in our data. One problem we have ignored in these calculations is the
fact that class sizes are not the same for each class. However, we find in a simple Monte
Carlo experiment that using the adjustment in (13) works very well for the level of variation
in class sizes present in our data. Our adjusted IV estimator will therefore be


               ⎛ N cs − 1 ⎞
λˆIVadj = λˆIV ⎜⎜         ⎟⎟.
               ⎝ ncs − 1 ⎠




The first stages corresponding to our IV regressions indicate that both the relevant
instruments for the individual level regressor and for the peer variable are always highly
significant. The t-statistics on the students’ report of books at home and parents’ education
are above 7 and typically above 10, and the corresponding F-statistics are also large.7 This
indicates that our IV models are not likely to suffer from any small sample bias.


Table 9 presents the results from the IV regressions. Both the individual and peers’ index of
the number of books at home from the home questionnaire are instrumented by the individual
and peers’ index of books at home from the student questionnaire and parents’ highest
educational level. Including only student level variables, the average peer effect across all


7
  The only exception is the Netherlands, where the instruments for the peer variable are not individually
significant. However, the F-statistic for the joint significance of the instruments is above 10.

                                                       20
countries decreases slightly from 19 in the OLS regression in column (1) to 15 in the IV
regression in column (2). Recall from equations (10) and (12) above that the bias in the OLS
regression may be positive if σ η2 > 0 .


Columns (3) and (4) report the corresponding results when school fixed effects and class level
regressors are included. We know already that the standard fixed effects estimate is much
smaller than the OLS estimate in column (1). Applying IV to the within estimates yields a
much higher average peer effect of about 15. The magnitude of this coefficient is very similar
to the pooled IV model in column (2). This is perfectly consistent with our results in
equations (11) and (13). Column (5) applies the correction for sampling bias which raises the
estimate slightly. Interestingly, this is actually slightly higher than the IV estimate in the
pooled sample without school fixed effects. We should note that the average peer effect
across countries masks large differences in the country level estimates. The coefficients in
columns (4) and (5) basically only increase in France, and to a lesser degree in the
Netherlands in Sweden, while they fall in the other countries. However, the country level IV
results are very imprecisely estimated. Hence we focus on the average across countries.
Finally, in column (6), we exclude tracked schools and the peer effect falls slightly but
remains large. If we use only the children’s report of books as instrument but not parental
education, we obtain slightly larger IV estimates but these estimates are also less precise.
Overall, these results suggest that the bias due to measurement error is important, particularly
in the fixed effects results, while omitted variables bias actually does not play a large role.




7      Effect sizes
In order to facilitate comparisons with other studies, it is common in the literature to report
effect sizes of the peer effects estimates. Effect sizes are typically calculated as σ X λˆ / σ y

where σ X is the within country variation in the peer variable, and σ y is the within country

variation in the test scores. This quantifies the peer effect as the impact of a one standard
deviation change in peer background in terms of individual level standard deviations of the
outcome variable.




                                                21
One complication with this measure in our context is that the standard deviation of the peer
variable is not an unbiased measure of σ X because of the measurement error. However, since

we have both the parents’ and the children’s reports for books at home, the covariance of the
two is a measure of the variance of the true variable if both reports are only subject to
classical measurement error.


We report the effect size measure and the necessary ingredients in Table 10. As before, the
effect sizes vary quite widely across countries, ranging from zero in Norway to almost 0.5 in
France. The average effect size across countries is 0.11. This is larger than most of the
estimates in the literature. The bulk of the reported effect sizes is in the range of 0.05 – 0.10.
Our estimate is at the upper end of that range but well below the highest estimates reported in
studies by Hoxby (2000) and McEwan (2003).           One reason why our estimates are higher
might be that we are careful about the measurement error in the peer effects variable.
However, adjusting for measurement error lowers the estimate of σ X and raises the estimate

of λ̂ , so this cuts two ways. However, the upward adjustment in λ̂ is much more important.
Calculating the effect size on the basis of the estimates ignoring measurement error yields a
value of only 0.06, almost half the size of our adjusted result. Hence, the treatment of
measurement error may be rather important, particularly in studies based on survey data, like
Schindler-Rangvid (2003) and Schneeweiss and Winter-Ebmer (2005).




8      Conclusion
Peer effects are potentially a major input into the process of educational production but are
difficult to estimate empirically. We estimate peer effects across classes within primary
schools and argue that classes within schools are formed randomly with respect to family
background.    We find that a one standard deviation change in our student background
measure of peer composition leads to a 0.11 standard deviation change in reading test scores
of fourth graders across our sample of six European countries. This is slightly larger than
most previous estimates in the literature. The estimated peer effects are highest in France and
The Netherlands and lowest in Norway, Iceland and Germany. For Sweden, the estimated
effects are also high but might be driven by within-school selection.




                                               22
We have argued that there is little evidence for systematic sorting into class rooms within
schools, and for different classes receiving different observable instructional resources.
Hence, comparing students in different classes within schools should be an effective way of
dealing with any selection at the school level. Surprisingly, we find that this selection does
not seem to be very important once we take measurement error issues into account. The
discussion in this literature seems dominated with solving the selection issues, while little
attention is being paid to the measurement error issues, which we find to be important in our
data.




                                             23
References


Ammermueller, Andreas (2005), Educational opportunities and the role of institutions, ZEW
   Discussion Paper No. 05-44.
Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang (2004), Does school intergration generate peer effects?
     Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program, American Economic Review 94(5), 1613-
     1634.
Boozer, Michael and Stephen Cacciola (2001), Inside the 'Black Box' of Project STAR:
     Estimation of peer effects using experimental data, Economic Growth Center Center
     Discussion Paper No. 832, Yale University.
Cullen, Julie, Brian Jacob and Steven Levitt (2003), The effect of school choice on student
     outcomes: Evidence from randomized lotteries, NBER Working Paper No. 10113.
DeGroot, Morris (1984), Probability and statistics, 2nd edition, Reading, MA: Addison
    Wesley Publishing Company.
Gibbons, Stephen and Shqiponja Telhaj (2005), Peer effects and pupil attainment: Evidence
     from secondary school transition, London School of Economics, mimeo.
Glewwe, Paul (1997), Estimating the impact of peer group effects on socioeconomic
    outcomes: Does the distribution of peer group characteristics matter? Economics of
    Education Review.
Gould, Eric, Victor Lavy and Daniele Paserman (2005), Does immigration affect the long-
     term educational outcomes of natives? Quasi-experimental evidence, Hebrew
     University, mimeo.
Graham, Bryan (2004), Identifying social interactions through excess variance contrasts,
     Harvard University, mimeo.
Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman and Steven Rivkin (2003), Does peer ability
     affect student achievement?, Journal of Applied Econometrics 18 (5), 527-544.
Hoxby, Caroline (2000), The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence from
    population variation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(4), 1239-1285.
Manski, Charles (1993), Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem,
    The Review of Economic Studies 60(3), 531-542.
McEwan, Patrick (2003), Peer effects on student achievement: Evidence from Chile,
    Economics of Education Review 22(2), 131-141.
Mislevy, Robert (1991), Randomization-based inference about latent variables from complex
     samples, Psychometrika 56, 177-196.
Mullis, Ina, Michael Martin, Eugene Gonzalez and Ann Kennedy, (2003), PIRLS 2001
     international report: IEA’s study of reading literacy achievement in primary schools,
     Chestnut Hill, Boston College.
Schindler-Rangvid, Beatrice (2003), Educational peer effects: Quantile regression evidence
     from denmark with PISA 2000 data, Kapitel 3 i "Do schools matter?", phd-afhandling
     nr. 2003:9 fra Handelshøjskolen i Århus.
Schneeweiss, Nicole and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer (2005), Peer effects in Austrian schools,
     Department of Economics, University of Linz, Working Paper No. 0502.


                                            24
Woessmann, Ludger (2004), How equal are educational opportunities? Family background
    and student achievement in Europe and the United States, CESifo Working Paper No.
    1162, Munich.




                                         25
Figure 1: Distribution of school-specific p-values for Pearson Chi² test for Germany


                                         Female                                                     Origin
               .15




                                                                               .2
                                                                           .1 .15
               .1
        Fraction




                                                                         Fraction
      .05




                                                                               .05
               0




                                                                               0
                          0   .2      .4       .6      .8       1                       0   .2       .4       .6      .8   1
                               school-specific p-value                                        school-specific p-value


                                       Language                                                     Books




                                                                               .2
      .05 .1 .15 .2 .25




                                                                                  .15
          Fraction




                                                                         Fraction
                                                                            .1 .05
               0




                                                                               0



                          0   .2         .4        .6      .8   1                       0   .2      .4       .6      .8    1
                                   school-specific p-value                                   school-specific p-value




                                                                    26
                                                                    Table 1: Recent studies on peer effects

                                     Grade /                            Peer measure or        Peer                         Magnitude of    Source of   Non-linearities
   Studies          Context                           Outcome                                             Identification
                                   student age                             treatment          group                          peer effect    Magnitude   in peer effects
                     Public                           Test scores                                                                            Table 9,
                                    3rd to 6th                                                           Cohort gender      1.s.d. Æ ~0.4
Hoxby (2000)        schools,                          (Reading,           Test scores          Class                                        columns 3    No evidence
                                     grade                                                                 variation              s.d.
                   Texas, US                            Math)                                                                                 and 4
                   Secondary
McEwan                                                Test scores                                         School fixed      1.s.d. Æ 0.27    Table 3,      Slightly
                    schools,        8th grade                          Mothers’ education      Class
(2003)                                                 (Spanish)                                            effects              s.d.       column 4       concave
                     Chile
                                                                       Math scores two
                     Public                                                                               Student and                        Table 2,
Hanushek et                         5th to 6th        Math test       years ago (also incl.   School-                         1.s.d. Æ
                    schools,                                                                            school-by grade                     column 3     No evidence
al. (2003)                            grade           score gain       prop. free lunch,       grade                          0.05.s.d.
                   Texas, US                                                                              fixed effects                     Table A1
                                                                       std. dev of score)
Cullen, Jacob       Chicago                                                                                                                  Table 6,
                                   9th and 10th   Test scores,         Winning a school                     Random          Near zero and
and Levitt           public                                                                      -                                          columns 1    No evidence
                                      grade       and others           voucher in lottery                  assignment       insignificant
(2003)            schools, US                                                                                                                 and 2
Schindler          Secondary                          PISA test                                            Additional                                   Weak evidence
                                                                                              School-                       1 s.d. Æ 0.07    Table 4
Rangvid             schools,         Age 15             scores         Mothers’ education                controls from                                   for declining
                                                                                               grade                             s.d.        Table 1
(2004)             Denmark                            (Reading)                                           register data                                     effects
                                                                                                            Random
                      State                                                                               variation in
                                                      Test scores                                                                           Tables 3
Gibbons and        secondary                                           Attainment at age      School-   transition from     1 s.d. Æ 0.08                  Slightly
                                     Age 14            (English,                                                                             and 4,
Telhaj (2005)       schools,                                                  11               grade       primary to            s.d.                      concave
                                                        Math)                                                                               column 7
                    England                                                                                secondary
                                                                                                             schools
                                                                                                            Random
                                    Kinder-           Test scores                                                           50 percentile
Graham              STAR                                                                                assignment and                       Table 5,
                                    garten to           (Math,            Test scores          Class                         increase Æ                        -
(2004)            project, US                                                                           excess variance                     column 3
                                    3rd grade          Reading)                                                              0.9-1.1 s.d.
                                                                                                            contrasts
Schneeweiss        Secondary                          PISA test                                                                              Table 2,   Weak evidence
                                                                        Socio-economic        School-   School type fixed   1 s.d. Æ 0.06
and Winter-         schools,         Age 15             scores                                                                              column 1     for declining
                                                                             status            grade        effects              s.d.
Ebmer (2005)        Austria                           (Reading)                                                                              Table 1        effects
   Builds on Table 1 in Gibbons and Tehlhaj (2005).



                                                                                        27
                                 Table 2: Mean scores and sample sizes
                                   (Standard deviations in parentheses)

                                   Germany         France       Iceland       Netherlands        Norway Sweden
                                     539.1          525.2         512.4           554.2           499.2        561.0
Reading score (all)
                                     (63.6)         (66.6)        (71.0)          (51.2)          (77.5)       (61.5)
                                     548.6          533.7         518.6           565.2           505.0        563.1
Reading score (sample)               (59.9)         (64.2)        (68.4)          (51.3)          (76.0)       (61.3)
Reading score (excl.                 548.6          534.2         518.7           562.8           504.4        562.8
tracked schools)                     (59.7)         (65.4)        (68.3)          (53.6)          (76.4)       (61.5)
Reading scores (tracked              549.4          532.2         506.8           568.8           529.1        570.0
schools)                             (64.2)         (60.5)        (81.0)          (47.5)          (66.5)       (56.6)
No. of students (all)                7,633          3,538         3,676           4,112           3,459        6,044
No. of students (sample)             4,577          2,312         1,728           1,857           2,548        3,997
No. of students in
                                      3,628         1,612         1,301            805            1,748        3,270
schools with > 1 class
No. of schools                         183            115           84             105             117          119
No. of schools with > 1
                                       114            55            39              29              54           79
class
No. of classes                         301            172          135             141             171          267
No. of classes in schools
                                       232            112           90              65             108          227
with > 1 class
Fraction of students in
schools that apply                    0.067         0.278         0.006           0.328           0.035        0.046
tracking

Scores are weighted by students’ sampling probability, standard deviations are in parentheses. Rows 6 and
below refer to the sample used in the estimations. Last row reports the fraction of students in schools in which
principals state that classes are formed by ability out of all students in schools for which principals reply to the
question.




                                                           28
          Table 3: Decomposition of variance in class level means

          Germany      France      Iceland     Netherlands   Norway    Sweden
                    Index of the number of books at home
Mean        3.45        3.30          4.00          3.37       4.00      3.95
Total      .2401       .3138         .1480         .3922      .1542     .2643
Between    .2098       .2726         .1220         .3629      .1297     .2174
Within     .0303       .0412         .0259         .0293      .0245     .0469
                                      Age
Total      .0326       .0313         .0065         .0306      .0082     .0111
Between    .0250       .0183         .0050         .0212      .0060     .0060
Within     .0076       .0130         .0015         .0094      .0022     .0051
                                   Female
Total      .0145       .0226         .0212         .0156      .0145     .0158
Between    .0085       .0174         .0170         .0139      .0125     .0091
Within     .0061       .0052         .0043         .0017      .0020     .0067
                                Foreign parent
Total      .0459       .0463         .0095         .0488      .0222     .0485
Between    .0404       .0413         .0069         .0451      .0189     .0386
Within     .0054       .0050         .0026         .0036      .0033     .0099
                          Foreign language at home
Total      .0141       .0151         .0088         .0345      .0069     .0230
Between    .0112       .0128         .0058         .0330      .0052     .0167
Within     .0029       .0023         .0030         .0015      .0017     .0064
                              Reading test scores
Total     1144.71     1223.61       751.93        896.62     1075.93   1123.78
Between   978.47      908.63        569.62        799.28     933.10     791.51
Within     166.24      314.97       182.31         97.34      142.83    332.27




                                    29
                     Table 4: Regressions of peer variables on class room
                           and school characteristics in Germany

                                                         Dependent Variable
                                                                          Foreign            Foreign
 Independent Variable            Books           Age         Female
                                                                           parent           language
 Class size                        .002          -.011         .030           .010             .015
                                 (.091)         (.043)        (.017)        (.028)            (.014)
 Class size squared*100             .03           .001         -.06           -.03             -.03
                                    (.2)         (.09)         (.04)         (.06)             (.03)
 Female teacher                    .109           .031         .006          -.008            -.009
                                 (.070)         (.024)        (.019)        (.030)            (.013)
 Teacher education:                .001           .026        -.039           .006            -.018
 ISCED 4                         (.146)         (.050)        (.039)        (.036)            (.023)
 Teacher education:                .065         -.062         -.023           .173             .056
 ISCED 5+                        (.114)         (.047)        (.034)        (.025)            (.015)
 Teacher’s experience             .001          -.002         -.005           .005            .0001
 in grade 4                      (.011)         (.003)        (.003)        (.004)            (.002)
 Teacher’s exp.                   .003            .008          .01           -.01           .00002
 Squared*100                      (.03)         (.009)        (.008)         (.01)            (.006)
 Size of town                    -.077            .141         .049         -.084             -.059
 < 3000 inhab.                   (.265)         (.037)        (.074)        (.048)            (.039)
 Size of town                     .008            .086        -.029           .090             .044
 < 100,000 inhab.                (.081)         (.026)        (.020)        (.030)            (.014)
 Size of town                     .045            .073         .004           .167             .084
 < 500,000 inhab.                (.143)         (.047)        (.031)        (.044)            (.028)
 Size of town                    -.046            .115         .017           .230             .116
 > 500,000 inhab.                (.154)         (.049)        (.035)        (.064)            (.033)
 Instruction hours per             .018           .005        -.022           .014             .012
 day                             (.053)         (.018)        (.012)        (.022)            (.013)
 Shortage of staff                -.020           .004        -.009           .034             .011
                                 (.055)         (.018)        (.010)        (.021)            (.011)
 Shortage of material              .005         -.035         -.001         -.013              .005
                                 (.071)         (.022)        (.013)        (.025)            (.015)
 Shortage of rooms               -.112            .041         .010           .004             .001
                                 (.057)         (.022)        (.012)        (.020)            (.013)

Regressions are weighted by the students’ sampling probability. Number of observations is 4,577. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level.




                                                   30
           Table 5: P-values for F-tests on class room and school characteristics
          and for Chi² test for independence of peer variable and class assignment

                      Germany         France      Iceland    Netherlands               Norway         Sweden
                                  Index of the number of books at home
 Class                 0.4532        0.2886       0.7094       0.4051                  0.0995          0.0673
 School                0.7095        0.1016       0.0595       0.0005                  0.0431          0.3348
 Class+school          0.7766        0.0588       0.3538       0.0000                  0.0286          0.2448
 Class (SFE)           0.4595        0.2552       0.0123       0.3370                  0.5675          0.0000
 Pearson Chi²          0.2415        0.3813       0.7964       0.7512                  0.0893          0.0364
                                                   Age
 Class                 0.0002        0.5581       0.0704       0.0249                  0.1587          0.3492
 School                0.0050        0.0137       0.3197       0.0015                  0.4364          0.4234
 Class+school          0.0000        0.0394       0.1603       0.0000                  0.2139          0.4130
 Class (SFE)           0.0017        0.2672       0.0021       0.0046                  0.0000          0.9300
 Pearson Chi²          0.0694        0.2402       0.1452       0.0992                  0.0467          0.6247
                                                 Female
 Class                 0.1270        0.7582       0.0006       0.0286                  0.0089          0.9612
 School                0.5170        0.3604       0.5958       0.0000                  0.8831          0.3424
 Class+school          0.4082        0.5402       0.0062       0.0000                  0.0902          0.6536
 Class (SFE)           0.5677        0.2838       0.0000       0.1467                  0.0036          0.1589
 Pearson Chi²          0.1240        0.4615       0.9608       0.6011                  0.8827          0.9657
                                             Foreign parent
 Class                 0.0000        0.1350       0.1339       0.0254                  0.5828          0.2174
 School                0.0000        0.0004       0.7760       0.0000                  0.0000          0.0000
 Class+school          0.0000        0.0011       0.3009       0.0000                  0.0000          0.0000
 Class (SFE)           0.0003        0.0327       0.0000       0.0024                  0.0000          0.1171
 Pearson Chi²          0.0157        0.3129       0.3201       0.0444                  0.1335          0.0046
                                       Foreign language at home
 Class                 0.0052        0.6215       0.0173       0.1830                  0.3365          0.1542
 School                0.0004        0.0098       0.6573       0.1222                  0.1026          0.0000
 Class+school          0.0000        0.0717       0.0476       0.0000                  0.0867          0.0000
 Class (SFE)           0.0000        0.4776       0.0001       0.0000                  0.0029          0.0000
 Pearson Chi²          0.0495        0.6920       0.1861       0.4217                  0.4860          0.0009

The first four rows in each panel report p-values of Wald tests for the joint significance of the respective group
of variables. The first three rows refer to regressions of peer variables on class and school variables. The fourth
row refers to regressions of peer variables on class variables controlling for school fixed effects. Running the
regressions at the class level or including the student level variables sex, age, origin and language in the
regressions for the first three rows yields comparable results. The fifth row reports the p-value for Pearson Chi²
tests of independence between the peer characteristic and class room assignment within each school using the
individual level data. See text for details.




                                                       31
       Table 6: Regressions for reading test score on peer composition for Germany
                              (Standard errors in parentheses)


      Independent Variable                    (1)       (2)      (3)                   (4)        (5)
                          Individual books variable: five categories
                                            17.93 17.62         -.93                   5.92       6.82
      Peers’ index of books at home
                                            (3.04) (3.03) (6.03)                      (6.15)     (6.30)
                                            -20.15 -4.42 -31.63                       -49.91     -68.77
      Fraction peers 11-25 books at home
                                           (23.44) (21.11) (22.87)                   (42.75)    (44.67)
      Fraction peers 26-100 books at        21.41 28.10 -17.32                        -22.90     -26.36
      home                                 (18.08) (16.09) (21.24)                   (32.38)    (33.20)
      Fraction peers 101-200 books at       40.48 47.49 -10.31                        -11.15     -16.21
      home                                 (18.88) (17.24) (24.85)                   (39.44)    (40.55)
                                            54.86 62.18 -28.67                        -15.95     -21.31
      Fraction peers 200+ books at home
                                           (17.69) (16.16) (30.35)                   (36.86)    (37.36)

                                Individual books variable: index
                                              17.97 17.66         -.98                 5.93       6.80
      Peers’ index of books at home
                                              (3.04) (3.03) (6.02)                    (6.11)     (6.27)
                                              -21.42 -6.36 -27.71                     -32.49     -45.14
      Fraction peers 11-25 books at home
                                             (22.83) (20.63) (21.74)                 (33.48)    (35.74)
      Fraction peers 26-100 books at          20.37 26.54 -13.03                       -7.50      -6.89
      home                                   (17.31) (15.39) (19.10)                 (23.62)    (25.02)
      Fraction peers 101-200 books at         39.68 46.04        -5.19                 5.40       5.37
      home                                   (18.16) (16.51) (22.38)                 (28.67)    (30.17)
                                              53.60 60.21 -21.18                        -.37      -2.18
      Fraction peers 200+ books at home
                                             (16.40) (14.99) (26.37)                 (27.64)    (28.48)
      Student level variables                   9        9         9                     9          9
      Class level variables                              9         9                     9          9
      School level variables                             9         9
      School peer variables                                        9
      School fixed effects                                                              9          9
      Exclude tracked schools                                                                      9

Weighted least squares regressions using students’ sampling probability. Number of observations is 4,577.
Standard errors are robust to clustering at the school level. Student level variables are student’s sex and age,
parents’ origin, language spoken at home, number of books at home (four categories in the upper part and index
in the lower part of the table) and number of persons living in household. Class level variables are class size,
class size squared, teacher’s sex, education, experience and experience squared. School level variables are
community size, average daily instruction hours, shortage of staff, teaching material and buildings. School peer
variables are school averages of index of number of books at home and parents’ origin. Tracked schools are
those for which principals state that fourth-grade classes are formed on the basis of ability.




                                                      32
                 Table 7: Regressions for reading test score on peer composition
                                 (Standard errors in parentheses)

                                             (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)
                                           17.97         17.66          1.52          5.93         6.80
       Germany
                                           (3.04)        (3.03)        (5.29)        (6.12)       (6.27)
                                           22.23         22.84         22.11         19.12        14.08
       France
                                           (3.05)        (2.91)        (7.67)        (8.32)      (10.78)
                                           18.08         19.97          9.73          6.46         3.28
       Iceland
                                           (5.77)        (5.04)       (11.07)       (11.28)      (11.37)
                                           17.58         19.70          7.80         11.17        20.06
       The Netherlands
                                           (4.30)        (4.37)        (8.01)        (9.29)      (10.57)
                                           15.46          9.84          -1.12         -6.93        -6.56
       Norway
                                           (7.33)        (7.42)       (10.47)        (9.44)       (9.57)
                                           18.98         18.04         12.59         12.07        11.73
       Sweden
                                           (3.84)        (4.10)        (6.78)        (6.97)       (7.20)
                                           19.17         19.40          8.33          8.50         8.08
       Average across countries
                                           (1.61)        (1.59)        (3.05)        (3.29)       (3.52)
       Student level variables                9             9            9             9            9
       Class level variables                                9            9             9            9
       School level variables                               9            9
       School peer variables                                             9
       School fixed effects                                                            9            9
       Exclude tracked schools                                                                      9

Weighted least squares regressions using students’ sampling probability. Peers’ index of books at home is
independent variable. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the school level. Student level variables are
student’s sex and age, parents’ origin, language spoken at home, index of number of books at home and number
of persons living in household. Class level variables are class size, class size squared, teacher’s sex, education,
experience and experience squared. School level variables are community size, average daily instruction hours,
shortage of staff, teaching material and buildings. School peer variables are school averages of index of number
of books at home and parents’ origin. Tracked schools are those for which principals state that fourth-grade
classes are formed on the basis of ability.




                                                       33
                Table 8: Regressions for reading test score on peer composition
                     and interactions with individual family background
                                (Standard errors in parentheses)

                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                               Peer          Inter     Peer         Inter     Peer         Inter     Peer         Inter

                              17.58            .82      1.27          .66      5.69          .65       6.58          .63
Germany
                              (3.03)         (1.04)    (5.28)       (1.02)    (6.11)       (1.04)    (6.26)       (1.08)
                              20.94           2.46     20.16         2.75     17.78         1.85     11.84          2.95
France
                              (3.12)         (1.43)    (7.59)       (1.42)    (8.27)       (1.40)   (10.40)       (1.68)
                              17.32           1.43      9.02         1.36      5.54         1.58       2.60         1.19
Iceland
                              (5.82)         (1.66)   (11.14)       (1.65)   (11.46)       (1.66)   (11.61)       (1.63)
                              17.74           -.34      7.42          .92     10.68         1.15     18.45          4.38
The Netherlands
                              (4.49)         (1.36)    (8.14)       (1.23)    (9.46)       (1.28)   (10.71)       (1.35)
                              15.35            .16     -1.03         -.17     -6.58         -.71      -6.24         -.61
Norway
                              (7.58)         (1.76)   (10.54)       (1.75)    (9.37)       (1.71)    (9.51)       (1.75)
                              19.91          -1.35     13.81        -1.40     13.81        -2.01     13.84         -2.43
Sweden
                              (3.94)         (1.14)    (6.80)       (1.13)    (6.98)       (1.13)    (7.21)       (1.16)
Average across                18.81           0.38      8.13         0.54      8.49         0.28       8.06         0.76
countries                     (1.64)         (0.54)    (3.06)       (0.53)    (3.29)       (0.53)    (3.51)       (0.56)
Student level variables         9             9         9            9         9            9         9            9
Class level variables                                   9            9         9            9         9            9
School level variables                                  9            9
School peer variables                                   9            9
School fixed effects                                                           9            9         9            9
Exclude tracked
                                                                                                      9            9
schools

Weighted least squares regressions using students’ sampling probability. Peers’ index of books at home
(columns “Peer”) and interaction term of peers’ index and individual level dummy variable for > 100 books at
home (columns “Inter”) are jointly included. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the school level. Student
level variables are student’s sex and age, parents’ origin, language spoken at home, index of the number of books
at home and number of persons living in household. Class level variables are class size, class size squared,
teacher’s sex, education, experience and experience squared. School level variables are community size, average
daily instruction hours, shortage of staff, teaching material and buildings. School peer variables are school
averages of index of number of books at home and parents’ origin. Tracked schools are those for which
principals state that fourth-grade classes are formed on the basis of ability.




                                                         34
              Table 9: IV regressions for reading test score on peer composition
                                (Standard errors in parentheses)


                                            (1)        ( 2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                          17.97       12.60        5.93        6.84       8.62        4.46
    Germany
                                          (3.04)      (4.01)      (6.12)     (10.64)    (13.40)     (12.56)
                                          22.23       16.51       19.12       47.75      64.99       63.63
    France
                                          (3.05)      (3.64)      (8.32)     (17.84)    (24.28)     (27.08)
                                          18.08        -.93        6.46        7.27       9.57       12.96
    Iceland
                                          (5.77)      (8.39)     (11.28)     (21.21)    (27.91)     (28.43)
                                          17.58       13.47       11.17       24.80      41.53      163.64
    The Netherlands
                                          (4.30)      (5.48)      (9.29)     (31.38)    (52.54)    (139.90)
                                          15.46       20.00       -6.93         .18       .22         .005
    Norway
                                          (7.33)     (10.86)      (9.44)     (16.49)    (20.01)     (19.79)
                                          18.98       22.00       12.07       19.69      26.21       23.16
    Sweden
                                          (3.84)      (4.66)      (6.97)     (12.48)    (16.61)     (16.51)
                                          19.17       15.22        8.50       14.97      18.70       14.75
    Average across countries
                                          (1.61)      (2.04)      (3.29)      (6.29)     (8.16)      (8.11)
    Student level variables                  9          9           9           9          9           9
    Class level variables                                           9           9          9           9
    School fixed effects                                            9           9          9           9
    IV books individual                                 9                       9          9           9
    IV books peer measure                               9                       9          9           9
    IV parents educ. indiv.                             9                       9          9           9
    IV parents educ. peers                              9                       9          9           9
    Corrected for sampling bias                                                            9           9
    Exclude tracked schools                                                                            9
Weighted least squares and instrumental variable regressions using students’ sampling probability. Peers’ index
of books at home is independent variable. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the school level. Student
level variables are student’s sex and age, parents’ origin, language spoken at home, index of number of books at
home and number of persons living in household. Class level variables are class size, class size squared,
teacher’s sex, education, experience and experience squared. School level variables are community size, average
daily instruction hours, shortage of staff, teaching material and buildings. The individual’s and peers’ index of
the number of books at home from the home questionnaire are instrumented by the individual’s and peers’ index
of books at home from the student questionnaire and individual’s and peers’ index of parents’ highest
educational level. A dummy for missing observations for the parental education variable has been added to not
further restrict the sample size. The correction factor for sampling bias in columns (5) and (6) is (N-1)/(n-1).
Tracked schools are those for which principals state that fourth-grade classes are formed on the basis of ability.




                                                       35
                                          Table 10: Effect sizes


                                   (1)             ( 2)              (3)               (4)          (5)
                                S. D. test      S. D. peer     S. D. peer var.        Peer      Effect size
                                score σ y      variable σ ~     adjusted σ X        effect λ̂    σ X λˆ / σ y
                                                          X


Germany                            59.9            .462              .379              8.6          .055

France                             64.2            .572              .480             65.0          .485

Iceland                            68.4            .367              .278              9.6          .039

The Netherlands                    51.3            .579              .420             41.5          .340

Norway                             76.0            .370              .300              .2           .001

Sweden                             61.3            .458              .420             26.2          .179

Average across countries           63.5            .468              .379             18.7          .112

Column (3) is the square root of the covariance between the peer variables index of books at home taken from
the student and the home questionnaire. The estimates of the peer effects in column (4) are taken from column
(5) in Table 8. The results in column (5) are calculated as (4)*(3)/(1)




                                                     36
                                       Appendix A

                            Table A1: Weighted mean values
                            (standard deviations in parentheses)

                           Germany     France     Iceland    Netherlands    Norway Sweden
Student background
                              .52       0.49        0.50            0.53     0.49     0.49
Student female               (.50)     (0.50)      (0.50)          (0.50)   (0.50)   (0.50)
                            10.51      10.10        9.72           10.24     9.97    10.80
Student’s age                (.47)     (0.49)      (0.28)          (0.46)   (0.33)   (0.32)
                              .22       0.29        0.12            0.17     0.17     0.23
Foreign parent               (.42)     (0.46)      (0.32)          (0.37)   (0.38)   (0.42)
                              .09       0.12        0.11            0.13     0.08     0.09
Foreign language at home     (.29)     (0.33)      (0.32)          (0.34)   (0.26)   (0.29)
Books at home (index 1 –     3.49       3.32        3.99            3.36     4.03     3.91
5)                          (1.19)     (1.25)      (1.01)          (1.29)   (1.04)   (1.12)
                              .06       0.10        0.02            0.10     0.02     0.03
0 – 10 books (ref.)          (.24)     (0.30)      (0.13)          (0.31)   (0.13)   (0.18)
                              .12       0.14        0.05            0.15     0.05     0.07
11 – 20 books                (.32)     (0.35)      (0.21)          (0.35)   (0.22)   (0.25)
                              .36       0.35        0.27            0.30     0.26     0.26
21 – 100 books               (.48)     (0.48)      (0.44)          (0.46)   (0.44)   (0.44)
                              .19       0.18        0.26            0.19     0.23     0.23
101 – 200 books              (.39)     (0.38)      (0.44)          (0.39)   (0.42)   (0.42)
                              .27       0.24        0.41            0.26     0.44     0.41
More than 200 books          (.44)     (0.43)      (0.49)          (0.44)   (0.50)   (0.49)
                             3.54       3.62        3.78            3.51     3.49     3.56
Household size              (1.50)     (1.45)      (1.35)          (1.15)   (1.17)   (1.26)
Class
                            22.77      24.04       19.56           26.65    20.32    24.25
Class size                  (3.93)     (3.41)      (3.98)          (5.26)   (5.40)   (6.36)
                              .80       0.62        0.94            0.51     0.84     0.79
Teacher female               (.40)     (0.48)      (0.23)          (0.50)   (0.36)   (0.41)
Teacher’s education           .07       0.42        0.13            1.00     0.02     1.00
ISCED 3 (ref.)               (.25)     (0.49)      (0.34)          (0.00)   (0.14)   (0.00)
Teacher’s education           .01       0.23        0.12                     0.98
                                                                     0                 0
ISCED 4                      (.12)     (0.42)      (0.33)                   (0.14)
Teacher’s education           .92       0.35        0.75
                                                                     0        0        0
ISCED 5+                     (.28)     (0.48)      (0.43)
                             8.26       9.06        2.84            6.25     3.17     6.78
Teacher’s experience        (7.25)     (8.86)      (2.73)          (5.81)   (2.35)   (6.54)




                                            37
                            Table A1, continued: Weighted mean values
                                 (standard deviations in parentheses)


                                Germany         France       Iceland   Netherlands   Norway Sweden
School
                                    .31           0.25         0.06       0.01        0.25     0.14
Village (ref.)
                                  (0.46)         (0.44)       (0.23)     (0.09)      (0.43)   (0.34)
                                    .02           0.06         0.17       0.14        0.15     0.08
< 3000 inhab.                     (0.12)         (0.25)       (0.37)     (0.35)      (0.36)   (0.27)
                                    .47           0.51         0.45       0.68        0.43     0.64
< 100,000 inhab.                  (0.50)         (0.50)       (0.50)     (0.47)      (0.50)   (0.48)
                                    .12           0.15         0.32       0.13        0.10     0.07
< 500,000 inhab.                  (0.32)         (0.36)       (0.47)     (0.33)      (0.30)   (0.26)
                                    .09           0.02                    0.04        0.07     0.07
> 500,000 inhab.                  (0.28)         (0.13)
                                                                   0
                                                                         (0.20)      (0.25)   (0.26)
                                   3.76           5.05         4.21       5.02        3.47     4.39
Instruction hours/day             (0.65)         (0.35)       (0.54)     (0.16)      (0.77)   (0.77)
Shortage of staff                  1.76           1.23         1.56       1.55        1.53     2.09
(index 1 – 4)                     (0.81)         (0.45)       (0.81)     (0.71)      (0.91)   (1.04)
Shortage of material               1.30           1.50         1.70       1.51        1.53     1.55
(index 1 – 4)                     (0.51)         (0.75)       (0.87)     (0.66)      (0.74)   (0.83)
Shortage of rooms                  1.49           1.40         1.62       1.49        1.67     1.74
(index 1 – 4)                     (0.69)         (0.76)       (0.94)     (0.76)      (0.86)   (0.92)

 Mean values are weighted by the students’ sampling probability.




                                                      38
                         Table A2: Percentage of missing values

                        Germany   France    Iceland Netherlands   Norway   Sweden
Reading score              0         0           0        0         0        0

Student female             0         0           0        0         0        0
Student’s age            0.03       0.17        0.03    0.54       1.07     0.02
Foreign parent           9.60       7.80        6.80    2.48       2.46     3.16
Foreign lang. at home    4.40       3.00        3.51    1.53       2.20     2.38
Books                    13.32     10.97        16.89   35.41      9.42     9.33
Household size           8.23       6.53        4.68    4.60       3.79     4.42
Class size               6.86       4.49        6.86    11.84      1.24     3.26
Teacher female           8.14       4.83        7.64    11.31      0.69     3.34
Teacher’s education      9.45       3.87        11.29    100       0.69     100
Teacher’s experience     14.45      4.49        12.40   14.42      3.32     6.72
Size of town             4.48       4.49        23.91   11.87      2.66     4.33
Instruction hours/day    7.91       6.02        18.47   10.00      6.27     11.15
Shortage of staff        4.48       7.55        20.08   10.34      2.11     5.15
Shortage of material      5.04      5.17        21.33   10.80      2.60     4.91
Shortage of rooms        4.48       6.22        20.13   10.09      2.89     3.87




                                           39
Table A3: Weighted means of student background variables by the number of books

                                Germany                           France
                     0-20    21-     101-    > 200    0-20    21-      101-   > 200
                    books    100     200     books   books    100      200    books
Student female        .49    .55      .51     .50      .50    .49       .50     .49
Student’s age       10.68   10.52 10.45      10.42   10.26   10.10 10.03       9.97
Foreign parent        .40    .23      .15     .14      .34    .29       .24     .29
Foreign language      .19     .09     .06      .05     .21    .11       .11     .07
Household size       3.60    3.51    3.49     3.57    3.85    3.59     3.46    3.58
No secondary          .07    .02      .01     .01      .19    .09       .03     .03
Lower secondary       .29    .13      .05     .03      .52    .37       .20    .08
Upper secondary       .23    .27      .24     .20      .17    .24       .27    .12
Post secondary        .36     .46     .41     .23      .09    .16       .21     .20
Tertiary              .05    .12      .30     .54      .04    .13       .28     .57
Income < 30,000$      .63     .45     .30      .17      -       -        -       -
30,000$ – 50,000$     .32     .41     .47      .43      -       -        -       -
> 50,000$             .06     .15     .23      .41      -       -        -       -

Number of obs.      835     1,641     849    1,252   528    782     412     590
                                Iceland                    The Netherlands
                     0-20    21-      101-   > 200    0-20   21-    101- > 200
                    books    100      200    books   books  100     200    books
Student female        .44    .50       .48    .53      .53   .54     .53     .51
Student’s age        9.76    9.71     9.74    9.71   10.33 10.23 10.19 10.17
Foreign parent        .25    .12       .10    .10      .25   .17     .11     .12
Foreign language      .15     .12      .11     .11     .18   .15     .13     .09
Household size       3.67    3.76     3.74    3.84    3.41  3.47    3.47    3.68
No secondary          .06     .02      .01     .01     .02   .01    .002    .002
Lower secondary       .22    .18       .16    .08      .69   .56     .36     .15
Upper secondary       .55    .54       .47    .27      .14   .18     .13     .09
Post secondary        .12     .11      .09     .11     .10   .22     .40     .45
Tertiary              .05    .15       .28    .53      .05   .03     .11     .31
Income < 30,000$      .34    .27       .20    .15      .48   .34     .25     .16
30,000$ – 50,000$     .49    .43       .41    .32      .37   .41     .39     .33
> 50,000$             .17    .30       .39    .54      .16   .25     .35     .51

Number of obs.      110     467      440     711     448     562      336     511




                                        40
 Table A3, continued: Weighted means of student background variables by the number
                                     of books

                                         Norway                                   Sweden
                            0-20       21-   101-         > 200      0-20       21-    101-        > 200
                           books      100     200         books     books      100      200        books
 Student female              .47       .50    .45           .50       .49       .46     .52          .50
 Student’s age              9.99      9.97    9.97         9.97     10.80     10.81 10.80          10.80
 Foreign parent              .31       .17    .14           .16       .45       .26     .20          .17
 Foreign language            .21       .10    .06           .05       .24       .11     .07          .05
 Household size             3.46      3.37    3.42         3.60      3.83      3.58    3.50         3.51
 No secondary                .01      .004     0           .001       .03      .003    .004         .001
 Lower secondary             .09       .05    .02           .01       .17       .08     .05          .02
 Upper secondary             .73       .64    .47           .26       .53       .51     .39          .22
 Post secondary               0         0      0             0        .15       .24     .30          .21
 Tertiary                    .18       .30    .51           .73       .12       .17     .26          .55
 Income < 30,000$            .45       .28    .19           .12       .47       .29     .21          .14
 30,000$ – 50,000$           .42       .47    .41           .31       .43       .52     .47          .38
 > 50,000$                   .13       .24    .41           .57       .10       .19     .32          .48

 Number of obs.             178        670       565      1,135      359       967        865      1,806

Mean values are weighted by the students’ sampling probability. Number of observations refers to variables
included in Table A1. For the variables highest educational level attained by at least one parent and annual
household income in US$ before taxes the number of observations is lower in most countries.




                                                    41
       Table A4: Regressions for reading test score on alternative peer composition
                             (Standard errors in parentheses)

                                                  (1)                                  (2)
                                                         Parent’s                            Parent’s
                                       Books                                Books
                                                        education                            education
                                       17.97                 12.12           5.93               -2.00
Germany
                                       (3.04)                (3.53)         (6.12)             (5.00)
                                       22.23                 17.38          19.12               3.67
France
                                       (3.05)                (2.75)         (8.32)             (7.40)
                                       18.08                 14.21           6.46              -11.70
Iceland
                                       (5.77)                (3.42)        (11.28)            (11.93)
                                       17.58                 16.18          11.17              -17.53
The Netherlands
                                       (4.30)                (3.57)         (9.29)             (9.48)
                                       15.46                 15.26          -6.93              -10.05
Norway
                                       (7.33)                (5.23)         (9.44)             (8.84)
                                       18.98                 25.53          12.07               -2.77
Sweden
                                       (3.84)                (4.31)         (6.97)             (7.40)
                                       19.17                 16.47           8.50               -4.37
Average across countries
                                       (1.61)                (1.46)         (3.29)             (3.05)
Student level variables                  9                    9               9                  9
Class level variables                                                         9                  9
School fixed effects                                                          9                  9

Weighted least squares regressions using students’ sampling probability. Peers’ index of books at home and
peers’ index of parents’ highest education are independent variables. Standard errors are robust to clustering at
the school level. Student level variables are student’s sex and age, parents’ origin, language spoken at home,
index of number of books at home and number of persons living in household. Class level variables are class
size, class size squared, teacher’s sex, education, experience and experience squared.




                                                        42
   Appendix
   We are interested in estimating equation (8) in the text

                                    yics = xics + wcs +                    ics                (1)

where wcs = x(   i)cs   is the peer e¤ect. The background variable xics is given by


                                        xics = cs + vics
                                     E(vics ) = 0

and measurement error is classical so that the measured variable is

                                       eics = xics + uics
                                       x
                                     E(uic ) = 0

There are Ncs students in a class. Even though E(vic ) = 0, because Ncs is relatively
small, v ( i)cs will generally be di¤erent from zero. It is useful to distinguish v ( i)cs from
 cs , because cs will carry information about xics , while v ( i)cs will not.
     Hence the variances of the true values of the variables are

                                 var(xics ) = 2 + 2v
                                 var(wcs ) = var(x( i)cs )
                                            = 2 + var(v (                    i)cs )
                                                                       2
                                                     2                 v
                                            =            +
                                                               Ncs         1
We have a sample on ncs Ncs students in the class. Hence the variance of the estimated
                   e( i)cs in the sample is
          eics and x
variables x
                                                2         2        2
                             var(e
                                 xics ) =           +     v   +    u
                                                               2                  2
                                                2              v                  u
                                  ecs ) =
                              var(w                 +                  +
                                                         ncs       1        ncs       1
We will also need various covariances below. Denote by S i the set of students other
than student i in the sample, and by P i the set of all other students in the classes under
study. Then
                          2                  0                                  13
                                                          1   X
         cov(e   e = E 4( cs + vics + uics ) @ cs +
             x; w)                                                (vics + uics )A5
                                                      ncs 1 S
                                                                                          i

                             2
                        =


                                                    43
                                              2                                 0                                             13
                                                                                                      1           X
                    x; w) = E 4(
                cov(e                              cs   + vics + uics ) @            cs      +                            vics A5
                                                                                                 Ncs          1   P   i

                                          2
                                =

                                           2                        0                                                             13
                                                                                         1       X
                       e = E 4(
                cov(x; w)                          cs   + vics ) @        cs   +                          (vics + uics )A5
                                                                                   ncs       1    S   i

                                       2
                                =

                                20                                                           10                                              13
                                                        1       X                                                     1           X
          e w) = E 4@
      cov(w;                         cs   +                             (vics + uics )A @             cs      +                           vics A5
                                                  ncs       1   S
                                                                                                                  Ncs         1   P
                                                                    i                                                                 i

                                                                                                                          2
                            2                       1                                        2            2               v
                     =          +                                        (ncs       1)       v   =            +
                                    (ncs          1) (Ncs           1)                                            (Ncs        1)

    The estimates of            converges to

                  e
            var(w)cov(y;     e) cov(w;
                             x            e x e)cov(y; w)   e
plim bOLS =
                  var(e x)var(w) e      cov(w;  e xe) 2
                          2
                  e
            var(w)(       x + cov(w; x  e)) cov(w;       e xe)( cov(w;    e x) + cov(w;       e w))
          =
                                 var(w)(e x + u ) cov(w;
                                               2       2             e x  e) 2
                       2         2
                                                                  h                             2
                                                                                                      i
               2                             2          2       2         2             2
                 + ncsv 1 + ncsu 1           x   +                           +            +     v
                                                                                             Ncs 1
          =                           2           2
                             2 +      v
                                          + ncsu 1          2 + 2 + 2                   4
                                  ncs 1                             v        u
              h                2          2
                                                         i      h                     2          2                       2
                                                                                                                               i
                 2    2                                4            2       2                               2    2
                 x       + ncs 1 + ncs 1
                               v          u
                                                           +                  + ncs 1 + ncs 1
                                                                                      v          u
                                                                                                                   + Ncs 1
                                                                                                                         v

          =                            1
                                    ncs 1
                                            ( 2v + 2u ) 2 + 2v + 2u + 2 ( 2v + 2u )
              h                  2           2
                                                                                    i       h          2         2         2
                                                                                                                                 i
                   2      2                               2   2         2         4            2
                     + v ncs 1 + ncs 1 +
                                 v           u
                                                                 + v                  +                v
                                                                                                   ncs 1
                                                                                                                 v
                                                                                                              Ncs 1
                                                                                                                    + ncs 1u

          =                         1
                                 ncs 1
                                         ( 2v + 2u ) 2 + 2v + 2u + nncs                cs 1
                                                                                           1 2
                                                                                               ( 2v + 2u )
              h                  2           2
                                                              i         h           2           2         2
                                                                                                               i
                   2      2                               2 2               2
                     + v ncs 1 + ncs 1 +
                                 v           u
                                                             v +
                                                                                    v
                                                                                 ncs 1
                                                                                                v
                                                                                            Ncs 1
                                                                                                    + ncs 1
                                                                                                          u

          =                          1
                                   ncs 1
                                          ( 2v + 2u )2 + ncs    ncs
                                                                    1
                                                                         2 ( 2 + 2)
                                                                               v        u
              h         2         2                                   2
                                                                             i        h                                2
                                                                                                                             i
                 2                             2     ncs    2                             2    2     Ncs ncs
                 v ncs 1
                        v
                            +     u
                               ncs 1
                                         +          ncs 1 v
                                                              +       u
                                                                  ncs 1
                                                                                +              v (ncs 1)(Ncs 1)   +    u
                                                                                                                    ncs 1
          =                                  1                  2        n
                                          ncs 1
                                                  ( 2v + 2u ) + ncscs 1 2 ( 2v + 2u )




                                                                        44
                                                                                                           h                                                   i
                          2           2         2               2                                                          Ncs ncs
                          v   (       v   +     u)   +              (ncs 2v         +        2
                                                                                             u)    +               2
                                                                                                                            Ncs 1
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                              v    +     2
                                                                                                                                                         u
             =                                               2          2)                   2         2               2
                                                        (    v      +   u           ncs           +    v   +           u
                                                                                                           h                                                   i
                          2           2         2               2               2            2                     2       Ncs ncs            2          2
                          v   (       v   +     u)   +              (ncs        v   +        u)    +                        Ncs 1             v    +     u
             =                                               2          2)                   2         2               2
                                                        (    v      +   u           ncs           +    v   +           u
                                                            2   2     2     2
                                                            v ( v + u) +      (ncs 2v +                                        2
                                                                                                                               u)
             =        2           2           2)            2 (n    2   2       2                                                        2         2           2
                      v   (       v   +       u    +             cs v + u ) + u (ncs                                           1)            +     v   +       u
                                      2       Ncs ncs           2           2
                                               Ncs 1            v   +       u
                 +            2            2)               2           2            2
                      (       v   +        u       ncs           +      v   +        u


This shows if = 0 or 2 = 0, then there is only classical attenuation bias in b. However,
if > 0 and 2 > 0, then there is also a positive bias term. However, this term will
tend to be small because of the factor (Ncs ncs )=(Ncs 1), unless very few students are
sampled per classroom.
   However, we are primarily interested in the estimate of the peer e¤ect:

            var(e
                x)cov(y; w)e     cov(w;e x e)cov(y; x  e)
plim bOLS =
                 var(ex)var(w)e     cov(w; e x e)2
            var(e
                x) [ cov(w;e x) + cov(w;     e w)] cov(w;        e) [ 2x + cov(w; x
                                                               e x                 e)]
          =
                                 var(ex)var(w)    e           e x
                                                         cov(w;  e)2
                             h                         2
                                                            i
              2
                + 2v + 2u         2
                                    +         2
                                                 + Ncsv 1          2       2
                                                                             + 2v + 2
          =                     1
                              ncs 1
                                     ( 2v + 2u ) ncs 2 + 2v + 2u
                                                                h                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       i
                  2
                    + 2v + 2u 2            2
                                             + 2v 2 +                 2
                                                                        + 2v + 2u  2
                                                                                     +                                                                                      Ncs
                                                                                                                                                                               v
                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4

          =                              1
                                      ncs 1
                                              ( 2v + 2u ) ncs 2 + 2v + 2u
                           h      2                                 2
                                                                         i
                2 2          2               2      2      2
                u     +           v
                               Ncs 1
                                      +  (   v  +   u )      +      v
                                                                Ncs 1
          =            1     2      2           2      2     2
                     ncs 1
                           ( v + u ) ncs + v + u
                                                   2 2                                            ncs 1        2           2             2         2                                   2       2           2
                                      (ncs         1)
                                                   u                                              Ncs 1        v               +         v   +     u     + (ncs              1)            (   v   +       u)
             =        2               2)
                                                                                         +
                  (   v   +           u       ncs + 2v
                                                 2                      +       2
                                                                                u                                      (       2
                                                                                                                               v    +        2)
                                                                                                                                             u     ncs     2   +        2
                                                                                                                                                                        v   +      2
                                                                                                                                                                                   u

                                                                                                                                                                   2
   Consider the following special cases. If there is no measurement error,                                                                                         u   = 0:
                                                                ncs 1           2        2         2                                         2 2
                                                                                v            +     v   + (ncs                       1)         v
                     plim bOLS =                                Ncs 1
                                                                                       2 n    2 + 2
                                                                                       v   cs     v
                                                                ncs 1               2 2     4                                                2 2
                                                                Ncs 1                 v + v + (ncs                                  1)         v
                                                   =                                     2             2               2
                                                                                         v    ncs          +           v




                                                                                    45
                                             ncs 1                                 2 2          ncs 1           4
                                             Ncs 1
                                                     + ncs            1              v     +    Ncs 1           v
                              =                           2               2            2
                                                          v   ncs             +        v
                                             ncs 1                                 2 2          ncs 1           4
                                             Ncs 1
                                                     + ncs            1              v     +    Ncs 1           v
                              =                           2               2            2
                                                          v   ncs             +        v
                                                                       2 2                     4
                                             ncs     1        Ncs        v +                   v
                              =
                                             Ncs     1            2 n
                                                                  v   cs
                                                                         2 +                   2
                                                                                               v
                                                                  2       2                     2
                                             ncs     1            v Ncs     +                   v
                              =
                                             Ncs     1            2
                                                                  v   ncs          2   +       2
                                                                                               v
                                                                          2            2
                                             ncs     1        Ncs           +          v
                              =                                           2 +          2
                                             Ncs     1        ncs                      v

In this case attenuation due to not sampling the whole class is most important when
 2
   = 0, but will vanish as 2 grows.
   If there is only measurement error but the whole class is sampled, Ncs = ncs :
                                        2 2                                        2       2            2           2                             2       2        2
                             (Ncs           1)                                                 +            +                + (Ncs       1)          (        +   u)
plim bOLS =
                                        u                                          v                    v           u                                     v
                     2        2) N    2 + 2                   2
                                                                      +                             2               2)           2        2           2
                 (   v   +    u    cs      v          +       u                                 (   v       +       u    Ncs         +    v   +       u
                                        2 2                                                2                2            2       2                              2 2
                             (Ncs 1) u                                                     v    Ncs             +        v   +   u    + (Ncs              1)      u
            =        2        2) N    2 + 2                   2
                                                                      +            2                2           2            2        2               2        2 + 2
                 (   v   +    u    cs      v          +       u                    v   Ncs              +       v   +        u   +    u   Ncs             +    v    u

In this case there is attenuation in b if = 0. Attenuation is greatest if 2 = 0, but
becomes less important when 2 grows. If > 0, this raises the estimated value of b,
and more so when 2 is bigger. The positive bias due to the -term may outweigh
the attenuation for large enough 2 . If the whole class is not sampled, this introduces
additional attenuation.
   We now turn to the instrumental variables estimator. The instruments
                                      z1ics = xics + u1ics
                                       z2cs = z 1cs = cs + v cs + u1cs
are based on an independent measurement of xics , i.e. we assume cov(uics ; u1ics ) = 0.
Then
                          e) = E [( cs + vics + u1ics )(
                 cov(z1 ; x                                                                cs   + vics + uics )]
                             = 2 + 2v = cov(z1 ; x)

                                  2                                   0                                                                  13
                                                                                               1            X
                 e = E 4(
        cov(z1 ; w)                    cs   + vics + u1ics ) @                cs   +                                (vics + uics )A5
                                                                                       ncs              1   S   i

                              2
                     =            = cov(z1 ; w)

                                                              46
                                            20                                                                        1                                   3
                                                                            1          X
                   e) = E 4@
          cov(z2 ; x                                  cs   +                                       (vics + u1ics )A (      cs   + vics + uics )5
                                                                      ncs         1    S       i

                                        2
                            =               = cov(z2 ; x)
                           20                                                                           10                                                     13
                                                      1               X                                                         1       X
         e = E 4@
cov(z2 ; w)                        cs   +                                     (vics + u1ics )A @                 cs   +                         (vics + uics )A5
                                             ncs                  1   S
                                                                                                                          ncs       1   S
                                                                          i                                                                 i


                       2                1                 2
               =           +                              v
                               (ncs              1)
                                   20                                                                        10                                               13
                                                                  1           X                                                     1           X
    cov(z2 ; w) = E 4@                      cs   +                                     (vics + u1ics )A @             cs   +                             vics A5
                                                       ncs                1   S
                                                                                                                                Ncs         1    P
                                                                                   i                                                                 i

                                                                                                                                        2
                               2                         1                                                   2        2                 v
                   =               +                                                       (ncs         1)   v   =        +
                                        (ncs           1) (Ncs                     1)                                          (Ncs         1)
   Hence
                     e
             cov(z2; w)cov(y;   z1 ) cov(w;  e z1 )cov(y; z2 )
plimbIV    =
                      e)cov(z2; w)
              cov(z1; x          e               e
                                       cov(z1; w)cov(z       e)
                                                          2; x
                     e [ cov(x; z1 ) + cov(w; z1 )] cov(w;
             cov(z2; w)                                             e z1 ) [ cov(x; z2 ) + cov(w; z2 )]
           =
                                           e)cov(z2; w)
                                   cov(z1; x          e                 e
                                                              cov(z1; w)cov(z       e)
                                                                                 2; x
                                                                    h                               i
                2
                  + (ncs1 1) 2v         2
                                          + 2v + 2                2      2
                                                                            +       2
                                                                                      + (Ncs1 1) 2v
           =
                                      2 + 2         2 +       1      2        4
                                              v           (ncs 1) v
               h                                        i        h                                                                                                           i
                                        1
                   2
                     + v 2      2
                                  + (ncs 1) v  2      4
                                                           +        2     2
                                                                            + (ncs1 1) 2v       2   2
                                                                                                      + (Ncs1                                                       1)
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                         v
           =
                                                 2 + 2         2 +      1      2       4
                                                      v              (ncs 1) v
                      h                               i
                                    2      1                  2           2      1                 2
                                        (ncs 1)               v               (Ncs 1)              v
           =       +
                               2            2              2              1                2           4
                                   +        v                     +    (ncs 1)             v
                                                2 2     Ncs ncs
                                                  v (ncs 1)(Ncs 1)
           =       +
                               2            2              2              1                2           4
                                   +        v                     +    (ncs 1)             v
                                                                                                             2 2
                               Ncs ncs                                                                          v
           =       +
                               Ncs 1                                  2   +       2
                                                                                  v        (ncs         1)    2 +     2
                                                                                                                      v         (ncs        1)       4

                                                                                  2 2
                               Ncs ncs                                              v
           =       +
                               Ncs 1                              2
                                                                  v       ncs      2 +             2
                                                                                                   v
                                                                              2
                               Ncs ncs
           =       +                                                      2            2
                               Ncs 1                           ncs            +        v


                                                                                       47
                                                           2
so the IV estimator of      is consistent if                   = 0.


                     e)cov(y; z2 ) cov(e
             cov(z1; x                       x; z2 )cov(y; z1 )
plim bIV   =
                     e)cov(z2; w)
             cov(z1; x         e                 e
                                      cov(z1; w)cov(z        e)
                                                          2; x
                     e) [ cov(x; z2 ) + cov(w; z2 )] cov(e
             cov(z1; x                                              x; z2 ) [ cov(x; z1 ) + cov(w; z1 )]
           =
                                 cov(z1; x  e)cov(z2; w)
                                                       e                e
                                                              cov(z1; w)cov(z        e)
                                                                                  2; x
                         h                                 i
               2
                 + 2v        2
                               +        2
                                           + (Ncs1 1) 2v           2         2
                                                                               + 2v + 2
           =
                                  2 + 2          2 +     1       2        4
                                          v           (ncs 1) v
                                                           h                                      i
                 2     2
                         + 2v       2     2
                                             + 2v +              2
                                                                   + 2v        2
                                                                                 + (Ncs1 1) 2v  4

           =
                                       2 + 2          2 +      1     2         4
                                               v           (ncs 1) v
                                     2         2                         2       2                  4
                   ncs     1             +     v         (Ncs       1)       +   v   (Ncs      1)
           =
                   Ncs     1         2   +      2
                                                v        (ncs       1)   2   +   2
                                                                                 v   (ncs     1)    4

                                 2               2         2
                   ncs     1     v       Ncs         +     v
           =
                   Ncs     1     2
                                 v       ncs    2    +     2
                                                           v
                                         2           2
                   ncs     1   Ncs         +         v
           =                             2 +         2
                   Ncs     1   ncs                   v

                                                                2                    2
This is the same as in the OLS case when                        u   = 0. When            = 0 this simpli…es to

                                                                      ncs    1
                                         plim bIV =
                                                                      Ncs    1

so that the IV coe¢ cient can easily be adjusted.




                                                               48
