NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIABILITy FOR HARM VERSUS
REGULATION OF SAFETY

Steven Shavell

Working Paper No. 1218

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1218
October 1983

Liability For Harm Versus Regulation of Safety
ABSTRACT

Liability in tort and the regulation of
safety are considered as means of controlling accident risks

using the instrumentalist, economic method of analysis.
Four general determinants of the relative social desirability of liability and regulation are first identified --

differences

in knowledge about risky activities as between a

social authority and private parties; the possibility that

parties would not be able to pay fully for harm done; the
chance that they would not face suit for harm done; and

administrative costs. On the basis of analysis of these
determinants, it is suggested that the choices observed to
be made between liability and regulation are, when broadly

viewed, socially rational: Notably, activities that create
the risk of the typical tort and that are little regulated
characteristically display features leading us to say that

they ought to be controlled mainly by liability. And activities that are much regulated —-

especially

ones involving

significant hazards to health or to the environment —-

ought

to be directly constrained in important ways, taking into
account their usual features.

[forthcoming in Journal of Legal Studies)

Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
Langdell 260

Cambridge, MA 02138
617—495—7920

Liability for Harm

versus

Regulation of Safety

S. Shavell*

I.

Introduction

Liability in tort and regulation of safety represent
two very different approaches for controlling activities

that create risks of harm.1 The approach of liability is
private in nature and works in a manner that is in essence
indirect, for behavior under it is not determined by command
of a social authority but rather by the deterrent of payment
of money damages should harm occur.

Standards, prohibitions,

and other forms of safety regulation, in contrast, are

public in character and operate in principle in an immediate
way to alter behavior; they are requirements imposed on
behavior ex ante--before, or at least independent of, the
actual occurrence of harm.

It is apparent that these two means of controlling
risks are employed with an emphasis that varies considerably

according to the activity. Whether I run to catch a bus and
perhaps collide with someone in the process will be influenced more by the possibility of my liability than by any
prior regulation of my behavior;2 and similarly, for example,
with how I choose to fell a tree in my backyard when there
is a chance that it would strike the roof of my neighbor's

garage. But whether I drive my truck through a tunnel when

2

carrying a load of explosives, whether I mark exits to be
used in case of fire in my store, whether an electric utility
incorporates certain safety features into the design of a

nuclear power plant--such decisions will often be determined
substantially by regulation.

What leads society sometimes to rely primarily on
liability to reduce risks and other times on regulation?

When is it socially desirable to employ one means of control

and when the other? These are the questions to be addressed
here. In considering them, the instrumentalist, economic
method of analysis will be used. That is, the effects on
behavior of liability and of regulation will be compared and
then evaluated on a utilitarian basis, given that parties

can be expected to act in their self_interest.2a
The plan of the article will first be to identify four
general determinants of the relative social desirability of

liability and of regulation. Then it will be suggested that
in light of these determinants, the choices observed to be
made between the two approaches for controlling risk are,

when very broadly viewed, socially rational: Notably,
activities that create the risk of the typical tort (the
tree falling on my neighbor's garage) and that are little
regulated characteristically display features which would
lead us to say that they ought to be controlled mainly by

liability. And activities that are much regulated -- especially ones involving significant hazards to health or to
the environment --

ought to be directly constrained in important

3

ways, taking into account their usual features. Following
this, several qualifying remarks will be made in a brief
concluding section and the possibility of extending the
analysis to a broader consideration of the control risk that
would include the use of fines and injunctions will be
noted.

4

II. Theoretical Determinants of the Desirability of
ity and of Regulation of Safety
In discussing the factors that will be claimed to pre-

dispose society toward reliance on liability or on regulation
to control risk, it will be convenient to consider a measure
of social welfare depending on the value of engaging in

risky activities, the difficulties and expense involved in
reducing risks, the harms that occur, and the administrative
costs associated with the use of liability and of regulation.3

These variables, then, will be seen as deciding whether and
at what level it would be socially desirable that parties
engage in risky activities, the steps that should be taken
to reduce risks, and the best use of liability and of regu-

lation. With this in mind the determinants will now be
examined.

The four determinants. The determinant of initial
concern is the possibility of a difference in knowledge
about risky activities possessed by private parties and by a

regulatory authority. The difference in knowledge might be
over the value of parties' activities, the costs of reducing
risks, or the probability or magnitude of risks.

If the private parties possess information about these
elements that is superior to the regulatory authority's,

then, other things equal, it would be desirable for it to be
the parties who perform the calculations to decide how to

control risks. Thus there would appear to be an advantage

5

in the use of liability. Conversely, if the authority
possesses the better information, the social advantage would
seem to lie in the direction of use of regulation.
To be more precise about the nature of this argument,

consider the situation where private parties possess perfect
information about a risky activity and the regulatory author-

ity has only imperfect knowledge about it. Then under
regulation, if the authority would overestimate the potential

for harm, it would set too stringent a standard, and likewise
if it would underestimate the value of the activity or the

cost of reducing risk. On the other hand, if the regulatory
authority would make the reverse errors, it would announce a
standard that is lax.

Under the approach of liability, however, the outcome

would likely be better. That this would be so is readily
seen if liability were strict—-if parties had to pay for
losses caused regardless of their fault--for then they would
be motivated to balance the true costs of reducing risk
against the true benefits in terms of expected savings in

losses caused. Now assume that the form of liability is the
negligence rule--under which parties are held responsible
for harm only if their level of care falls short of a level
of "due" care--and suppose that the courts would acquire
enough information if harm were done from learning about the
nature of the incident in question to be able to formulate

the appropriate level of due care. Then the parties, anticipating this, would in principle be led to exercise that

6

level of care.4 The situation is altered of course if the
courts are not assumed to be able to acquire sufficient
information to determine an appropriate standard of due

care; but the situation would still be superior to that
under regulation if the information which the courts would
normally obtain in the event of harm would be better than
that which a regulatory authority would be capable of bringing to bear ex ante.

(In the case where it is the regulatory authority that
possesses the superior information, an argument can obviously
be given in favor of regulation analogous to the one in
favor of liability that was just discussed.)

Having identified how a difference in knowledge about
risk affects the relative desirability of liability and of
regulation, the question must be asked what differences in

knowledge would actually be expected to exist. As a general
matter, the answer would seem to be that private parties
should enjoy an inherent advantage in knowledge in virtue of

their position. They, after all, are the ones who are
engaging in and deriving benefits from their activities; as
a kind of byproduct of this, they should know quite a lot
about the nature of the risks created, the costs of reducing
the risks, and changes in the risks or in the costs of

reducing them.5 Similarly, it would seem that the courts
ought usually to have an advantage in knowledge over a
regulatory authority; one would expect the courts to be
•better able to adjust the due care standard on the basis of

particular sets of facts adduced by private parties who have

7

caused harm than a regulatory authority would be able to
individualize its prior standards of behavior.6
Yet this is not to say that private parties (or the

courts) would necessarily possess information superior to
that of a regulatory authority, for in certain contexts
information of significance about risk or its reduction is

not an obvious byproduct of engaging in risky activity but
rather requires effort to develop or special expertise to

evaluate. Where this is so, the regulatory authority might
possess the superior information7 and, further, be unable to
communicate it easily to private parties because for instance

of its technical aspect. Thus, a case can be made for why
the regulatory authority might possess better information
than private parties' and not transmit it to them, even if

the usual expectation would be for the parties to possess
the superior information.

The second determinant of interest is that private
parties might be incapable of paying for the full magnitude

of harm done. To the extent that this is so, potential
liability would not furnish an adequate incentive to reduce

risk. Specifically, such would be the case because liability
exceeding a party's assets would be seen by him only as

liability equal to his assets; thus the party's motive to
reduce risk would be less than society's.8
But under the regulatory approach possible incapacity
to pay for harm done would be a matter of irrelevance, for

8

parties would be made to take steps to reduce risk as a
precondition for engaging in their activities.9

Of course, in assessing the importance of this argument
in favor of regulation over liability, a variety of consid-

erations needs to be taken into account: most obviously,
the size of parties' assets in relation to the chances of
various magnitudes of harm; in addition, the voluntary or
required purchase of liability insurance and its effects on
behavior; and further, the type of private party--whether a
large enterprise as opposed to an individual or to a several-

person firm. The latter considerations bear comment.
Regarding liability insurance, it should first be
observed that a party's motive to purchase coverage against
having to pay damages substantially exceeding his assets

will be a diminished one. This is because the purchase of
such coverage is in effect the purchase of protection against
losses which the party would otherwise have to bear only in

small part)-0 Thus the party may well decide against the
purchase of coverage much exceeding his assets, meaning that
the argument under consideration in favor of regulation
would be essentially unaffected.
If, however, the party does decide to purchase coverage

against liability significantly exceeding his assets or is
required by statute to do so, the question that needs to be

asked is what his incentive to take care would then be. And
the answer depends on whether insurers can easily determine
risk-reducing behavior and link the premium charged (or the

conditions of coverage) to such behavior. If this can be

9

done, then the motive of insureds to take care should be

tolerably good; but if insurers find it difficult to verify
efforts at risk-reduction and do not do so, then the motive
of insureds to take care may be insufficient, and plausibly

lower than if they did not own coverage) Accordingly, the
problem of the inadequacy of the incentive to reduce risk
that would exist were parties uninsured and unable to pay
fully for harm done may either be mitigated or exacerbated
by their purchase of liability insurance.

With respect now to the other consideration, concerning
the type of private party, what is of special interest is
the situation where the party is a large firm; for the
activities of a large firm are prone to result in large

liabilities, and although the firm may have assets sufficient
to cover them, individuals within the firm often will not.

In consequence, the firm's ability to induce its decisionmakers to reduce the risk of corporate liability by the
threat of recovery from them or by imposition of penalties
of its own devise may be limited, and this in turn may

increase the appeal of regulation.2

The third general determinant of the relative desirability of liability and of regulation is that parties might

not face the threat of suit for harm done. Such a possibility clearly means that liability might not result in proper
incentives to reduce risk, whereas it would be of no import
under regulation.

10

The relevance of this determinant favoring regulation
depends on the presence of causes of failure to bring suit.

One of these causes is the chance of dispersal of harm over
many victims, making it less than worthwhile for any par-

ticular victim to initiate legal action. (However, in
certain contexts- the victims' opportunity to employ the

device of the class action limits the importance of this as

a problem for liability.) A second cause of failure to
bring suit is the passage of a long period of time before

harm eventuates. This raises the possibility that by the
time suit could be brought, the evidence necessary for a
successful action would be stale or that the responsible

parties would be defunct. And a third source of victims'
failure to bring suit is difficulty in attributing harm to

responsible parties. This problem may arise for reasons
ranging from simple ignorance that a harm could have been
caused by another party (as opposed to being "natural" in
origin), to inability to make other than rough guesses about
the role played by numerous other parties of varying description, to the impossibility of saying which among a fairly
well-defined group of parties caused the loss.13
In addition, a point about large firms analogous to the

one made two paragraphs above should be mentioned. Namely,
even if harms can be linked to the actions of firms and suits
successfully brought, the effect of the prospect of suit on
the behavior of decisionmakers within firms may be slight;

with the passage of time, for example, there might be no

11

clear way of identifying which among the employees of the
firm were the responsible parties; and the responsible

parties might no longer be working at their firms. In other
words, the problem that decisionjnakers might not face the

threat of suit or some other penalty for harm done may still
exist at one remove.

The last general determinant of interest is the magni-

tude of the various administrative costs incurred

private

parties and y the public in connection with use of the
legal system and with regulation.14
In this regard, it is tentatively suggested that there

is an underlying advantage in favor of liability, for under
liability administrative costs are borne only if harm occurs.
Thus, if harm is unlikely, administrative costs will be low.
If the possibility of some harm is eliminated because of the
deterrent effect of liability, then no administrative costs

will be borne; in effect, the reduction of that risk of harm

will have been accomplished for free. Under regulation, on
the other hand, administrative costs are incurred whether or
not harm occurs; even if the risk of a harm is eliminated by
regulation, administrative Costs will have been borne in the
process.

In evaluating the importance of this point, one factor

that needs to be taken into account is that a systematic

difference may exist between the administrative costs borne
per instance of enforcement of regulation and per instance

12

of use of the liability system. This factor may work either
to reinforce or to diminish or offset the initial advantage

of liability. A second factor of relevance, and one which
tends to enhance the advantage of liability, is that even
when an accident occurs, often there will not be a suit or
litigation.14a

A third factor, but working in favor of regulation, is
that determining adherence to regulatory requirements need
not involve verification with certainty; administrative
costs may be lowered by use of probabilistic methods of

enforcement).4b There is, however, a bound to the savings
that can be achieved by this strategy, at least because
there is a minimum frequency of verification that must be
maintained to induce parties' adherence to a regulation.15

And a fourth factor of relevance is the desirability
that administrative costs be "focused" on controlling the

group of parties most likely to cause harm. This occurs
naturally under liability just because administrative costs
are incurred only for parties who actually cause harm.

(The

population of these parties is comprised of a larger fraction
of the group most likely to cause harm than is the original
population of all parties engaged in the risky activity.)
On the other hand, there is no such favorable tendency under
regulation, all the parties being equally subject to verifi-

cation procedures in the absence of special information
about their category of risk.

13

Summary. The discussion to this point may be summarized
as follows: that (i) to the extent private parties possess
information about risky activities which is superior to a

regulatory authority's, the desirability of allowing the
parties to decide how to reduce risk will be enhanced, and
thus, so will be the appeal of the liability approach over
the regulatory; that (ii) the problem of inability to pay
for the full magnitude of harm done reduces the deterrent

inherent in liability and is therefore an argument in favor
of regulation; that (iii) the likelihood that suit would not
be brought is for similar reasons a factor that works in
favor of regulation; that (iv) consideration of adndnistra-

tive costs may favor liability because under it and not
under regulation, such costs are borne only if harm actually
occurs; but this argument was qualified in several ways.

Joint use of liability and of regulation. To conclude
this section, it should be observed that the determinants
favoring liability and those favoring regulation ought both
generally to have enough importance to make desirable some

degree of use of each means of controlling risk. Consideration of the four determinants is therefore to be regarded
as determining the best balance between liability and regulation, not which approach ought to be employed to the exclusion of the other.

If, then, some measure of jointness of use of liability
and regulation is likely to be advantageous, what can be

1.4

said

about the two questions that are immediately raised

concerning the relationship between satisfaction of regula-

tion and liability? That is, should a party's adherence to
regulation relieve him of liability? And on the other hand,
should a party's failure to satisfy regulatory requirements
result necessarily in his liability?
Theory suggests that the answer to both these questions

ought to be in the negative. In respect to the first, if
satisfaction of regulatory requirements were to render
parties immune from liability, then none would do more than

to satisfy the requirements. But there will generally be
parties who ought to do more to reduce risk than what is
called for by regulation because they bear lower than usual
costs of taking care or present a higher than usual poten-

tial for doing harm, or because there are aspects of their
behavior which affect risk but are not covered by regulation
(due to limitations of knowledge on the part of the regula-

tory authority). And since some among these parties would
be induced by liability to take more care to reduce risk
(for some would be able to pay for harm done and would be

sued with sufficiently high likelihood), it becomes desirable
to employ liability as an additional means of controlling
risk.

16

At the same time, if failure to satisfy regulation were
necessarily to result in a party's liability for negligence,

then some parties would be inappropriately led to satisfy

regulation who would not otherwise have done so. This is

15

because some parties for whom the regulatory requirements
would not be desirable--those facing higher than usual costs
of care or posing less than the usual potential for harm--will

not have been forced to satisfy the requirements due to
flaws in or probabilistic methods of regulatory enforcement.
Yet these parties might still be induced by threat of liabil-

ity to obey the requirements. But allowing recognition in
liability law of the parties' special circumstances will
lead, desirably, to their not adhering to the regulatory
requirements after all)7

16

III. Activities Controlled Mainly by Liability; the Typical
Tort.

It will be suggested now that there exists a rough

consistency between the theoretically desirable use of

liability and of regulation and their use in fact. In
arguing thus, attention will be focused in this part on
activities which are controlled mainly by liability; and for

concreteness, reference will often be made to the two activities mentioned earlier--to my chopping down the tree that
might fall on a neighbor's garage; or to my running to catch

a bus and possibly colliding with someone in so doing. It
will be seen by examining in turn the four determinants that
such activities as these ought to be controlled primarily by

liability, that the drawbacks of regulation would probably
be acute.

Consider first the determinant concerning the possession

of information about risk. When one thinks about this
matter in some detail, one comes to believe that private
parties would, as suggested above, know more, and much more,

than a regulatory authority. I would likely know significantly more than an authority about the danger involved in
felling a tree in my backyard and the costs of reducing the
danger because I would know the position of this particular
tree relative to my neighbor's particular garage; how difficult it would be to lower risk by use of guy wires; or how
time consuming it would be to cut down the tree in stages.

17

Similarly, I would know more than an authority about the

chance of knocking someone down when running for a bus at
this particular speed at that particular corner; and how
hard it would be to take greater care in running for the bus
and the consequences of failing to catch it.
The reason -why I, or, private parties will usually have

much more information than a regulatory authority about the
risks associated with tortious activities and the cost of

reducing them is evidently that this information will truly
be a byproduct of engaging in the activities and because the
conditions determining the nature of risks will be so various
and subject to changing circumstance.

As a consequence of the superiority of private parties'
information, it seems that reasonably satisfactory decisions
should be made under liability, whereas costly mistakes

would be unavoidable under regulation. Were a regulatory
authority to set forth rules concerning the felling of trees
in backyards and the proper pursuit of buses, it is a surety
that the rules would sometimes be too restrictive.

In

instances where it would be safe to chop down my tree or to
hurry after a bus, I might be required by regulation to take
needless precautions—-precautions which I would not take on
account only of my potential liability.

Conversely, it is

plain that the authority's rules standing alone would sometimes be insufficiently demanding; I might find it very easy
to take a precaution in chopping down a tree that was not
required by regulation; only because of a concern for liability

18

would I be led to take the precaution. It does thus appear
that behavior under regulation often would be much inferior
to that resulting from liability on account of a regulatory
authority's relative lack of information.

Consider now the second determinant, that of ability to

pay for harm done. Here, admittedly, there is a potential
problem; there will frequently be some possibility that a

party will not be able to pay for harm done. Nevertheless,
this does not seem to be an issue of great significance in

respect to many of the activities of present interest. If
my tree falls and damages my neighbor's garage, it is reasonably likely that I will be able to pay what is necessary
to repair it; if I own or rent a house, I should probably
have assets plus liability insurance sufficient to cover

damage to the garage. While inability to pay for harm done
is conceded to be a factor reducing the deterrent of liability in respect to the typical tort, it does not stand out as
a problem of unusual dimension (at least by comparison to

many of the situations discussed in the following part of
the article).

Next, consider the likelihood that suit would be brought

for harm done. This likelihood appears to be relatively
high for the typical tort, as none of the reasons given for

failure to bring suit would usually seem to apply. In
particular, the dispersal of harm over many

victims

is not a

19

characteristic of the typical tort; when my tree falls, it

might damage the property of one, not many neighbors; when I
run for a bus, I am unlikely to collide with more than one

or two individuals. Similarly, the passage of a long period
of time between an injurer's action and the occurrence of
harm is not a feature of the typical tort; rather the harm
that I might do in chopping down my tree or running for a
bus will be direct and immediate; for the usual tort, the
injurer's action will be quickly followed by harmful conse-

quences if there are to be any. The other possible cause of
failure to bring suit was the chance that harm would not be
attributable to a responsible party, and, again, there does

not seem to be any special difficulty in respect to the
usual tort; if my tree falls on my neighbor's garage, he

will know what did the harm. In sum, then, none of the
reasons for failure to bring suit should usually be of
significance in situations presenting the risk of the typical
tort and, hence, do not constitute an argument for regulation.

Regarding, finally, the determinant of administrative
costs, consider the interpretation of what was said in

Part II. The initial point was that liability should have
an underlying cost advantage because we would expect it to

be less expensive for society to bear administrative costs
only in the event of harm than independent of the occurrence

of harm. The relevance of this point does seem to be confirmed by our examples; one does have the impression that it

20

would be significantly less costly for society to incur
administrative costs only when falling trees happen to
descend on garage roofs or only when individuals running for

buses happen to collide with others--fairly unlikely events-than for society to formulate and enforce regulations con-

cerning whether trees are chopped down and how so, and
whether individuals may walk only at a normal pace to catch

a bus or may be allowed to hurry after it.18 Indeed, when
one stops to think about it, virtually all our entirely
routine activities (walking, mowing a lawn, playing catch)

are seen to be, like the examples, perfectly innocuous in

the overwhelming majority of instances. Thus the savings
over regulation that are realized under liability on account
of the limitation of administrative costs to those numerically
few occasions when harm is done must be great.
(The notion of effective regulation of the activities

of everyday life even seems fanciful to contemplate. Perhaps
this is because it would be made particularly difficult by
the necessity of frequent and likely intrusive verification
procedures; for what would usually need to be determined by
a regulatory authority are aspects of readily modifiable
individual behavior rather than the presence of "fixed"
physical objects. )19

Last, the earlier noted tendency for administrative

costs to be concentrated under liability on those most
likely to cause harm can also be seen to be of relevance; it
makes sense to believe there will be a much higher propor—

21

tion of awkward individuals among the group who succeed in

knocking down others when running for buses than among the
group of all those who chase after buses; and it would be a
waste to monitor the behavior of the many relatively agile

individuals in the latter group who do not cause accidents,
but that is what would be done under the regulatory approach.

Let us now summarize our review of the determinants.

We first argued that a reasonably strong case exists in
favor of liability due to the likely superiority of knowledge

of private parties over a regulatory authority's; and we
just argued that a strong case for liability results from
consideration of savings in administrative costs; we thought

that only a moderate advantage of regulation exists in
connection with parties' inability to pay for harm done; and

we saw no real reason to believe that there would be systematic
failure of victims to bring suit and thus no advantage of

regulation arising in that regard. Taking these four arguments into account--the two working strongly in favor of
liability, the one working with only some force against it,

and the other of little relevance--the conclusion is that
liability ought to be employed and that regulation ought not
to be much used in controlling the risk of the typical tort.
The theoretically desirable solution to the control of this
familiar category of risk is thus seen as consistent with
the solution observed in practice.

22

IV. Activities Controlled in Significant Ways by Regulation
It will be the aim here to demonstrate by examining
again the four determinants that it is desirable that society

resort to safety regulation where it does--in controlling
the risks of fire, the production and sale of many foods and
drugs, the generation of pollutants, and the transport and

use of explosives and other dangerous materials. The claim,
in other words, will be that regulation in these areas is no
coincidence but rather is needed because liability alone

would not result in adequate reduction of risks and because
the usual disadvantages of regulation are not so serious, or
at least are outweighed by its advantages.

Consider first the determinant concerning information

about risk. Here it appears that what typifies much regulation is that its requirements can fairly reliably be justi-

fied by common knowledge or something close to it. Presumably,
most of us would agree that it is well worthwhile for explosives to be transported over routes that avoid the drastic

risk of explosions in tunnels; that expenditures on highly
strong elevator cables are warranted by the resulting reduc-

tion in the probability of fatal accidents; that expenditures on pasteurization of milk are made desirable by the

decreased chances of bacterial contamination. In such
examples as these, it seems that the regulatory authority
can be reasonably confident that its requirements are justi-

fied in the great majority of situations. This is not to

23

say, of course, that they will be justified in all situations.
There will obviously be some occasions when milk will be

consumed soon enough that failure to pasteurize it would

lead to no real risk. But these occasions will be few in
number, and the error due to inappropriate regulation will
accordingly be small.

In addition, even where this argument does not apply--

because the design of appropriate regulation requires much
more than common knowledge--it may still be true that the
regulatory authority enjoys an informational advantage.

This situation perhaps obtains in respect to certain healthrelated and environmental risks for which expert medical,
epidemiological, or ecological knowledge is needed for

proper assessment. Small firms using toxic substances, for
instance, could well be thought to know little about and to
have a limited capacity to understand the risks they create,
and the same might sometimes be true of large firms. The
reason that this possibility arises is that it may be uneconomic for firms individually to develop and maintain expert
knowledge about toxic substances; there may be economies of

scale involved in the acquisition of knowledge about the
substances and external benefits associated with it making a
regulatory authority or a governmental agency the more
logical entity for the purpose of securing the knowledge.20
(Nevertheless, it is hardly claimed that this will usually
be the case in areas where substantially more than common

knowledge is needed to determine regulatory requirements.)

24

Let us now consider the second of the four determi-

nants, ability to pay for harm done. This determinant seems
to be of general value in explaining why we regulate the

activities that we do, for these activities frequently
create risks which can readily be imagined to exceed the

assets of responsible parties. Injury due to fire at a
nightclub or hotel, for example, could clearly result in
larger losses than the assets of its owner; the harm caused
by mass consumption of spoiled food or by inoculation with
vaccines with adverse side-effects could easily surpass the
assets of a packager of food or a drug company; the losses
caused by explosions, oil spills, chemical pollutants,

radioactive or other carcinogenic substances could with not
insubstantial probability exceed the assets of even the

largest corporations. It is thus apparent that in many
areas of regulation, potential liability could well be
larger than the assets of an involved firm (certainly of the
personal assets of any of its employees) and therefore that
the deterrent effect of liability alone would not result in
adequate reduction of risk.

Consider next the determinant concerning the likelihood

of being sued for harm done. As a brief reconsideration of
the factors that lead to failure to bring suit will demonstrate, this determinant seems to be of significance in
explaining the regulation of a wide class of environmental

and health-related risks. First, many environmental and

25

health-related risks evidently are sufficiently dispersed
that it is not worth victims' while to bring suit on an

individual basis. Second, many such risks often take a long
time to eventuate. This is both because harmful agents may
not produce adverse effects until years after their introduction into host bodies and because the agents may retain

their potency for extended periods. As a consequence, and
as remarked generally earlier, by the time harm occurs the
evidence necessary to bring a successful action may be hard
to develop, responsible individuals may have separated from
their firms or have died, and firms themselves may have gone

out of business. Third and last, environmental and healthrelated risks frequently have the characteristic that when
they occur, it is difficult to attribute them to a particular

firm or to a particular cause. This in turn is true for a
variety of reasons: as just mentioned, the time that it
takes for risks to eventuate; the often complex and incompletely understood nature of the risks; and the fact that
the risks are sometimes truly due to more than one cause.
Thus, it indeed seems to be the case that environmental and
health-related risks often do not result in an appropriately
high potential liability burden to the firms that caused
them; and that even where this is not so, the responsible
individuals within the firms may not face an appropriate
chance of incurring liability or of bearing a sanction

internal to the firm. In either event, therefore, the
rationality of use of regulation is suggested.

26

Consider, finally, the determinant of administrative

costs. As explained before, there may be an underlying cost
advantage in favor of liability, but two qualifying factors

were mentioned. One was the cost per instance of verifying
adherence to regulation. And this, we indicated earlier,
should typically be lower when regulation requires the
presence of particular things (fire extinguishers, guard
rails, life boats) than when it requires adoption of particular modes of behavior, and much regulation requires the

former. Moreover, even when regulation concerns modes of
behavior, the cost of verifying adherence may relatively be
low if there is little chance of concealment of the behavior.

How easy would it be, for instance, for a dairy to keep
secret its failure to pasteurize milk given the ease with
which a sample could be tested, the large number of employees
who would be aware of the firmts practices, and so forth?
The other qualifying factor noted was the possibility of
reducing monitoring costs by use of probabilistic methods of

enforcement. In this regard, it need only be said that such
methods of determining compliance with regulations are often

employed. Thus, the administrative costs of verification of
adherence to regulation per instance appear sometimes actually
to be low; while if not, at least some savings are realized
by use of probabilistic means of enforcement.

At this point, having discussed the four determinants
in relation to activities that are regulated in significant

27

ways, the claim of consistency with

theory

should seem

plausible. For most such activities, the two affirmative
arguments for regulation--the problem of inability to pay

for harm done, and the possibility of failure to bring
suit--should seem to outweigh the two potential disadvantages

of regulation--the lack of information of the regulator and

the size of administrative costs. (It is clear from what we
have said, however, that the relative importance of the
different arguments may vary according to the activity; thus
our statement must be carefully interpreted.21)

The general claim of consistency of the theory with the
choice society has made over which activities to regulate is
given further support by consideration of the "second-order"

choices society has made over which aspects of a regulated

activity to subject to regulation and which not. While to
reduce the risks due to fire there may be requirements
concerning the display of exit signs or the installation of
smoke alarms and sprinkler systems, there will inevitably be
many routine practices that affect the risk of fire and
which will not be regulated (e.g., whether to store flammable
furniture polish in a closet through which a heating pipe

passes). These unregulated aspects of risk appear usually
to have the feature that it would involve great expense for
the regulatory authority to enforce its standard (ensure
that polish is kept out of the closet), or that the appropriate standard would be hard for the authority to determine

28

because of the highly contextual nature of the information
that would be needed (type of polish, surface temperature of

heating pipe). In other words, the two advantages of hability--savings in administrative costs, and allowing parties

to make decisions based on their superior information--seem
to help explain -what aspects of a regulated activity are
left unregulated.

Finally, the claim of consistency of the theory with
what is true in fact is confirmed also by the agreement
between the theoretically desirable and the observed relationship between satisfaction of regulation and imposition

of liability. Specifically, it is indeed the case that
adherence to regulation does not necessarily relieve a party

of liability.22 Moreover, when liability is found despite
adherence to regulation, the reason given is frequently

phrased in terms of there being "unusual circumstances" or
"increased danger," which is what we said theory suggests

ought to give rise to liability despite satisfaction of

regulation.23 On the other hand, it is also true that
failure to satisfy regulatory requirements does not auto-

matically result in liability.24 And the explanation that
is often furnished in this regard, that a party's "violation
of the [statutory] law" does not imply his negligence if the
"circumstances" justify an apparent disobedience, again
comports with theory.25

29

V.

Concluding Comments
(a) While it was the claim in the

last two parts that the theoretical determinants discussed
initially serve to explain the observed use of regulation of

safety and of liability, it was stated several times that
this is believed to be true only in an approximate sense.
It is hardly thought that the use of the two means of con-

trolling risk, when inspected in a detailed way, will uniformly seem rational in light of the theory presented here
(or of any other simple theory).
Indeed,

mistakes

one not infrequently encounters the view that

have been made in the use of regulation and liability.

On the one hand, one sometimes hears it said that regulation

is inadequate. Consider for example the claim that there
has been insufficient control over the disposal of toxic

wastes. This claim might well have merit: For at least
until recently, the disposal of toxic wastes was little
regulated, while the threat of liability probably provided
an insufficient deterrent against improper disposal -- due
to manifold problems of establishing causation and of the
possibility that the harm done would exceed the assets of

responsible parties.26 On the other hand, one of course
hears it asserted that certain regulation is unduly con-

straining. It is commonly argued, for instance, that various
O.S.H.A. requirements and antipollution standards are too
standardized or impose excessive costs on industry.27

30

That there should be examples of apparent social irrationality is really to be expected, for the choices actually
made concerning regulation are obviously influenced by a
multitude of factors lying outside our framework of analysis
(notably, the pressures of interest groups27a), and, in any
event, often will not reflect conscious, careful use of a

social cost-benefit calculus. Moreover, the complexity of
the

relationship

between liability and regulation, the

possibilities for modification of the liability system as an
alternative to use of regulation, and the many unanswered
empirical questions supply further reasons to expect errors
(relative to an ideal) to have been made.

(b) The theoretical determinants used here to analyze
the choice between regulation and liability would be of
relevance as well to a more complete assessment of the
relative social desirability of alternative methods for
controlling risk, and in particular, to one considering the

use of fines for harm done28 and of injunctions. It therefore
seems worthwhile indicating what would probably be the major
points of such an assessment.

Consider first the use of a fine. This method of
controlling behavior is identical to liability in the respect
that it creates an incentive toward reduction of risk which
works through parties paying for the harm they turn out to

do. Thus, the fine enjoys essentially the same advantages
as liability --

the

private parties balance the costs of

31

reducing risks against the benefits; and society bears

administrative costs only when harm is done. Also, the fine
suffers from similar disadvantages --

inability

to pay for

harm would dilute the effect of its use, as would the possibility that the fine would not be levied.

But the fine differs from liability in that it is
public in nature; a private party does not institute the
fine and does not benefit financially when it is collected,

a public agency does. The principal implication of this
difference is perhaps that the likelihood of collection of
the fine may differ from the likelihood a party would be

sued. In most contexts, one supposes that this difference
would work against the fine; as private parties would usually
know better than a public agency when harm occurred and
might profit from bringing or threatening suit but not from
informing a public agency of harm so that it could impose a
fine, the likelihood of suit would be higher than that of a

fine.29 Nevertheless, there are circumstances in which the
advantage would lie in the other direction: where a suit
would not be brought because of difficulty in establishing
causation under the usual tort principles, the fine could
still be imposed; and similarly where private parties are

unaware of the harm or it is too dispersed to make legal

action worthwhile.3° Finally, another difference between
the fine and liability is in the size of administrative

costs. This difference, one speculates, might work against
liability as a general matter, assuming that its use is
procedurally more complex than that of the fine.

32

With regard now to the injunction, observe that it
resembles regulation of safety in that it works in a direct

way to control risk; the injunction prevents harm simply by

proscribing certain behavior. Hence, the injunction shares
advantages similar to those of safety regulation: the use
of the injunction is in no way impeded by the possibility
that a party would not be able to pay for the harm he does,31
or by the chance that the harm would be highly dispersed or
difficult to attribute to him under tort principles.32
The injunction differs from safety regulation, however,
in that it is employed at the urging of private parties.
This would seem to offer an advantage over safety regulation

where the private parties have better information about the

nature of potential harm. Still, the fact that the injunction is brought by private parties would amount to a disad-

vantage where they would not have superior information about
potential harm, or where, because the harm would be of a
general nature and spread over many parties, they would not
find it individually worthwhile to take legal action and
would face difficulties in coordinating a collective action.

Footnotes

*

Professor

of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School.

I

wish to thank S. Rose-Ackerman, L. Bebchuk, P. Burrows,
L. Kaplow, M. Kelman, R. Stewart, and, especially,
R. Epstein for comments and the National Science Foundation (grant no. SES -8014208) for financial support.

A formal version of the main argument of this article
is made in my Harm as a Prerequisite for Liability,

Harvard University, 1979, and in A Model of the Socially
Optimal Use of Liability and Regulation, Harvard Law

School, 1983. The present article will provide the
basis for a chapter in the part on torts of a book A
Theoretical Analysis of Law on which I am at work.

1. Of course, liability and regulation might be viewed as
serving purposes distinct from the control of risk;

notably, liability might be seen as a means of compensating those who have suffered harm, and regulation as
reflecting in part the influence of interest groups.
In the interest of clarity, however, this article will

abstract from functions of liability and regulation

other than the control of risk. (But see note 3,
infra.)

la. As the chief goal here is to compare liability and
regulation, there will be no explicit attempt to identify
the extent to which the conclusions reached may be
separately attributed to the first dimension in which

fn-2

the approaches differ (employed only after harm is done
vs. before) or to the second dimension (employed at the
initiative of private parties vs. of a public agency).

Neither will there be an attempt to discuss other
approaches to controlling risk, except, as will be
indicated, in the concluding comments.
2.

This is hardly to deny that I would try to avoid colliding with someone for reasons independent of the fear
of legal sanctions, but, again for expositional con-

venience, in analyzing parties' behavior here, attention
will be limited to the legal consequences of acts.
2a. This is the general approach adopted by two influential
legal scholars in their analysis of the problem of
accidents; see Guido Calabresi, The Costs of Accidents,
1970, and Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law,
(2nd ed.) 1977, Chapter 6.
3.

The reason that the compensatory objective is excluded
is not that it is thought unimportant but rather that

the objective does not appear to bear significantly on

the subject of the article. The latter seems the case
because under either the liability approach or the

regulatory, potential victims have the opportunity to
purchase first-party insurance coverage; and if it is
felt that this would not provide them adequate coverage
(perhaps because they would fail to make rational purchase of insurance or because they would not be able

to afford it), the state could always establish a
public insurance program.

fn-3

4. See John P. Brown, Toward an Economic Theory of Liability, 2 J. Legal Studies 323 (1973).
5.

Consideration of the possibility of changes in the

risks or the costs of their reduction suggests that a
private party should have an advantage in knowledge
even if the regulatory authority were assumed able to
assess perfectly accurately his situation at the time

it observed him. Only if the regulatory authority were
presumed to monitor continuously the party's situation
would it possess knowledge equal to the party's.

6. In part, this is because the facts presented to the
courts will often reflect changes in parties' situations; see note 5, supra.

7. The regulatory authority might possess the superior
information for well known

reasons:

First, the authority

(or some governmental agency) might have decided to

commit resources to the acquisition of information
about risk in light of a socially inadequate incentive

of private parties to do so. The incentive of private
parties might be inadequate because of their inability
to appropriate the full social benefits of information
that they develop; others will often learn what they
have discovered and benefit from it without paying
them; see generally Kenneth 3. Arrow, Essays in the
Theory of Risk Bearing, 1971, Chapter 6.

And second, the regulatory authority might be
better suited to acquire information about risk because

fn-4

it requires assembling relatively large groups of

experts; it would be wasteful and unnecessary for such
groups to be assembled by multiple private parties.

8. See more generally, Steven Shavell, The Judgment Proof
Problem, Harvard Law School, 1984.

9. In saying this, we are ignoring the possibility that in
some contexts enforcement of a regulation could itself
become a problem due to parties' low assets.

10. Consider whether a party with assets of $20,000 and
facing a potential liability of $100,000 would wish to

buy liability insurance coverage. For the party to
purchase coverage would be for him to purchase protection
against $80,000 of risk which he would not otherwise

bear. This means that his premium for coverage would
be much higher-- five times so--than what would be the

premium for the risk of his $20,000 of assets alone.

Hence, the party might well rationally decide against
purchase of coverage (even though he would have purchased coverage if his assets had been as large as

$100,000). See William Keeton and Evan Kwerel, Externalities in Automobile Insurance and the Underinsured
Driver Problem, Yale University, 1983; and Shavell,
note 8, supra.

11. To illustrate this possibility, consider the party of
the previous note, suppose that liability insurers
cannot observe anything about his efforts to reduce

risk, and suppose too that he is legally obligated to

fn-5

purchase full coverage of $100,000. Then, being fully
covered (and the premium or policy terms not being
dependent on his behavior), the party will have no

motive whatever to reduce risk. But if he had not been
obligated to buy the coverage and would have decided
against doing so (as explained in the previous note),
he would have had some incentive to reduce risk, for at

least his assets of $20,000 would then have been at

stake. See Shavell, note 8, supra.
12. As it stands, what we have argued is really only that
some form of ex ante control of a firm's decisionmakers

may be socially desirable. But the firm itself might
be expected to employ ex ante controls to reduce its
corporate liability where ex post sanctions would be

unsatisfactory. (If a firm's potential liability is
$1,000,000 and the relevant decisionmaker's assets are
only $50,000, then the firm would wish to control

directly his behavior to lower the risk of incurring
the $1,000,000 in liability; as the decisionmaker's

potential loss is far lower, the firm would not wish to
rely solely on the prospect of an ex post sanction to
induce the decjsjonmaker to act so as to avoid corporate

liability). Thus, to complete our argument that the
limited assets of firms' decisionmakers may constitute
an argument in favor of regulation, we must demonstrate

that regulation would often be expected to be superior
to ex ante controls imposed by the firm.

fn-6

To this end, consider first "managerial" decisionmakers, by which we mean individuals whose activities
are overseen only by the board of directors and the
shareholders——and thus not by superiors within the

firm. Now the board of directors and the shareholders
would not be -likely to know as much as a regulatory

authority about the nature of risks facing the firm,
for it is implausible that they would have the time or

the necessary expertise to devote to this matter. Thus
the suspicion is that the regulatory authority would
enjoy an informational advantage in controlling the
behavior of managerial decisionmakers.

However, in regard to "line" decisionmakers, those
whose activities are overseen by superiors within the
firm, this argument becomes problematic; for the natural

presumption would be that the superiors within the firm
would have better information than a regulatory authority about the nature of the risks confronted by the

line decisiorunakers. Nevertheless, that will not
always be true, and it will sometimes be cheaper and
more practical for a regulatory authority to enforce
controls than for management to do this.

(A harbor

authority would be likely to know more about the risks
at its port than would the management of a shipping
company, and, further, be able to regulate docking
procedures of the company's ships more cheaply than

management due to economies of scale.) In addition,

fn-7

and perhaps more important, the incentive of management
to regulate the behavior of line decisionmakers may be
inadequate due to the very problem that a managerial
decisiorinaker's potential liability might be less than

the firm's. Hence, it seems plausible that a regulatory
authority would sometimes be expected to control in a
more desirable way line decisionmakers than would the
firm itself.

For a general discussion of closely related issues,

see Christopher Stone, The Place of Enterprise Liability
in the Control of Corporate Conduct, 90 Yale L. J. 1
(1980); and see also Lewis Kornhauser, An Economic

Analysis of the Choice Between Enterprise and Personal
Liability for Accidents, 70 Calif. L.R. 1345 (1982).

13. Discussion of modifications of the tort system which
would alleviate this problem of attribution--notably,

imposing liability in proportion to the probability of

causation—-are beyond the scope of this article, On
this matter, see Coimnent, DES and a Proposed Theory of

Enterprise Liability, 46 Fordham L. Rev. 963 (1978);
M. David Rosenberg, The Causal Connection in Mass
Exposure Cases, forthcoming Harvard L. Rev.; Steven
Shavell, Uncertainty Over Causation and the Determination of Civil Liability, Harvard Law School, 1983.

14. The administrative costs associated with use of the
liability system include parties' litigation costs and
other legal expenses, and also the public costs of

fn-8

conducting trials, employing judges, and so forth.

Similarly, the administrative costs associated with
regulation include parties' costs in proving their
compliance with regulatory requirements (e.g., time
spent completing forms and undergoing inspection by
regulatory officials) and the operating cost of the
regulatory authority.
].4a. That is, the victim either will not threaten legal

action--for lack of a case--or he will do so and will

settle with the other party. Thus, the administrative
costs per accident will frequently, if not usually, be
substantially less than those associated with actual
litigation.

14b. See Donald Wittman, Prior Regulation versus Past Lia-

bility: The Choice Between Input and Output Monitoring,
6 Journal of Legal Studies 193 (1977), for an analysis

of optimal probabilistic enforcement in a setting
similar to that of this article.

15. Specifically, the minimum frequency of verification
that will induce adherence to regulation exists because,
among other things, there is a definite limit to the
fine that can be imposed for failure to adhere --

namely, the size of the party's assets. And the administrative costs using even this minimum probability of
verification could easily exceed the administrative
costs associated with liability, for accidents could
occur with arbitrarily small or even with zero proba-

fn-9

bility. To illustrate, suppose that the assets of a
party are $10,000; that the costs of taking optimal
care are $500; that regulation calls for spending this
amount; and that spending this amount would entirely

eliminate the possibility of accidents. Then the
minimum probability of verification would be 5% (for
the maximum effective fine of $10,000 times the proba-

bility of verification must exceed $500 to induce the
party to adhere to regulation and to spend the $500).

Hence, the administrative costs of regulation would be

positive. But since under liability the party would
generally be led to spend the $500 and accidents would
therefore not occur, there would be no administrative
costs whatever.

16. To illustrate this point, consider a situation where it
is desirable that most parties, "typical"

parties,

spend $500 on care because this will reduce expected
accident losses by $1,000; where a small fraction of
"atypical" parties have the opportunity to reduce

accident losses by an additional $1,000 by spending
$500 more; where such atypical parties cannot be identified ex ante by the regulatory authority; and where
some fraction of both types of parties have very limited
assets, so that they would not be induced by potential
liability to take care.

In this situation note that the regulatory standard

would of necessity be the same for the typical and the

f n]. 0

atypical parties, owing to the assumed lack of information of the regulatory authority as to a party's true

opportunity to reduce risk. Observe also that the best
such regulatory standard of care would correspond to
the $500 expenditure, for an expenditure of $1,000
would be appropriate only for the small minority of
atypical parties.

Now if parties were never liable so long as they
adhered to the regulatory requirement that they spend
$500 on care, then the atypical parties would never

spend $1,000, an undesirable outcome. But if there
were a possibility of their liability despite satisfaction of the regulatory requirement, then the atypical
parties with normal assets would, desirably, be led to

spend the additional $500 on care. Thus liability
would serve as a socially beneficial adjunct to regulation.

(Notice also that use of liability alone would be

inferior to the described joint use of regulation and
liability; for use of liability alone would result in
the parties with limited assets (typical or not) taking
no care rather than spending $500.)

17. To illustrate this point, consider the situation described
in note 16, supra, but with the following changes: the
atypical parties are now distinguished by the characteristic that they would not lower the risk of an accident
at all even by spending the first $500 on care, so

fn— 11

their making expenditures on care would be undesirable;

and some fraction of all parties escape the attention
of the regulatory authority.
In this situation, the regulatory standard would
again have to be the same for both types of parties due

to the regulatory authority's inability to tell them
apart, and the best standard would again correspond to
an expenditure of $500 on care, as the atypical parties
are assumed to be so few in number.
Now consider the question whether under the negli-

gence rule an atypical party ought to be found negligent
if he failed to satisfy the regulatory requirement that

he spend $500 on care. This question is relevant of
course because an atypical party might not have been
forced to spend $500 as he might have escaped the atten-

tion of the regulatory authority. Clearly, if such an
atypical party would face no risk of liability for

negligence if he did not spend the $500, then he would

not do so, the desirable result. On the other hand, if
he did face the risk of liability for negligence if he
failed to spend the $500, then he might be led to do

so, an undesirable result. Hence, it is best for the
standard of due care to be relaxed and for atypical
parties to escape liability for negligence despite
their failure to adhere to the regulatory standard of
care.

f n- 12

It should perhaps also be stated that this example
illustrates why there is no conundrum represented by
the social "demand" for a certain type of behavior
through announcement of regulatory requirements and yet
the social "acceptance" of different behavior in the
courts' sometimes not finding parties negligent for

failing to comply with the requirements. The social
rationality of this seeming contradiction lies in an
appreciation of the significance of lack of information
for the formulation of optimal regulatory requirements-the significance being that the requirements should not

be viewed as an unconditional demand but rather as a
demand which, while generally good, ought to be relaxed
if the circumstances warrant it.

18. Suppose that the likelihood of the three which I cut
down striking my neighbor's garage roof is .1%; that
the probability of a dispute over my negligence should
this happen is 50%; that the chance of such a dispute

being settled is 75%; that the administrative cost of a
settlement would be $100; that the chance of a dispute
leading to a trial is 25%; and that the administrative

cost of a trial would be $1,000. Then the likelihood
of a dispute ending in settlement would be .0375% and
that of one resulting in litigation would be .0125%;

hence the expected adminisrative cost associated with
my chopping down the tree would be only .0375%x$lOO +

.0125%x$1,000 = $.0375

+

$.125 = $1625.

It is hard to

fn- 13

imagine that a regulatory authority could, ex ante,

determine compliance with its safety requirements
concerning the felling of my tree for a comparably low
amount.

19. To enforce effectively a regulation concerning an
aspect of behavior which can be modified from one
instance to the next (I can run for the bus tomorrow
even if I do not today) will generally require fairly

frequent monitoring. By contrast, to ensure that a
fixed physical object is in place (strong elevator

cables are installed) will not require very frequent
monitoring (the cables are not going to be replaced
tomorrow).

20. The reader will recall that this point was made more
generally in note 7, supra, but a brief discussion here

of an example may be helpful. Consider the acquisition
of information about the risks associated with use of a

pesticide by firms engaged in the business of extermi-

nation. To determine the nature of these risks using
even existing knowledge as incorporated in professional

medical, public health and other related literature
would require a staff of experts; a several—person
exterminator firm could hardly be expected to undertake

the required literature search, let alone be able to

evaluate and interpret what is in the literature. And

it is of course extremely unlikely that the firm would
engage in research of its own. Moreover, to the argument

f n- 14

that most exterminator firms might jointly and collectively finance efforts to evaluate current knowledge
about the pesticide and to engage in further research,

two answers can be given. First, it might be hard to
make the firms contribute toward the common pool, for
each might expect to benefit from the group's efforts
regardless of its own contribution (the information
about risk being difficult to restrict to those making

contributions). Second, parties outside the group of
exterminator firms (manufacturers of the pesticide,

farmers who use the pesticide) might generally benefit
from the information about the pesticide risk, meaning

the motive of the exterminator finns to acquire
information about the pesticide might be less than
society's (quite apart from the group's problems in
that

making its members contribute to the pool).
21. With regard to health-related and envirorunental risks,
for example, we argued that the likelihood that harm

would not be attributed to responsible parties is an
important consideration favoring use of regulation.

But we made no such suggestion in regard to the risk of
explosions in tunnels or the failure of elevator cables;
we justified regulation of these risks on other grounds.

22. See William L. Prosser, Handbook of the Law of Torts,
4th ed., 1971, at 203.

23. See Prosser, note 22, supra, 204. Also, at 203, Prosser
writes, "The statutory standard is no more than a

f n— 15

minimum, and it does not necessarily preclude a finding
that the actor was negligent in failing to take addi-

tional precautions. Thus the requirement of a hand
signal on a left turn does not mean that . . . a driver
is absolved from all obligation to slow down, keep a
proper lookout, and proceed with reasonable care."
This statement is in perfect agreement with our expla—
nation from Part II, supra, where we said that the
statutory standard ought to be regarded as a minimum
since there would be parties who ought to take greater
care and would not do so were they to escape liability
on account of complying with the statutory standard.

24. See Prosser, note 22, supra, at 197.

25. See Prosser, note 22, supra, at 198. At 198 and 199,
Prosser writes that "it has been held not to be negligence to violate . .

. a statute because of physical

circumstances beyond the driver's control, as where his
lights suddenly go out on the highway at night .

Another valid excuse is that of emergency, as where one
drives on the left because the right is blocked, or a
child dashes to the street .

. ." Such

results obviously

agree with what we said in Part II; that is, we do not

want the driver to stay on the right side of the road
when the child dashes out; holding him liable for being
on the left would give him a socially undesirable
incentive to drive on the right.

f n- 16

26. See, for example, Note, "Allocating the Cost of Hazardous
Waste Disposal," Harvard Law Review 94 (1981) 584 and

references cited therein; Richard A. Epstein, "The
Principles of Environmental Protection: The Case of
the Superfund" Cato Journal 2 (1982) 9; and "Public
Threat Feared in Loopholes in Laws on Toxic Waste
Dumping," p.l, New York Times, June 6, 1983.

27. See, for example, Stephen Breyer, Regulation and its
Reform, Harvard University Press, 1982, Chapter 14;
Albert Nichols and Richard Zeckhauser, Government Comes

to the Workplace: An Assessment of O.S.H.A., The
Public Interest 39 (1977); and for a general introduction
to the issues, Ch. 5 of Richard Stewart and James
Krier, Environmental Law and Policy, Second Edition,
Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, 1978.

27a. See for example George Stigler, The Economic Theory of
Regulation, 2 Bell J. Econ. 3 (1971), and Sam

Peltzman,

Toward a More General Theory of Regulation, 19 J. of
Law and Econ. 211 (1976).

28. The type of fine we have in mind is calculated to equal
the harm done; from the perspective of the party who
does harm, therefore, it is as if he is strictly liable.

29. If the tree falls on my neighbor's garage, it is more
likely that he would sue to collect compensation but
that he would report the incident so that I would have
to pay a fine.

f n— 17

30. Many environmental and health related harms of course
provide cases in point.

31. This point is made in Robert Ellickson, Alternatives to

Zoning: Covenants, Nuisance Rules, and Fines on Land
Use Controls, 40 Univ. Chi. L. Rev. 681 (1973).

32. Thus, for example, just as regulation of the safety of
nuclear reactors might be justified by the fact that
incapacity to pay for possible harm would dilute the
deterrent of liability, so could enjoining their operations in certain circumstances be justified.

