                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHAT DETERMINES BILATERAL TRADE FLOWS?

                                          Marianne Baxter
                                        Michael A. Kouparitsas

                                         Working Paper 12188
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12188


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




Marianne Baxter: Department of Economics, Boston University, 270 Bay State Road, Boston MA 02215,
USA (mbaxter@bu.edu). Michael Kouparitsas: Economic Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, 230 South Lasalle Street, Chicago IL 60604, USA (mkoup@frbchi.org). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Marianne Baxter and Michael A. Kouparitsas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
What Determines Bilateral Trade Flows?
Marianne Baxter and Michael A. Kouparitsas
NBER Working Paper No. 12188
April 2006
JEL No. F10, C23, O24

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper undertakes an exhaustive search for robust determinants of international trade, where
"robustness" is tested using three popular empirical methods. The paper is frankly atheoretical: our
goal is solely to establish statistically robust relationships. Along the way, however, we relate our
results to the empirical results obtained by prior researchers and to the received theory of
international trade. We find that robust variables include a measure of the scale of factor
endowments; fixed exchange rates; the level of development; and current account restrictions.
Variables that are robust under certain methods and sample periods include exchange rate volatility,
an index of sectoral similarity, and currency union. However, the estimated coefficient n currency
union is much smaller than estimates obtained by prior researchers.

Marianne Baxter
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mbaxter@bu.edu

Michael A. Kouparitsas
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
mkoup@frbchi.org
1       Introduction

This investigation undertakes an exhaustive search for robust determinants of inter-
national trade, where "robustness" is tested using three popular empirical methods.
The paper is frankly atheoretical: our goal is solely to establish statistically robust
relationships. Along the way, we relate our results to the empirical results obtained
by prior researchers and to the received theories of international trade. However, we
stop well short of testing any particular theory of international trade.
    Our dataset includes 92 countries. We collected data on 24 variables that measure
a wide range of economic, geographic, and policy environments. Our data span six
five-year intervals from 1970 to 1995. Our list of potential trade determinants includes
the following: the standard gravity variables (distance, common language, common
border, etc.), endowments of the factors of production, including land, labor, and
capital; the level of economic development; various measures of barriers to trade;
exchange rate volatility; currency union; and similarity of industrial structure. We
follow prior research in the measurement of variables insofar as this is possible.
    We consider three methods for testing the robustness of the relationship between
bilateral trade and the candidate explanatory variables listed above. First, we em-
ploy the method proposed by Leamer (1983, 1985). Second, we employ the method
subsequently proposed by Sala-i-Martin (1997). Third and finally, we use an ap-
proach recently suggested by Hendry (1995). We compare the results obtained with
these diﬀerent approaches to measuring robustness. We find that the Sala-i-Martin
and Hendry approaches are more ‘permissive’ than the Leamer method, in the sense
that variables found not to be robust under the Leamer approach can be robust with
the Sala-i-Martin and Hendry approaches. There is no clear ordering between the
Sala-i-Martin and Hendry methods in the sense that variables that are not robust
under one approach can be robust with the other.1
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our data sources and the
    1
    Hoover and Perez (2004) find, in their study of the determinants of long-term growth, that the
Leamer approach is the least permissive, while the Sala-i-Martin approach is the most permissive.
They show, through Monte-Carlo experiments, that the Leamer approach tends to reject variables
that are in the true model, while the Sala-i-Martin approach tends to include variables that are
not in the true model. This reflects size and power distortions associated with these approaches.
The Hendry approach is shown to have near normal size and power, which implies that it includes
variables that are in the true model and rejects those that are not.


                                                2
construction of each of the variables that will be considered as a potential determi-
nant of bilateral trade. Section 3 provides a detailed description of each of the three
empirical methods for determining robustness. Section 4 begins the presentation of
our empirical results with analysis of benchmark econometric models. Specifically,
this section presents regressions of trade on gravity variables alone in order to pro-
vide a point of comparison for econometric models that include additional regressors.
This section also provides benchmark regressions of bilateral trade on each potential
explanatory variable, one variable at a time. These benchmark regressions are re-
peated with the set of gravity variables included, in addition to the single additional
explanatory variable.
    Section 5 is the heart of the paper, containing the robustness tests for each poten-
tial determinant of trade. The results are presented in groups by variable. For each
variable (or group of variables), we present the results and compare our results to
those obtained in the prior literature. We oﬀer possible interpretations of the results
in light of received theories of international trade. Section 6 concludes with a brief
summary of our results.


2       Data and Measurement

This section describes the measurement and construction of variables used in this
study. The measure of bilateral trade between countries i and j in period t, Tijt , is
defined as follows:

                                      Tijt = ln(Xijt + Xjit )

where Xijt denotes exports from country i to country j in period t.2 The variables
that may explain bilateral trade fall naturally into several distinct groups, as described
below.
    2
    This specification is motivated by the standard gravity model of bilateral trade and for that
reason is typically the focus of studies of the determinants of trade (see the survey by Rose (2004)).




                                                  3
2.1     Gravity variables
The so-called “gravity variables” have been the primary focus of empirical studies of
international trade for over 50 years.3 The gravity variables are included in every
‘robustness’ regression that we run. The reason for the universal inclusion of the
gravity variables is that we wish to determine which variables, in addition to the
gravity variables, can explain bilateral trade. Our gravity variables consist of the
following group:

2.1.1    Distance

The greater is the distance between two countries, the higher are the costs associated
with transporting goods, thereby reducing the gains from trade and reducing trade
itself. We use Glick and Rose’s (2002) estimate of the log of the distance between
two countries.



2.1.2    Common border

Many researchers have shown that the influence of distance on trade is non-linear,
with trade between bordering countries being significantly greater than countries
that are positioned at similar distances, but do not share a border. We use Glick
and Rose’s (2002) indicator variable of common borders, which takes the value 1 if a
country pair shares a border and zero otherwise.

2.1.3    Cultural distance

Measures of ‘cultural distance’ have also been considered as determinants of inter-
national trade (see, for example, Glick and Rose (2002)). The most commonly used
measure of ‘cultural distance’ is an indicator of common language, which takes the
value 1 if the country pair shares the same language and zero otherwise.

2.1.4    Colonial ties

In recent work, Glick and Rose (2002) investigate the importance of colonial ties for
international trade. They provide two measures of this variable. The first measure
   3
     See Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for a recent contribution in this area and a comprehensive
list of references.


                                                4
is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the country pair includes a colonizer and one
of its current or past colonies, and is zero otherwise. The second variable is also an
indicator variable, set equal to 1 for country pairs that had the same colonizer.

2.1.5   Economic scale

Empirical gravity models have shown that measures of economic scale are important
determinants of bilateral trade. We follow much of the empirical literature by in-
cluding the log of the product of the two countries’ levels of GDP as a scale variable
in the group of gravity variables. The inclusion of population is also widespread in
the empirical trade determinants literature. In many cases, it is included indirectly
through the natural logarithm of the product of countries’ per capita levels of GDP.
We therefore include per capita GDP as an additional measure of economic scale.

2.2     Factor Endowments


A country’s factor endowments are thought to be important determinants of the
country’s pattern of trade. The longstanding belief in the importance of factor en-
dowments is a consequence of the widespread acceptance of the Heckscher-Ohlin
model of international trade. Specifically, the Heckscher-Ohlin theory predicts that
country pairs should trade more, the more diﬀerent are their factor endowments.
    There is a voluminous literature that bears on the importance of factor endow-
ments for international trade, and we will mentioned only a few contributions to this
literature in order to motivate the inclusion of the factor endowment variables in
our investigation. Early empirical investigations based on the Heckscher-Ohlin the-
ory were quite negative; the classic paper is by Bowen, Leamer, Sveikauskas (1987).
More recently, Frankel, Stein and Wei (1995, Table 4), in their study of regional
trading blocks, find weak to no support for the Heckscher-Ohlin hypothesis. Frankel,
Stein and Wei include, along with other variables diﬀerences in capital-labor ratios,
educational attainment and land-labor ratios in a standard gravity equation. They
find that the coeﬃcients on these variables are positive as predicted by the theory
but are not statistically significant. In contrast, a recent study by Ghosh and Ya-
marik (2005) finds that diﬀerences in per capita land are positively related to bilateral
trade flows and are robust to the inclusion of other variables in their dataset, while
diﬀerences in educational attainment and capital-labor ratios are significant in their

                                           5
base regressions, but fragile to the inclusion of indicators of stage of development.
Recent papers by Debaere (2003) and Romalis (2004) also find strong empirical sup-
port for Rybczynski and Heckscher-Ohlin predictions on factor abundance and factor
content.
    We measure the endowments of three factors of production: human capital, physi-
cal capital, and land. The details of the measurement of these variables is summarized
below.

2.2.1   Human capital

We use a measure of human capital as our measure of labor input. Human capital is
measured using the Barro-Lee (1996, 1997) data on average years of schooling in the
population over age 15. We construct two measures of human capital in a bilateral
setting. The first is the log of the product of education in the two countries, where
Fit stands for the factor endowment in country i in period t:

                      Factor Intensity Measure 1: ln(Fit ∗ Fjt )                   (1)

This variable has not been used in prior studies of the determinants of bilateral
trade. We included it in our investigation because we viewed it as an indicator of
the ‘scale’ of human capital in the two countries, similar to the way that the product
of GDP measures is a scale variable in the standard gravity equation. Obviously,
this measure is higher the higher is human capital in either of the two countries. But
another interesting aspect of this measure is that it is higher the more equal are the
levels of human capital in the two countries, holding fixed the aggregate amount of
human capital in the country pair.
    Our second measure of human capital is more commonly used, and is given by the
log of the ratio of the highest to the lowest levels of education in the two countries:

             Factor Intensity Measure 2: ln[max(Fit , Fjt )/ min(Fit , Fjt )]      (2)
This indicator has been used in a number of empirical trade studies, including those
discussed earlier.

2.2.2   Physical capital

In parallel with our measure of human capital, we construct two measures of a coun-
try’s endowment of physical capital per worker, using data from Easterly and Levine

                                            6
(2001). The first measure is the log of the product of physical capital per worker in
the two countries; the second is the absolute value of the log of the ratio.

2.2.3     Land

Our measure of land is arable land per capita, since we feel that arable land is more
closely related to a country’s productive capacity than is total land. We construct
two measures of bilateral land variables, in parallel with the measures for human and
physical capital described above.

2.3     Stage of development
The levels of development within the two countries that comprise a country pair
may aﬀect trade within the country pair. Following IMF classifications reported in
the World Economic Outlook (2000) we split countries into two groups, “developed
countries” and “developing countries". We then construct an indicator variable that
takes on the value 1 if both countries are from the same group, and zero otherwise.4
    Theory alone is not definite on the sign of the relationship between this vari-
able and the extent of bilateral trade. On the one hand, the “New View” of inter-
national trade developed by Helpman and Krugman (1985) stressed the large and
growing trade between developed countries, with the bulk of this trade occurring in
goods produced under monopolistic competition. On the other hand, Ricardian and
Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson models would predict more trade between countries that
are diﬀerent from one another.
    Frankel, Stein and Wei (1995), Thursby and Thursby (1987) and Yamarik and
Ghosh (2005) measure relative development as diﬀerences in log real per capita GDP.
Yamarik and Ghosh use two additional measures. The first is diﬀerences in the share
of manufacturing in total GDP, the idea being that more developed countries should
have larger manufacturing shares. The second is diﬀerences in the share of manu-
facturing in total merchandise trade. We approach the measurement of industrial
structure more directly by constructing an index of industrial similarity (defined be-
low) first suggested by Shea (1996).
   4
    Because of constraints imposed by the inclusion of the country fixed eﬀects, we cannot separately
identify (i) a coeﬃcient for a pair of two developed countries and (ii) a coeﬃcient for a pair of
developing countries.




                                                 7
    Frankel, Stein and Wei (1995), Thursby and Thursby (1987) and Yamarik and
Ghosh (2005) find that diﬀerences in per capital GDP enter the gravity model with a
negative sign. All 3 measures used by Yamarik and Ghosh had estimated coeﬃcients
whose significance levels were sensitive to the inclusion of other variables. No clear
conclusion could therefore be drawn.
    The absolute level of development in a country pair is typically measured as the
log of the product of per capita GDPs. Although the size of its coeﬃcient estimates
vary across studies, this measure of absolute development positively, and statistically
significantly related to explaining bilateral trade. The Yamarik and Ghosh (2005)
analysis includes the average share of manufacturing in GDP and average share of
manufacturing in merchandise exports. They find that both variables are robust,
each with a positive sign.
    With the exception of Klein and Shambaugh (2004), we did not find studies that
look at discrete indicators of the stage of development. Klein and Shambaugh run
separate regressions for industrial-industrial, industrial-developing, and developing-
developing pairs. There is some variation in coeﬃcient estimates across these bilateral
pairs, but no clear pattern of results emerges from their study.

2.4    Industrial similarity
We explore the importance of the stage of development on bilateral trade from another
angle by comparing the industrial structure of bilateral trading partners. We use the
following measure of industrial similarity suggested by Shea (1996):

                                          X
                                          N
                                                 sin sjn
                                           i=n
                             ISIij = v        v                                    (3)
                                     u        uN
                                     uXN      uX
                                     u
                                     t   s2in t  s2jn
                                         i=n         i=n


where sin is industry n’s share of country i’s GDP. This indicator takes on values
between 0 and 1. If a bilateral pair have the same sectoral structure this indicator
is 1. The indicator takes on the value zero if both countries are specialized in
production, i.e., sin = 0 whenever sjn > 0.




                                          8
2.5     Impediments to flows of goods and capital
There are a wide range of explicit trade barriers used by the countries in our dataset.
They can be roughly broken down into two groups. The first group measures barriers
to flows of goods. Most of these barriers are non-tariﬀ barriers, such as quotas, which
explicitly limit the flows of goods. Tariﬀ barriers are typically levied as an ad valorem
tax (i.e., proportional to the value of an imported good). Due to data limitations,
most prior studies of the determinants of bilateral trade have not used explicit mea-
sures of ad valorem tariﬀs or tariﬀ-equivalent estimates of non-tariﬀ barriers. In some
cases, researchers have used country-specific or country-pair fixed eﬀects to capture
these trade barriers. In general, summary measures of trade liberalization are used,
such as indicator variables that are one if country pairs are members of a free trade
area and zero otherwise.
    The Klein and Shambaugh (2004) study estimates the relationship between mem-
bership of a regional free trade area and bilateral trade flows. They find that, on
average, members of free trade areas have trade flows that are 50 percent higher than
trading partners that are not part of a free trade area. Ghosh and Yamarik (2004)
use a large set of indicator variables that are specific to membership in a particu-
lar free trade area (e.g., NAFTA) in their Bayesian extreme bounds analysis of free
trade areas. They find that the relationship between this large set of regional free
trade agreements and bilateral trade is fragile. We follow this approach by employ-
ing Glick and Rose’s (2002) indicator variable that captures all free trade areas and
customs unions. This variable takes the value 1 if such an agreement exists between
the bilateral pair during the sample period, and 0 otherwise.
    The second set of trade barriers deals with restrictions on capital flows or cur-
rent account transactions. Perturbations of a country’s capital/financial account has
eﬀects on the country’s current and future trade flows. For example, factors that
restrict capital flows may restrict the size of the current account and net export bal-
ance. Therefore, current account restrictions may be an important determinant of
the level of trade between countries.

2.5.1   Multiple exchange rate arrangements

There are numerous exchange rate arrangements employed by the countries in our
dataset. These arrangements range from (i) membership in a currency union (in


                                           9
which the members share the same legal tender and monetary policy, as in the Euro-
pean Monetary Union) to (ii) a policy under which the exchange rate is determined
by market forces (as in the United States). In some cases, countries have multiple
exchange rate arrangements. For example, Nigeria has four exchange rates: (i) the
oﬃcial exchange rate which results from auctions of foreign exchange by the Nigerian
Central Bank; (ii) the interbank rate at which commercial banks transact among
themselves; (iii) the retail "bureau de change" rate; and (iv) the parallel market rate.
We explore the extent to which these multiple arrangements are barriers to trade.
Specifically, we construct an indicator variable using data from Milesi-Ferretti (1998)
that takes the value 2 if both countries have multiple exchange rate arrangements,
takes the value 1 if only one country has a multiple exchange rate arrangement and
is zero otherwise.5

2.5.2      Controls on current account transactions

Many countries place restrictions on current account transactions. These restrictions
aﬀect, among other things, (i) the way in which payments must be made on mer-
chandise and service imports and (ii) the repatriation of proceeds of merchandise
and service exports. These restrictions can also aﬀect ‘invisible’ transactions, such as
(i) investment related transactions (interest, profits/dividends, and rent/lease pay-
ments), and (ii) payments to non-resident labor. We explore the extent to which these
restrictions on current account transactions aﬀect bilateral trade flows by employing
an indicator variable takes the value 2 if both countries impose controls, 1 if only one
country imposes controls, and zero otherwise.

2.5.3      Specific surrender requirements

Countries sometimes impose “specific surrender” requirements on proceeds from
exports or invisible transactions when these transactions exceed a specified value or
if the transaction involves particular goods or services. In most cases, the exporter
must surrender the proceeds from a transaction to the monetary authority which
exchanges the proceeds at a regulated rate of exchange. This type of arrangement
is common in countries that have adopted a currency board. For example, during
the period under which Argentina had a currency board, surrender requirements
were imposed on export proceeds exceeding $200,000. We assess the impact of the
  5
      We are grateful to Dr. Milesi-Ferretti for sharing his data with us.

                                                  10
restrictions on bilateral trade by using an indicator variable takes the value 2 if both
countries have specific surrender requirements, 1 if only one country does, and is zero
otherwise.

2.5.4      Controls on the capital account

Most countries employ some form of capital control that regulates the inward and
outward flow of capital. These restrictions include prohibitions; need for prior ap-
proval, authorization and notification; discriminatory taxes; reserve requirements;
interest penalties; and limits on the holding of assets at home by non-residents and
abroad by residents. We explore the implications of these controls for bilateral trade
by employing an indicator variable that takes the value 2 if both countries impose
capital controls, 1 if only one country imposes capital controls, and zero otherwise.



2.6       Currency Union
There is much current interest in determining the eﬀect of currency union on trade.
Indeed, one important reason for forming a currency union is the promotion of trade
within the union. Consequently, there is a large literature on the eﬀects of currency
union on trade.6 Most studies indicate a positive eﬀect of currency union on trade,
so it is a natural candidate for our investigation of robust determinants of bilateral
trade. Because a currency union can be explicit (a shared currency or a formal treaty)
or implicit (a unilateral fixing of the exchange rate), we construct two measures of
currency union.

2.6.1      Explicit and implied currency union

We employ an indicator variable constructed by Glick and Rose (1992) that takes on
the value 1 if the country pair is part of an explicit or implied currency union. In an
explicit currency union, the currency of one country circulates in the second country
as the sole legal tender. Alternatively, the two countries may both be members of a
union in which the same legal tender is shared by the members of the union. Adopting
such systems generally requires the complete surrender of monetary policy to another
  6
      This literature is summarized in Rose (2004).




                                                 11
nation’s monetary authority (US Federal Reserve in the case of "dollarization") or
an independent international monetary authority (ECB, for EMU members).
    Implied currency unions are defined as situations in which at least one of the two
countries maintains a formal exchange rate peg to another country’s currency. This
may take the form of a currency board arrangement. A less restrictive alternative
is a conventional peg in which a country agrees to peg its currency at a fixed rate to
another currency or a basket of currencies. Implied unions do not include crawling
pegs, crawling bands, horizontal bands or managed floating arrangements since they
allow the bilateral rate of exchange to vary over time.

2.6.2   Fixed exchange rate

We constructed an indicator that takes the value 1 if the country pair maintained a
constant monthly nominal exchange rate during a five year interval, and 0 otherwise.
This variable includes all explicit and implicit currency unions, as well as informal
pegging arrangements and any other policy that, ex post, meant that the exchange
rate between the two countries did not vary during the sample. This variable is
obviously broader than the variable used by Glick and Rose. We include this variable
because we wish to investigate whether the formal nature of the currency unions
selected by the Glick/Rose variable are more strongly related to bilateral trade than
this alternative, broader measure.

2.7     Exchange Rate Variability
     There are numerous exchange rate arrangements employed by the countries in
our dataset, as discussed above. The wide range of exchange-rate policies implies
wide variation in the levels of exchange-rate volatility among the country pairs in
our dataset. According to theoretical analyses, the relationship between exchange
rate volatility and bilateral trade is ambiguous and typically depends on the source
of exchange rate fluctuations (see, for example Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2000),
and Sercu and Uppal (2003)).
    The empirical literature is less ambiguous. There is a large body of empirical
research which finds that higher exchange rate volatility is associated with lower trade
volumes. Klein and Shambaugh (2004) , in their comprehensive analysis of the eﬀect
of fixed versus floating exchange rates on trade flows, find that direct exchange rate
pegs have a statistically significant positive relationship with the volume of bilateral

                                          12
trade flows. In contrast, they find that indirect pegs do not have a statistically
significant relationship with trade flows.7 Exchange rate volatility is explored further
in their paper by including an indicator of the level and square of the volatility of
bilateral exchange rates, where volatility is measured as the standard deviation of
monthly exchange rates over a fixed period. They find that the level of exchange
rate volatility has a statistically significant negative relationship with trade flows.
However, Tenreyro (2004) argues that Klein and Shambaugh use econometric methods
that lead to biased estimates. She argues that, in the absence of these biases,
exchange rate volatility does not have a significant impact on trade flows.
    Although the jury is still out on the empirical importance of exchange rate vari-
ability as a determinant of trade volumes, it deserves inclusion in our study. We
therefore investigate the importance of exchange rate volatility on trade flows using
a measure of exchange rate volatility defined as the standard deviation of the growth
rate of the nominal monthly bilateral exchange rate over the preceding five-year pe-
riod.


3       Methodology

The goal of this paper is to determine which economic variables are important de-
terminants of bilateral trade. To accomplish this, we employ three methods that
have been proposed as appropriate for isolating robust relationships. This section
describes these three methods.

3.1     The “Extreme Bounds Analysis” (EBA) of Leamer
This sub-section describes the extreme-bounds analysis (EBA) suggested by Leamer
(1983). The general form of the regression used for the EBA is follows. The variable
Tijt measures log bilateral trade between countries i and j in period t:
                          Tijt = β A Aijt + β M Mijt + β Z Zijt + vijt .                     (4)
    The independent variables are of three types, as follows. A denotes a set of
variables that appear in every regression, thus these are referred to as "always included
    7
    An indirect peg is defined as follows. If countries A and B have explicit pegs with C, then A
and B have an indirect peg. To take another example, if A is pegged to B, and B is pegged to C,
then A and C have an indirect peg.

                                               13
variables". This set may be empty. In our application, however, A includes the
gravity variables. M is the variable which is being tested for robustness. Z contains
one or more other variables that prior studies have suggested may be an important
determinant of bilateral trade flows. The EBA is performed by varying the set of
variables included in Z for a particular M-variable. Following Levine and Renelt
(1992), we include three Z-variables in each regression, drawn from the complete set
of potential Z-variables, denoted C. Let N denote maximum number of sets of three
Z-variables that can be drawn from C. The extreme bounds of an M-variable are
established by ordering from lowest to highest the 90 percent confidence intervals of
the N estimates of β M from the exhaustive set of Z-variable draws from C. We will
say that an M-variable is robust if the lower and upper bounds of this ordering are
the same sign.

3.2    The “Extreme Bounds Analysis” of Sala-i-Martin
    Sala-i-Martin (1997) proposed an alternative application of the extreme-bounds
concept. Sala-i-Martin’s methodology is derived from Leamer’s (1983) EBA method-
ology and uses the same regression model (4). However, Sala-i-Martin’s approach
diﬀers in the way the extreme bounds of the variable of interest are calculated. In
this case, the extreme bounds of an M-variable are based on a weighted average of
the N point estimates of β M from the exhaustive set of Z-variable draws from C.
        bMn denote the estimate of β M from regressing bilateral trade on the A-
    Let β
variables, on the variable M, and on the nth Z-variable, Zn . Let ω n denote the
weight (defined below) attached to the estimate β Mn . Then the Sala-i-Martin’s
point estimate of β M from this set of N regression models is defined as:

                                        X
                                        N
                                 bM ≡
                                 β              bMn .
                                              ωnβ                                 (5)
                                        n=1

The weights, ω n , are constructed as follows. Let LMn denote the likelihood function
of the regression model evaluated at β   bMn , T, M and Zn . The weight ωn is then
computed as
                                             LMn
                                   ω n ≡ PN         .                             (6)
                                            n=1 LMn




                                         14
                bM is computed as follows:
The variance of β

                                              X
                                              N
                                  b2β M
                                  σ       ≡           b2β M n
                                                    ωnσ                             (7)
                                              n=1

                                          bMn . According to Sala-i-Martin’s approach,
      b2β Mn is the estimated variance of β
where σ
an M-variable is robust if the t-statistic of βbM exceeds the critical value associated
with the researcher’s desired level of significance.

3.3    The “General to Specific” approach of Hendry
We use a version of Hendry’s (1995) general-to-specific approach. Our method begins
with a regression of the dependent variable (i.e., log bilateral trade) on all potential
explanatory variables. Next we break the set of explanatory variables into two
groups: a set S of variables with statistically significant coeﬃcients; and the set of
remaining variables, NS, with coeﬃcients that are not statistically significant, which
includes a variable, L, with the lowest t-statistic. After partitioning the variables in
this way we drop the variable L and regress the dependent variable on the remaining
set of explanatory variables. If there is a new L-variable, we drop it from the set of
explanatory variables and regress the dependent variable on the further reduced set
of explanatory variables. This process repeats until there are no variables in NS.


4     Benchmark Results

This section begins the presentation of the results of our empirical investigation. We
present first the results for the gravity variables alone, as a benchmark for comparison
with the results of including other variables. Next, we present regressions for each
potential explanatory variable, with one variable per regression. Finally, we combine
the gravity variables with the other potential explanatory variables, introducing the
additional explanatory variables one at a time.

4.1    Gravity variables only
We begin our investigation with estimation of the eﬀects of the gravity variables on
trade:

                                              15
                               Tijt = Dijt + β A Aijt + vijt                          (8)

where Tijt is bilateral trade between countries i and j, Dijt is a matrix of country and
year fixed eﬀects, and Aijt is the vector of gravity variables. Since we have data on
one important variable—sectoral similarity—only for a subset of countries, throughout
the paper we run each regression for the full sample and again for the restricted
sample. The results are shown in Table 1-A (full sample) and Table 1-B (restricted
sample).
    The results are, for the most part, independent of the sample and have the ex-
pected sign. For example, distance has a negative coeﬃcient: countries located
closer to each other trade more. A common border and a common language are
associated with higher trade. Trade is higher if the two countries had a common
colonizer or are in a colonial relationship. There is a negative estimated coeﬃcient on
the variable indicating a current colonial relationship, but this variable is not signifi-
cant. The log product of GDP is positive and significant in both samples. However,
the log product of per capita GDP is positive and significant in the full sample, but
negative and not significant in the restricted sample.

4.2    Other variables only
Next, we explore the importance of the non-gravity variables—our “M-variables”— in
explaining bilateral trade when considered one at a time. We run the following
regression for each M-variable, including in each regression country and year fixed
eﬀects, denoted Dijt :

                              Tijt = Dijt + β M Mijt + vijt .                         (9)

    Table 2 summarizes the results from these regressions. As in the case of Table
1, there are two panels corresponding to the large sample (which includes all avail-
able data) and the restricted sample (which includes only observations for which the
sectoral similarity variable can be constructed). The results are similar across the
two panels. Beginning with measure 1 for factor intensity (see equation (1), we
find that education and capital per worker are both significantly related to bilateral
trade. This means that trade is higher between country pairs for which the products
of endowments of human and physical capital are higher. By contrast, measure 1 for


                                            16
arable land per worker is not significant in the full sample, although it is significantly
less than zero in the restricted sample.
    Measure 2 of the factor intensity variables measures the diﬀerence between factor
endowments in the two countries—see equation (2). Here, we find that education, cap-
ital, and arable land are all significantly, negatively related to bilateral trade. Thus,
the more dissimilar are the two countries in terms of all three factor endowments, the
less they trade.
    The development-indicator variable takes on the value 1 if both countries are at
the same stage of development: either both are developed countries or both are
developing countries.8 This indicator is strongly significant across both samples.
The variable measuring industrial similarity, which is 1 if countries have identical
sectoral shares and zero if they have no similarities, is positive and significant in
the smaller sample. Thus, countries trade more, the more similar is the industrial
structure in the two countries.
    We considered four measures of capital controls. In the full sample, each measure
of controls carries a negative estimated coeﬃcient, although only two are significantly
diﬀerent from zero: (i) multiple exchange rates and (ii) restrictions on the current
account. In the restricted sample, only the variable measuring restrictions on the
current account is significant—the coeﬃcient is negative, as in the full sample. These
findings suggest that most types of capital controls have little eﬀect on bilateral trade,
even when considered in isolation. The only variable that has a significant eﬀect
across both samples is the variable measuring restrictions on the current account.
This is quite understandable, as this restriction is directly targeting bilateral trade.
The full-sample coeﬃcient of 0.09 means that trade is 9% lower if one country of
the pair under consideration has trade restrictions, and trade is 2*0.09=0.18 or 18%
lower if both countries have current account restrictions. In economic terms, this is
a very significant eﬀect.
    We turn next to measures of currency union. A large and growing literature
has found that currency union is associated with higher trade among members of
the union. Our measure of currency union is the same measure used in Glick and
Rose (2002). This variable has a significant, positive coeﬃcient in both the large and
restricted samples. We also include the ‘fixed exchange rate’ variable defined earlier—
   8
    Because we include country and year fixed eﬀects, we cannot independently estimate the eﬀects
of “two developed countries” and “two developing countries.”



                                               17
this variable takes on the value 1 if the pair of countries had a fixed exchange rate
over the sample period, regardless of whether there was an explicit currency union
or currency board in place. This variable is also significantly, positively related to
bilateral trade.
    Membership in a customs union is significantly, positively related to trade in
both samples, as one would expect and as policymakers hope is the case when they
establish a customs union or free trade area. Finally, bilateral exchange rate volatility
is negatively, significantly related to trade. This result adds weight to the theoretical
and empirical literatures that argue exchange rate volatility lowers bilateral trade.

4.3    Combining gravity and ‘other’ variables
Next, we explore the importance of the non-gravity variables—our “M-variables”— in
explaining bilateral trade when considered one at a time in a regression that also
includes the gravity variables, Aijt . We run the following regression for each M-
variable, including country and year fixed eﬀects, Dijt , in each regression:

                         Tijt = Dijt + β A Aijt + β M Mijt + vijt                   (10)

    Table 3 summarizes the results from these regressions. As in the case of Table 1
there are two panels, corresponding to the large sample (which includes all available
data) and the restricted sample (which includes only observations for which the sec-
toral similarity variable can be constructed). The results are broadly similar across
the two panels.
    Our main findings are as follows. Measure 1 of the capital and education variables
remain positive and significant, although the estimated coeﬃcient on capital per
worker is much smaller once the gravity variables are included. None of the measure
2 factor intensity variables is significant, although all three were significantly negative
in Table 2 in which the gravity variables were omitted.
    The indicator for same stage of development is now negative and strongly significant—
recall this variable was significantly, positively related to trade in Table 2. Evidently
there are important interactions between this variable and one or more of the gravity
variables. The results for the capital controls are similar to the results in Table
2—in fact, the coeﬃcient estimates are larger when the gravity is included. Thus, re-
strictions on the current account are still significantly, negatively related to bilateral


                                           18
trade.
    The coeﬃcients on the currency union variable and the fixed exchange rate variable
are still positive and significant, although the size of the coeﬃcients is much smaller
once the gravity variables are included. For example, in Table 2 the full-sample
estimate of the currency union coeﬃcient was 2.62, but falls to 0.47 once the gravity
variables are included (Table 3). Similarly, the full-sample estimate of the fixed-
exchange-rate variable was 1.90 in Table 2, but is only 0.43 in Table 3.
    The customs union variable is no longer significant once the gravity variables are
included—it was positive and significant in Table 2. The measure of exchange rate
volatility also loses statistical significance when the gravity variables are included.
    Table 3-B contains results for the sectoral similarity variable. The coeﬃcient is
negative and statistically significant when the gravity variables are included. This
means that countries trade less, the more similar are their industrial structures. Re-
call that, in Table 2, the coeﬃcient was positive and statistically significant, implying
more trade the more similar are industrial structures.
    Overall, we find that only a few variables retain their statistically significant re-
lationship to bilateral trade once the gravity variables are included. Of those that
remain significant, several had estimated coeﬃcients that are markedly smaller once
gravity is taken into account. The development indicator and the sectoral similarity
variable are both still significant once gravity variables are included, but the sign
of the coeﬃcients change from negative to positive. Our conclusion from this sec-
tion is that the statistical significance of economic determinants of trade is strongly
influenced by the inclusion of gravity variables.


5    Results: Robustness
In this section, we study each group of variables in turn, discussing their ‘robustness’
and how this varies across the three empirical methodologies. Robustness the three
approaches are contained in three tables, corresponding to the approaches of Leamer
(Table 4), Sala-i-Martin (Table 5), and Hendry (Table 6). Table 7 summarizes our
results, showing which variables and methods lead to findings of robustness for specific
variables.




                                           19
5.1    Factor Endowments
We consider three factors: human capital (education); physical capital per worker;
and arable land. As discussed in Section 2, we have two measures of each variable: see
equations (1) and (2). Our baseline results in the prior section showed that measure
1 for education and capital-per-worker were significantly, positively related to trade
even when gravity variables were taken into account. Measure 2 was significant only
for some variables and some sample periods.
    The results for the Leamer approach are shown in shown in Table 4. As with
previous tables, there are separate panels for the full sample (Panel A) and for the
restricted sample (Panel B). In the full sample, measure 1 for education, capital-per-
worker, and arable-land-per-worker are robustly, positively related to bilateral trade.
None of the measure 2 variables is significant. The results for the restricted sample
are similar, with the exception that measure 1 for arable land is no longer robust. In
general, the Leamer test is considered the most restrictive of the robustness tests, so
we are interested to learn how our results change when we consider other tests.
    The results for the Sala-i-Martin test is reported in Table 5. These results are
the same as the Leamer results, with just one exception: measure 2 for capital-per-
worker is now robust (with a negative coeﬃcient), although only in the full sample
and only with a 10% significance level.
    The Hendry results are reported in Table 6. Measure 1 for education and capital-
per-worker are robust, as they were with the Leamer and Sala-i-Martin tests. Measure
1 for arable land is not robust with the Hendry approach, although it was robust in
the full sample with both prior tests. The Hendry results diﬀer from Leamer and
Sala-i-Martin for the measure-2 variables. In the large sample, all three endowment
measures are significant: education and land carry positive coeﬃcients, while capital
has a negative coeﬃcient. In the small sample, only capital per worker is robust,
and continues to have a negative coeﬃcient.
    Overall, our results indicate that measure 1 endowment variables, which measure
the product of the endowments, are robust, especially human capital and physical
capital. There is less support for the measure-2 variables, which measure diﬀerences
in endowments, and which have been the traditional variables included in studies
of the determinants of trade. Thus, our results have apparently uncovered a new
measure of factor endowments which has significant role in explaining (in a statistical
sense) bilateral trade. This measure, being the product of endowments in the two

                                          20
countries, is higher the higher is the sum of endowments in the two countries. Holding
fixed the level of the sum of endowments, this measure is higher the more equal are
the endowments across the two countries.

5.2     Development indicator
We considered the stage of development as a possible determinant of international
trade. Since our focus is on bilateral trade, our development indicator takes on the
value 1 if the two countries share the same level of development (either developed or
developing), and takes on the value 0 if one country is developed while the other is
developing.9 Economic theory is largely silent on the potential importance of devel-
opment levels as determinants of trade volume. However, our empirical investigation
suggests that the level of development is strongly associated, in a statistical sense,
with bilateral trade. We turn now to the results.
    Tables 2A and 2B gives the baseline estimates for the development indicator co-
eﬃcient for the full and restricted samples. In both sample periods the coeﬃcient
estimate is positive and significantly diﬀerent from zero. However, Table 3 shows that
the point estimates in both samples become negative and significant when the gravity
variables are added to the regression of bilateral trade on the development indicator:
the baseline estimates are -0.61 in the large sample, and -0.63 in the restricted sample.
Evidently, the development indicator is correlated with some variables in the set of
gravity variables, and the coeﬃcient estimate for development is thus highly sensitive
to the inclusion of the gravity variables.
    Table 4 presents robustness tests using the Leamer method. In both samples, the
development indicator is robust and has a negative coeﬃcient. This means that, other
things held constant, a pair of countries at the same level of development experiences
less bilateral trade than a pair of countries with diﬀering levels of development.
    It is plausible that the level of development might be highly correlated with the
sectoral structure of economic activity. For example, highly developed economies
tend to produce and trade manufactured goods, while developing countries tend to
produce and trade agricultural goods and commodities. Thus, it is notable that the
presence of the variable that measures industrial similarity (ISI) in Table 4-B does
not reduce the significance of the development variable. The industrial similarity
   9
   Because of the presence of country and year fixed eﬀects, it is not possible to separately estimate
coeﬃcients for (i) two developed countries and (ii) two developing countries.


                                                 21
variable, by contrast is not robust, as we discuss further in the next sub-section.
    Tables 5 and 6 present robustness results for the Sala-i-Martin and Hendry meth-
ods. With both methods and for both sub-samples, the development indicator con-
tinues to be robust with a negative coeﬃcient. Further, the coeﬃcient estimates are
very similar to those obtained with the Leamer approach. Overall, the results are
very clear for the development variable: other things held constant, two countries at
a similar level of development have lower bilateral trade.

5.3    Industrial Similarity
Industrial structure has long played an important role in theories of international
trade. Although theories diﬀer on the determinants of production and trade, the
central questions investigated by theoretical and empirical studies of international
trade remain “who produces what” and “who trades what.” Therefore, we con-
structed a variable that measures similarity in two countries’ industrial structures
and investigate the importance of industrial structure as a determinant of bilateral
trade. Unfortunately, the necessary data for computation of the sectoral similarity
variable is available only for a subset of country pairs. This reduces our sample from
10947 observations to 7274 observations. Thus, we present results throughout for
the full sample (Tables 2A through 7A) and for the restricted sample for which the
sectoral similarity variable can be computed (Tables 2B through 7B).
    Table 2B shows that sectoral similarity is positively, significantly related to bilat-
eral trade when considered on its own (together with country and year fixed eﬀects.)
Table 3B, however, shows that the inclusion of the gravity variables changes this re-
sult dramatically: the coeﬃcient estimate for sectoral similarity is now significantly
negative.
    The robustness results are as follows. With the Leamer approach (Table 4B),
the sectoral similarity variable has a negative and significant coeﬃcient (-0.58) in the
baseline case, but the variable is not robust. With the less restrictive Sala-i-Martin
approach, the sectoral similarity variable continues to carry a negative coeﬃcient (-
0.45) and is found to be robust. Sectoral similarity is also found to be robust under
the Hendry approach, with a coeﬃcient estimate of -0.71.
    Overall, our findings indicate that similarity of the sectoral structure of production
is negatively related to bilateral trade: country pairs with similar patterns of produc-
tion trade less than country pairs for which the pattern of production diﬀers between

                                           22
the two countries. These findings lend support to theories of international trade
which highlight country-level diﬀerences as important for trade (e.g., the Ricardian
and Heckscher-Ohlin theories), and cast doubt on theories that predict that trade
will rise with increased industrial similarity (e.g., the theory presented in Helpman
and Krugman (1989)).

5.4    Capital controls
We turn next to investigation of the importance of policies that directly or indirectly
interfere with international trade. As described in Section 2, we consider four policies:
(i) multiple exchange rate arrangements; (ii) restrictions on current account trans-
actions; (iii) restrictions on capital account transactions; and (iv) specific surrender
requirements.
    The baseline univariate regressions, reported in Table 2, can be summarized as
follows. In the large sample, both (i) multiple exchange rates and (ii) restrictions
on the current account, have a significant (negative) eﬀect on bilateral trade. In the
restricted sample, only current account restrictions are significant. When the gravity
variables are included (Tables 3A-B), only the variable measuring current account
restrictions continues to be significantly, negatively related to bilateral trade. This is
true for both samples. The significance of this variable is easy to understand, since
current account restrictions, in their various forms, are all designed to aﬀect external
trade.
    But are these restrictions robust? Table 4 reports that the current account
restrictions are robustly, negatively related to bilateral trade in both sample periods.
None of the other capital controls considered is robust. The Sala-i-Martin and Hendry
approaches confirm the findings of the Leamer approach—the estimated coeﬃcients
for current account restrictions are negative and robust. Across all of these methods,
the point estimates of the coeﬃcient lies in the range -0.08 to -0.12. Thus, if one of
the two countries has current account restrictions trade is reduced by 8%-12%, while
if both countries have current account restrictions, trade is reduced by 16%-25%.

5.5    Fixed Exchange Rates and Currency Union
One of the most compelling arguments for currency union and other fixed-exchange-
rate arrangements is that these arrangements facilitate international trade by remov-


                                           23
ing exchange-rate uncertainty. Fixed exchange rate arrangements may be made
through public announcements and codified through explicit currency union, or they
may be more informal through fixing arrangements that are not part of a publicly
announced exchange-rate policy.
    We attempt to distinguish between these two types of arrangements in the follow-
ing way. We say that a pair of countries has fixed exchange rates vis-a-vis each other
if the bilateral exchange rate does not change over the course of the 5-year sample
period. This definition thus includes both explicit and implicit fixing arrangements.
A subset of these country pairs is engaged in an explicit currency union, and we code
this arrangement separately by assigning to the currency union variable the value 1 to
country pairs in a currency union, and the value 0 to country pairs not in a currency
union, even if they have fixed exchange rates.
    There are only 48 observations out of a possible 10947 in which there is a currency
union. (A particular country pair can appear as an ‘observation’ more than once if
the currency union was in place for more than one five-year period). There are 131
additional observations in which there is a fixed exchange rate for the country pair
for that sample period, but for which there was no currency union, either explicit
or implicit. The country pairs in our sample that have currency union or a fixed
exchange rate are concentrated mainly in two groups. The first group, accounting for
17 of the 49 observations, is characterized by a large, developed country paired with
a less-developed country (e.g., the US paired with Panama, Dominican Republic,
and Guatemala, for a total of 13 observations); and the UK paired with Ireland,
Cypress, and Malawi, for a total of 4 observations). The second group consists
of pairs of developing countries, primarily African countries. The second group
includes a few cases in which a country pair has an implied union through each of
these countries’ currency union with the US. Aside from this, the remaining 26
observations are country pairs from the group that includes Togo, Cameroon, Benin,
Senegal, Barbados, Mali, and Guyana.
    There are many more country pairs for which there is a fixed exchange rate but
no explicit or implicit currency union. However, these country pairs typically do not
involve two developed countries. The only example in which two OECD countries
had a fixed bilateral exchange rate for one or more 5-periods is the US-Mexico. Thus,
we suggest great caution be exercised in interpreting the results of our investigation
as shedding light on the potential results of currency union between developed coun-


                                          24
tries. More bluntly, our results may not have much to say about the trade eﬀects
of the European Monetary Union. Since our data is the same as data used by prior
researchers, a similar caution may apply to interpretation of results obtained in this
prior work.

5.5.1   Currency union

The currency union variable takes on the value 1 if the country pair has an explicit
currency union, and zero otherwise. Thus, the currency union variable selects a
subset of the country pairs that had a value of 1 for the fixed-exchange-rate variable.
Frankel and Rose (2000, Table 1) report a coeﬃcient in the range 1.22-1.72 in a
regression of bilateral trade on gravity variables and the currency union variable,
which they report is consistent with the earlier estimate of Rose (2000), and is also
consistent with Glick and Rose (2002).
    Under the Leamer approach, currency union is fragile. Although the baseline
point estimates are 0.47 (large sample) and 0.71 (restricted sample), the standard
errors of these estimates are large enough that the estimates are barely significant
in the baseline case, and are fragile when we allow for combinations of Z-variables.
Under the Sala-i-Martin approach, by contrast, currency union is robust, although
just barely so. In the large sample, the coeﬃcient estimate is 0.44 with a standard
error of 0.22. With the restricted sample, the estimate is 0.66 with a standard error
of 0.32. The point estimates are thus similar to those obtained under the Leamer
approach, and are much smaller than the estimates obtained by Frankel and Rose
(2000). The less-restrictive nature of the Sala-i-Martin approach leads to a result
of robustness, with t-statistics of about 2.05, while the Leamer approach finds that
currency union is not robust. Turning to the Hendry approach, we find that currency
union does not appear as a robust determinant of bilateral trade in either sample.
    Overall, our results cast serious doubt on the hypothesis that currency union
plays an important, independent role in determining bilateral trade. The significant
role of the currency union variable uncovered by previous studies is not robust to the
inclusion of other variables. Of course, this is a purely statistical result and it is
possible that currency union is important for bilateral trade but in a way that is too
subtle to be detected using these methods.




                                          25
5.5.2   Fixed exchange rate

 The fixed-exchange-rate variable takes on the value 1 if the country pair has an
exchange rate that does not change during the sample period. This will include
both explicit currency unions and informal fixing arrangements. Looking first at
the Leamer approach, the baseline coeﬃcient estimate for the fixed exchange rate
variable is 0.43 for the large sample, and is found to be robust. In the restricted
sample, however, the baseline point estimate is 0.30 with a standard error of 0.16,
and is therefore not robust.
    Turning to the Sala-i-Martin approach, we find that fixed-exchange-rate variable
is robust in both the large and the restricted samples, with coeﬃcient point estimates
of 0.42 and 0.27, respectively. With the Hendry approach, the fixed exchange rate
variable is significant in the large sample. as it was with the Leamer approach. The
point estimate is 0.30 with a standard error of 0.12. In the restricted sample, however,
the fixed-exchange-rate variable is not significant, which again is what was found with
the Leamer approach.
    Overall, the fixed-exchange-rate variable is robust with all methods in the large
sample, but is only robust under the Sala-i-Martin approach in the restricted sample.
In all cases, the coeﬃcient estimate is in the range 0.25-0.45, with standard errors
about 0.12-0.16.

5.6     Free trade areas/customs union
The next variable considered is an indicator variable that takes on the value 1 if
the country pair was in a free trade area or customs union. Theory would predict
a positive relationship between the level of bilateral trade and the existence of a
customs union, since the object of a customs union is to enhance trade within the
union by reducing trade barriers among members. It is surprising, therefore, that
our robustness analysis gives a very mixed view of the relationship between free trade
areas and the level of bilateral trade.
    Beginning with the Leamer method, we find that the free trade area variable is
not robust. This is true whether one considers the large sample or the restricted
sample. Further, the point estimates in the baseline cases are actually negative—we
expected a positive coeﬃcient. Using the Sala-i-Martin method, we find that the
free trade area variable has a positive, but fragile coeﬃcient in the full-sample and a


                                          26
robust negative coeﬃcient in the small sample. Turning to the Hendry approach, the
free trade area variable has a positive coeﬃcient and is robust in the full sample, but
is fragile in the small sample.

5.7    Exchange rate volatility
Exchange rate volatility is widely believed to reduce bilateral trade, as it adds an
additional source of price uncertainty to goods sold abroad. Our baseline regressions
in Table 2 supported this view: the coeﬃcient estimate ranges from -0.63 (large
sample) to -0.82 (restricted sample) and are strongly significant in both samples.
When the gravity variables are included (Table 3), the coeﬃcient estimates are still
negative, but are much smaller in absolute value and are no longer stastistically
significant.
    The robustness results are as follows. With the Leamer approach, as shown in
Table 4, the baseline estimates for exchange rate volatility are negative but insignif-
icant, implying that exchange-rate volatility is not robust in either sample. The
Sala-i-Martin and Hendry approaches yield similar results: exchange rate volatility
is not robust in the large sample, although it is robust in the restricted sample. In
the restricted sample, however, the robustness result is not strong, in the sense that
the t-statistic is -1.70 with the Sala-i-Martin approach (the normal CDF is 0.96), and
is -1.69 with the Hendry approach. Thus the finding of robustness would not hold
if the test were more stringent with, for example, a 1% significance level. Overall,
we find that exchange rate volatility is robustly, negatively related to trade, but this
finding of robustness is not strong, relying as it does on particular methods, particular
sample periods, and particular significance levels.


6     Conclusion
This paper was intended to be a purely empirical investigation, attempting to draw
together several methods for assessing robustness, and applying these methods a
longstanding question: “What determines international trade?” We attempted to
be quite inclusive in our approach to selecting variables as potential determinants of
international trade. In this concluding section, we will simply summarize the salient
results. For reference, we have collected all the robustness results into a single table,
Table 7.

                                           27
    First, we find that one particular measure of bilateral factor endowments are
robust determinants of trade. Specifically, the product of endowments in the two
countries is positively related to bilateral trade. Holding fixed the level of the sum
of endowments, trade is higher the more equal are the endowments across the two
countries. This measure had not generally been included in prior studies of the
empirical determinants of international trade. The more commonly-used measure,
involving bilateral diﬀerences in factor endowments, was not robust.
    Second, we found that bilateral trade was lower if two countries shared the same
stage of development, and that this result is robust across all three methods. Bilateral
trade was also found to be lower the more similar are industrial structures in the
country pair: this variable was not robust with the Leamer approach but was robust
with the Hendry and Sala-i-Martin approaches. We studied a variety of capital
controls, and found that the only robust restriction was restriction on current account
transactions which, as expected, is negatively related to trade.
    We explored the importance of currency union and also the importance of a fixed
exchange rate (which includes currency unions). We found that fixed exchange rates
were positively related to bilateral trade, but were robust only in the full sample
(and in the restricted sample under the Sala-i-Martin approach). The results for
currency union were weaker: although the point estimates of the coeﬃcients were
always positive, they were robust only under the Sala-i-Martin approach. Further,
the point estimates of the coeﬃcient on currency union were much smaller than those
reported in earlier research.
    The results on customs unions are mixed. This variable has a positive coeﬃcient
and is robust under the Hendry method in the full sample, but in the restricted sample
the coeﬃcient estimate is negative and is robust only for the Sala-i-Martin approach.
It is impossible to draw any conclusions from this pattern of results. Finally, there is
weak evidence that exchange rate volatility is negatively related to trade. Although
the coeﬃcient point estimates are negative, as is consistent with prior research, the
variable is robust only in the restricted sample.




                                          28
References
 [1] Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop (2003) “Gravity with Gravitas: A
     Solution to the Border Puzzle," American Economic Review 93(1) March , 170-
     92.

 [2] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2000) “Does Exchange-Rate Stabil-
     ity Increase Trade and Welfare?” American Economic Review 90(5) December ,
     1093-1109.

 [3] Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1996) “Schooling Quality in a Cross Section
     of Countries, AER, Papers and Proceedings, 86(2) (May 1996), 218-223.

 [4] Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1997) “International Measures of Schooling
     Years and Schooling Quality", National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper 6198, September 1997.

 [5] Bowen, Harry; Edward Leamer and Leo Sveikauskas, “Multicountry, Multifactor
     Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory,” American Economic Review 1987, 791-
     809.

 [6] Debaere, Peter (2003) "Relative Factor Abundance and Trade" Journal of Po-
     litical Economy 11, 589-610.

 [7] Easterly, William and Ross Levine (2001) “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Styl-
     ized Facts and Growth Models,” World Bank Economic Review 15(2), 177-219.

 [8] Feenstra, Robert C. (2000) "World Trade Flows, 1980-1997" University of
     California-Davis, Institute for Government Aﬀairs Working Paper, March 2000.

 [9] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey and Harry Bowen (1997), "World Trade
     Flows, 1970-1992, with Production and Tariﬀ Data" National Bureau of Eco-
     nomic Research Working Paper 5910, January 1997.

[10] Frankel, Jeﬀrey, Ernesto Stein and Shang-Jin Wei, 1995, "Trading Blocs and
     the Americas: The Natural, the Unnatural and the Supernatural" Journal of
     Development Economics 47, 61-95.




                                       29
[11] Frankel, Jeﬀrey and Andrew Rose (2002) “An Estimate of the Eﬀect of Currency
     Unions on Trade and Output,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVII.2, 437-
     466.

[12] Ghosh, Sucharita and Steven Yamarik (2004) "Are Regional Trading Arrange-
     ments Trade Creating? An Application of Extreme Bounds Analysis" Journal
     of International Economics 63, 369-395.

[13] Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (2002) “Does a Currency Union Aﬀect Trade?
     The Time Series Evidence," European Economic Review 46(6), 1125-1151.

[14] Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman (1989) "Trade Policy and Market
     Structure" MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).

[15] Hendry, David (1995) Dynamic Econometrics, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
     United Kingdom.

[16] Hoover, Kevin and Stephen Perez (2004) “Truth and Robustness in Cross-
     country Growth Regressions," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 66(5),
     765-798.

[17] International Monetary Fund (2000) " World Economic Outlook" October 2000.

[18] Klein, Michael and Jay C. Shambaugh (2004) "Fixed Exchange Rates and Trade"
     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10696, August 2004.

[19] Leamer, Edward (1983) "Let’s Take the Con Out of Econometrics" American
     Economic Review 73(1), 31-43.

[20] Leamer, Edward (1985) "Sensitivity Analysis Would Help" American Economic
     Review 75(3), 308-313.

[21] Levine, Ross and David Renelt (1992) “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-country
     Growth Regressions,” American Economic Review 82(4), 942-963.

[22] Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria (1998) “Why Capital Controls? Theory and Evi-
     dence” in: Eijﬃnger, S., and Huizinga, H., Positive Political Economy: Theory
     and Evidence. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England., 217-247.

[23] Penn World Tables, Version 5.6, University of Pennsylvania.

                                        30
[24] Rose, Andrew (2000) “One Money, One Market? The Eﬀect of Common Cur-
     rencies on International Trade,” Economic Policy 30, 7-33.

[25] Rose, Andrew (2004) “A Meta-Analysis of the Eﬀect of Common Currencies
     on International Trade,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
     10373, March 2004.

[26] Rose, Andrew and Jeﬀrey Frankel (2004) “Estimating the Eﬀect of Currency
     Unions on Trade and Output," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper 7857, August 2000.

[27] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (1997) “I have Just Run Two Million Regressions,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 87(2), 178-183.

[28] Sercu, Piet and Raman Uppal (2003) "Exchange Rate Volatility and Interna-
     tional Trade: A General Equilibrium Analysis" European Economic Review 47

[29] Shea, John (1996) "Comovements in Cities" Carnegie Rochester Conference Se-
     ries on Public Policy 44, 169-206.

[30] Tenreyro, Silvana (2004) "On the Trade Impact of Nominal Exchange Rate
     Volatility" Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper.

[31] Thursby, Jerry and Marie C. Thursby (1987) "Bilateral Trade Flows, the Linder
     Hypothesis, and Exchange Risk" The Review of Economics and Statistics 69(3),
     488-495.

[32] United Nations Industrial Development Organization (2000) "Industrial Statis-
     tics Database, 3-Digit Level of ISIC (Rev.2) 1963-1998 on CD ROM".

[33] United Nations Statistical Division (2001) "Statistical Yearbook, Forty Seventh
     Issue on CD ROM".

[34] Yamarik, Steven and Sucharita Gosh (2005) "A Sensitivity Analysis of the Grav-
     ity Model" The International Trade Journal 19(1), 83-126.

[35] World Bank (1998) "World Development Indicators on CD ROM".




                                        31
                                 Table 1: Gravity Variables Only
                             Includes Country and Year Fixed Effects
                                           A. Full Sample                B. Restricted sample
                                         10947 observations               7274 observations
Variables                          β       se(β)     t-stat R-sq.     β     se(β)    t-stat R-sq.
Distance (DIST)                  -1.26      0.02    -51.47 0.81     -1.28 0.03      -42.44 0.82
Common Border (BRDR)              0.32      0.11      3.00           0.30 0.13        2.27
Common Language (LANG)            0.71      0.05     15.30           0.66 0.06       11.71
Common Colonizer (COMCOL)         0.27      0.07      3.71           0.47 0.09        5.22
Current Colony (CURCOL)          -0.84      0.59     -1.43          -0.86 0.59       -1.45
Colonial Relationship (COLONY)    1.03      0.09     11.39           1.21 0.11       10.59
GDP (GDP)                         0.83      0.13      6.46           1.09 0.16        6.72
Per Capita GDP (GDPPC)            0.39      0.13      3.01          -0.04 0.17       -0.21
       Table 2-A: Basic Regressions including one M-Variable, Country and Year Fixed Effects
                               Large Sample: No Sectoral Similarity
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                β      se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                          0.50    0.11     4.59    0.72
Log[Fi*Fj]                   Capital per Worker (CAP1)                  0.84    0.07    12.73    0.72
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)            -0.11    0.10    -1.04    0.72

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                         -0.60   0.05    -11.38    0.72
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker (CAP2)                 -0.31   0.02    -17.20    0.73
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)            -0.11   0.03     -4.04    0.72

Development Indicator       Same Stage of Development (DEV)            0.36    0.04      8.72    0.72

Capital Controls            Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)              -0.09   0.04     -2.22    0.72
                            Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)      -0.09   0.04     -2.23    0.72
                            Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)      -0.01   0.05     -0.16    0.72
                            Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)      -0.04   0.05     -0.98    0.72

Currency Union              Fixed exchange rate (FE)                   1.90    0.14    13.56     0.72
                            Currency Union (CU)                        2.62    0.26    10.24     0.72

Customs Union               Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)        2.46    0.12    20.08     0.73

Financial                   Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)   -0.63   0.07     -8.52    0.72
       Table 2-B: Basic Regressions including one M-Variable, Country and Year Fixed Effects
                            Restricted Sample: Includes Sectoral Similarity
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                 β    se(β) t-stat.    R-sq
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                           0.79  0.14    5.56    0.74
Log[Fi*Fj]                   Capital per Worker (CAP1)                   0.76  0.08    9.31    0.74
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)             -0.41  0.14   -2.99    0.73

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                         -0.53   0.07    -7.73   0.74
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker (CAP2)                 -0.25   0.02   -11.35   0.74
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)            -0.09   0.03    -3.03   0.73

Development Indicator       Same Stage of Development (DEV)            0.28    0.05    5.62    0.74
                            Sectoral Similarity (ISI)                  0.98    0.20    4.88    0.74

Capital Controls            Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)              -0.08   0.05    -1.47   0.73
                            Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)      -0.12   0.05    -2.30   0.73
                            Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)       0.04   0.06     0.74   0.73
                            Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)       0.04   0.06     0.72   0.73

Currency Union              Fixed exchange rate (FE)                   1.08    0.19    5.59    0.74
                            Currency Union (CU)                        2.49    0.38    6.48    0.74

Customs Union               Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)        1.79    0.16   11.04    0.74

Financial                   Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)   -0.82   0.11    -7.78   0.74
 Table 3-A: Regressions including one M-Variable, Gravity Variables, Country and Year Fixed Effects
                                Large Sample: No Sectoral Similarity
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                  β       se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                            0.57     0.10     5.97    0.81
Log[Fi*Fj]                   Capital per Worker (CAP1)                    0.30     0.07     4.52    0.81
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)               0.17     0.09     1.79    0.81

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                             0.07   0.05      1.47    0.81
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker (CAP2)                     0.01   0.02      0.88    0.81
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)            2.46E-03   0.02      0.11    0.81

Development Indicator       Same Stage of Development (DEV)               -0.57   0.04    -15.58    0.81

Capital Controls            Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)                 -0.02   0.04     -0.67    0.81
                            Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)         -0.08   0.03     -2.55    0.81
                            Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)          0.01   0.04      0.35    0.81
                            Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)          0.02   0.04      0.57    0.81

Currency Union              Fixed exchange rate (FE)                       0.43   0.12      3.61    0.81
                            Currency Union (CU)                            0.47   0.22      2.19    0.81

Customs Union               Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)           -0.01   0.11     -0.07    0.81

Financial                   Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)      -0.04   0.07     -0.68    0.81
 Table 3-B: Regressions including one M-Variable, Gravity Variables, Country and Year Fixed Effects
                           Restricted Sample: Includes Sectoral Similarity
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                   β    se(β)     t-stat.   R-sq
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                             0.62    0.13     4.85    0.82
Log[Fi*Fj]                   Capital per Worker (CAP1)                     0.28    0.08     3.28    0.82
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)                0.10    0.14     0.74    0.82

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                             0.12    0.06     2.11    0.82
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker (CAP2)                     0.05    0.02     2.38    0.82
                             Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)            1.42E-02    0.02     0.57    0.82

Development Indicator       Same Stage of Development (DEV)               -0.61    0.04   -13.69    0.82
                            Sectoral Similarity (ISI)                     -0.58    0.17    -3.39    0.82

Capital Controls            Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)                 -0.04    0.04    -0.95    0.82
                            Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)         -0.13    0.04    -3.03    0.82
                            Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)          0.00    0.05    -0.03    0.82
                            Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)          0.02    0.05     0.47    0.82

Currency Union              Fixed exchange rate (FE)                       0.30    0.16     1.86    0.82
                            Currency Union (CU)                            0.71    0.32     2.20    0.82

Customs Union               Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)           -0.58    0.14    -3.99    0.82

Financial                   Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)      -0.16    0.09    -1.69    0.82
                                          Table 4-A: Robust regression using Leamer Approach
                                        Large Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Not Included
                                                                                                                            Robust/
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)             β      se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq   ZVAR1 ZVAR2 ZVAR3      Fragile
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                      0.70    0.10     6.99     0.81   LAND2 EDUC2   FE       Robust
Log[Fi*Fj]                                                          0.57    0.10     5.97     0.81
                                                                    0.45    0.10     4.43     0.82   DEV     EDUC2   CAP2

                            Capital per Worker (CAP1)               0.33    0.07     4.91     0.81   LAND2   CAP2     FE    Robust
                                                                    0.30    0.07     4.52     0.81
                                                                    0.16    0.07     2.27     0.82   DEV     EDUC1   CAP2

                            Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)          0.25    0.09     2.67     0.81   EDUC1   CAP1    ERV    Robust
                                                                    0.17    0.09     1.79     0.81
                                                                    0.15    0.09     1.66     0.81   EDUC1    CC2    CC2

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                      0.17    0.05    3.56      0.81   EDUC1   CAP1     FE    Fragile
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)]                                        0.07    0.05    1.47      0.81
                                                                    -0.18   0.05    -3.82     0.82   DEV     LAND1   FTA

                            Capital per Worker (CAP2)               0.03    0.02    1.83      0.81   EDUC1   CAP1     FE    Fragile
                                                                    0.01    0.02    0.88      0.81
                                                                    -0.16   0.02    -8.76     0.82   DEV     CAP1    FTA

                            Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)          0.03    0.02    1.31      0.82   DEV     LAND1   CAP1   Fragile
                                                                    0.00    0.02    0.11      0.81
                                                                    0.00    0.02    -0.01     0.81   EDUC1   CAP1    CU

Development Indicator       Same Stage of Development (DEV)         -0.59   0.04    -15.15    0.82   EDUC1   EDUC2    FE    Robust
                                                                    -0.57   0.04    -15.58    0.81
                                                                    -0.80   0.04    -18.26    0.82   CAP2     CC2    FTA
                           Table 4-A (continued): Robust regression using Leamer Approach
                              Large Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Not Included
                                                                                                                      Robust/
Variable Group     "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                  β     se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq   ZVAR1 ZVAR2 ZVAR3      Fragile
Capital Controls   Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)              0.02    0.04     0.60     0.81    CAP1  CC2    FE        Fragile
                                                              -0.02   0.04     -0.67    0.81
                                                              -0.03   0.04     -0.86    0.81   LAND1    CC4    CU

                   Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)      -0.06   0.03    -1.97     0.81   EDUC1   EDUC2    FE    Robust
                                                              -0.08   0.03    -2.55     0.81
                                                              -0.10   0.03    -2.93     0.82   DEV     CAP2    CC4

                   Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)      0.04    0.04    1.00      0.81   CAP1     CC2     FE    Fragile
                                                              0.01    0.04    0.35      0.81
                                                              -0.01   0.05    -0.17     0.81   LAND1   CAP1    CC4

                   Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)      0.06    0.04     1.43     0.81   CAP1     CC2     FE    Fragile
                                                              0.02    0.04     0.57     0.81
                                                              0.00    0.04     0.05     0.81   EDUC1   CAP2    CC3

Currency Union     Fixed exchange rate (FE)                   0.49    0.12     4.08     0.81   EDUC1   EDUC2   CAP1   Robust
                                                              0.43    0.12     3.61     0.81
                                                              0.26    0.12     2.19     0.82   DEV     CAP2    CC2

                   Currency Union (CU)                        0.54    0.22     2.50     0.81   EDUC1   EDUC2   CAP1   Fragile
                                                              0.47    0.22     2.19     0.81
                                                              0.10    0.22     0.45     0.82   DEV     CAP2    ERV

Customs Union      Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)        0.41    0.11    3.68      0.82   DEV     CAP2    CU     Fragile
                                                              -0.01   0.11    -0.07     0.81
                                                              -0.02   0.11    -0.14     0.81   EDUC1   CAP1     FE

Financial          Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)   0.02    0.07    0.31      0.81   EDUC1    CC2     FE    Fragile
                                                              -0.04   0.07    -0.68     0.81
                                                              -0.10   0.07    -1.52     0.82   DEV     LAND1   CAP1
                                           Table 4-B: Robust regression using Leamer Approach
                                         Restricted Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Included
                                                                                                                         Robust/
Variable Group               "M-Variable" (abbreviation)               β      se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq   ZVAR1 ZVAR2 ZVAR3 Fragile
Factor Intensity, Measure 1: Education (EDUC1)                        0.75    0.13     5.69     0.82   LAND1 EDUC2  FTA Robust
Log[Fi*Fj]                                                            0.62    0.13     4.85     0.82
                                                                      0.47    0.13     3.52     0.83    DEV    EDUC2   CAP1

                            Capital per Worker (CAP1)                 0.33     0.09    3.88     0.82   CAP2     CC4    ERV    Robust
                                                                      0.28     0.08    3.28     0.82
                                                                      0.16     0.08    1.89     0.83    DEV    EDUC1   CAP2

                            Arable Land Per Worker (LAND1)            0.17     0.14    1.20     0.82   EDUC1   CAP2    CAP1   Fragile
                                                                      0.10     0.14    0.74     0.82
                                                                      0.04     0.14    0.27     0.83    DEV    CAP2    CC2

Factor Intensity, Measure 2: Education (EDUC2)                         0.22    0.06     3.57    0.82   EDUC1    CU     ERV    Fragile
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)]                                           0.12    0.06     2.11    0.82
                                                                      -0.26    0.06    -4.15    0.83    DEV    LAND2   CC2

                            Capital per Worker (CAP2)                  0.06    0.02     3.02    0.82   EDUC1   CAP1    CU     Fragile
                                                                       0.05    0.02     2.38    0.82
                                                                      -0.20    0.03    -7.38    0.83    DEV    ERV      ISI

                            Arable Land Per Worker (LAND2)            0.04     0.02    1.52     0.83    DEV    EDUC1   CAP2   Fragile
                                                                      0.01     0.02    0.57     0.82
                                                                      0.01     0.02    0.44     0.82   EDUC2   CAP1    ISI

Development Indicators      Same Stage of Development (DEV)           -0.61    0.05   -12.61    0.83    CU      FTA     ISI   Robust
                                                                      -0.61    0.04   -13.69    0.83
                                                                      -0.84    0.05   -15.28    0.83   EDUC2   CAP2    ISI

                            Industrial Similarity Index (ISI)          0.12    0.18     0.67    0.83    DEV    LAND2   CC2    Fragile
                                                                      -0.58    0.17    -3.39    0.82
                                                                      -0.78    0.21    -3.74    0.83    DEV    EDUC2   CAP2
                           Table 4-B (continued): Robust regression using Leamer Approach
                              Restricted Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Included
                                                                                                                 Robust/
Variable Group     "M-Variable" (abbreviation)                  β     se(β)   t-stat.   R-sq   ZVAR1 ZVAR2 ZVAR3 Fragile
Capital Controls   Multiple Exchange Rates (CC1)               0.02   0.05      0.38    0.82   EDUC1 CAP1   CC2  Fragile
                                                              -0.04   0.04     -0.95    0.82
                                                              -0.05   0.05     -1.10    0.82   LAND1    CC4    ISI

                   Restrictions on Current Account (CC2)      -0.12   0.05    -2.53     0.82    CC1    ERV     ISI   Robust
                                                              -0.13   0.04    -3.03     0.82
                                                              -0.15   0.04    -3.36     0.83   DEV     CAP2    CC4

                   Restrictions on Capital Account (CC3)       0.03   0.05     0.56     0.82   CAP1     CC2    ERV   Fragile
                                                               0.00   0.05    -0.03     0.82
                                                              -0.04   0.06    -0.69     0.82   CAP1     CC4    FTA

                   Specific Surrender Requirements (CC4)       0.07   0.05     1.33     0.82   CAP1     CC2    FE    Fragile
                                                               0.02   0.05     0.47     0.82
                                                              -0.01   0.05    -0.11     0.82   EDUC1   EDUC2   ISI

Currency Union     Fixed exchange rate (FE)                   0.33    0.16     2.03     0.82   LAND1   CAP1    ISI   Fragile
                                                              0.30    0.16     1.86     0.82
                                                              0.14    0.16     0.89     0.83   DEV     CAP2    CC2

                   Currency Union (CU)                        0.76    0.32     2.36     0.82   CAP2    CAP1    CC2   Fragile
                                                              0.71    0.32     2.20     0.82
                                                              0.31    0.32     0.98     0.83   DEV     CAP2    ERV

Customs Union      Free Trade Area or Equivalent (FTA)        -0.04   0.15    -0.24     0.83   DEV     CAP2    ISI   Fragile
                                                              -0.58   0.14    -3.99     0.82
                                                              -0.60   0.14    -4.15     0.82   EDUC1   CAP1    ERV

Financial          Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility (ERV)   -0.10   0.09    -1.03     0.82   EDUC1    CC2    FE    Fragile
                                                              -0.16   0.09    -1.69     0.82
                                                              -0.21   0.09    -2.24     0.83   DEV     CAP1    CC4
                Table 5-A. Robust Determinants of International Trade: Sala-i-Martin Approach
                           Large Sample: Sectoral Similarity Variable Not Included
                                                                                            Normal   Robust/
Variable Group                Independent Variables             β          se(β)   t-stat    CDF     Fragile
Factor Intensity, Measure 1   Education                             0.57    0.10    5.91     1.00    Robust
Log[Fi*Fj]                    Capital per Worker                    0.29    0.07    4.34     1.00    Robust
                              Arable Land Per Worker                0.19    0.09    2.01     0.98    Robust

Factor Intensity, Measure 2 Education                            0.04      0.05      0.93    0.82    Fragile
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker                 -0.02      0.02     -1.26    0.90    Robust
                             Arable Land Per Worker              0.01      0.02      0.34    0.63    Fragile

Development Indicator         Same Stage of Development         -0.63      0.04    -16.17    1.00    Robust

Capital Controls              Multiple Exchange Rates           -0.01      0.04     -0.38    0.65    Fragile
                              Current Account Restrictions      -0.08      0.03     -2.47    0.99    Robust
                              Capital Account Restrictions       0.02      0.04      0.38    0.65    Fragile
                              Specific Surrender Requirements    0.03      0.04      0.67    0.75    Fragile

Currency Union                Fixed Exchange Rate                   0.42   0.12     3.52     1.00    Robust
                              Currency Union                        0.44   0.22     2.05     0.98    Robust

Customs Union                 Free Trade Area or Equivalent         0.08   0.11     0.73     0.77    Fragile

Financial                     Exchange Rate Volatility          -0.04      0.07     -0.64    0.74    Fragile
                Table 5-B. Robust Determinants of International Trade: Sala-i-Martin Approach
                            Restricted Sample: Sectoral Similarity Variable Included
                                                                                            Normal   Robust/
Variable Group                 Independent Variables               β         se(β)   t-stat CDF      Fragile
Factor Intensity, Measure 1    Education                            0.63      0.13    4.88   1.00    Robust
Log[Fi*Fj]                     Capital per Worker                   0.28      0.08    3.32   1.00    Robust
                               Arable Land Per Worker               0.11      0.14    0.81   0.79    Fragile

Factor Intensity, Measure 2    Education                         0.05      0.06      0.77   0.78     Fragile
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)]   Capital per Worker                0.00      0.02     -0.02   0.51     Fragile
                               Arable Land Per Worker            0.02      0.02      0.72   0.76     Fragile

Development Indicators         Same Stage of Development         -0.66     0.05    -13.79   1.00     Robust
                               Industrial Similarity Index       -0.45     0.18     -2.49   0.99     Robust

Capital Controls               Multiple Exchange Rates           -0.03     0.05     -0.64   0.74     Fragile
                               Current Account Restrictions      -0.13     0.04     -2.93   1.00     Robust
                               Capital Account Restrictions       0.00     0.05     -0.10   0.54     Fragile
                               Specific Surrender Requirements    0.03     0.05      0.58   0.72     Fragile

Currency Union                 Fixed Exchange Rate               0.27      0.16      1.70   0.96     Robust
                               Currency Union                    0.66      0.32      2.04   0.98     Robust

Customs Union                  Free Trade Area or Equivalent     -0.47     0.15     -3.25   1.00     Robust

Financial                      Exchange Rate Volatility          -0.16     0.09     -1.70   0.96     Robust
 Table 6: Robust Determinants of International Trade: Hendry Approach
         A. Large Sample: Sectoral Similarity Variable Not Included
Significant Independent Variables          β        se(β)    t-stat R-sq.
Education, Measure 1                       0.55      0.10     5.45 0.82
Capital per Worker, Measure 1              0.15      0.07     2.25
Education, Measure 2                       0.11      0.06     1.96
Capital per Worker, Measure 2             -0.16      0.02    -7.77
Arable Land per Worker, Measure 2          0.22      0.09     2.42
Same Stage of Development                 -0.78      0.04   -17.48
Restrictions on Current Account           -0.07      0.03    -2.28
Fixed Exchange Rate                        0.30      0.12     2.54
Free Trade Area or Equivalent              0.40      0.11     3.55



         B. Restricted Sample: Sectoral Similarity Variable Included
Significant Independent Variables           β        se(β)    t-stat R-sq.
Education, Measure 1                        0.54      0.13     4.27 0.83
Capital per Worker, Measure 1               0.16      0.08     1.86
Capital per Worker, Measure 2              -0.19      0.03    -6.84
Same Stage of Development                  -0.81      0.05   -14.92
Sectoral Similarity                        -0.71      0.21    -3.41
Restrictions on Current Account            -0.12      0.04    -2.79
Exchange Rate Volatility                   -0.16      0.09    -1.69
                                         Table 7-A: Summary of Results
                              Large Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Not Included
Variable group              Specific Variable                                    Leamer    Sala-i-Martin   Hendry
Factor Intensity Variables: Education                                             0.57 *       0.57 *      0.55 *
Log[Fi*Fj]                  Capital per Worker                                    0.30 *       0.29 *      0.15 *
                            Arable Land per Worker                                0.17 *       0.19 *      0.22 *

Factor Intensity Variables: Education                                             0.07         0.04         0.11 *
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker                                   0.01       -0.02 **      -0.16 *
                             Arable Land per Worker                               0.00         0.01           --

Development Indicator           Countries at Same Stage of Development           -0.57 *      -0.63 *      -0.78 *

Capital Controls                Multiple Exchange Rates                          -0.02        -0.01           --
                                Restrictions on Current Account Transactions     -0.08 *      -0.08 *      -0.07 *
                                Restrictions on Capital Account Transactions      0.01         0.02           --
                                Specific Surrender Requirements                   0.02         0.03           --

Currency Union                  Fixed Exchange Rate                               0.43 *      0.42 *       0.30 *
                                Currency Union                                    0.47        0.44 *         --

Customs Union                   Free Trade Area or Equivalent                    -0.01         0.08        0.40 *

Financial Variables             Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility               -0.04        -0.04          --

Notes: * indicates variable is robust at 5% level of statistical significance
      ** indicates variable is robust at 10% level of statistical significance
       -- indicates variable is eliminated in general to specific reduction
                                           Table 7-B: Summary of Results
                              Restricted Sample: Industrial Similarity Variable Included
Variable group              Specific Variable                                    Leamer    Sala-i-Martin   Hendry
Factor Intensity Variables: Education                                             0.62 *       0.63 *      0.54 *
Log[Fi*Fj]                  Capital per Worker                                    0.28 *       0.28 *      0.16 *
                            Arable Land per Worker                                 0.04         0.11         --

Factor Intensity Variables: Education                                             0.12         0.05           --
Log[Max(Fi, Fj)/Min(Fi, Fj)] Capital per Worker                                   0.05         0.00        -0.19 *
                             Arable Land per Worker                               0.01         0.02           --

Development Indicators          Countries at Same Stage of Development           -0.61 *      -0.66 *      -0.81 *
                                Industrial Similarity                             -0.58       -0.45 *      -0.71 *

Capital Controls                Multiple Exchange Rates                           -0.04        -0.03          --
                                Restrictions on Current Account Transactions     -0.13 *      -0.13 *      -0.12 *
                                Restrictions on Capital Account Transactions       0.00        0.00           --
                                Specific Surrender Requirements                    0.02        0.03           --

Currency Union                  Fixed Exchange Rate                               0.30        0.27 *         --
                                Currency Union                                    0.71        0.66 *         --

Customs Union                   Free Trade Area or Equivalent                    -0.58       -0.47 *         --

Financial                       Bilateral Exchange Rate Volatility                -0.16       -0.16 *      -0.16 *

Notes: * indicates variable is robust at 5% level of statistical significance
      ** indicates variable is robust at 10% level of statistical significance
       -- indicates variable is eliminated in general to specific reduction
