                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




AIDS, "REVERSAL" OF THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
                           EVIDENCE FROM AFRICA

                                         Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan

                                           Working Paper 12181
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w12181


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2006




  I thank Emily Oster, Rodrigo Soares, two anonymous referees, and the seminar participants at Bilkent
  University, Brown University, Harvard University School of Public Health, METU, and participants
  of the 2005 conference on \Health, Demographics and Economic Development" at Stanford University,
  of the 2006 AIDS Workshop at Amsterdam Institute for International Development for valuable comments
  and suggestions. I thank Ms. Laura Heaton of the Health Studies Branch, Population Division, the
  U.S. Bureau of Census for providing her HIV estimates. The views expressed herein are those of the
  author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  © 2006 by Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
  may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
  the source.
AIDS, "Reversal" of the Demographic Transition and Economic Development: Evidence from
Africa
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
NBER Working Paper No. 12181
May 2006, Revised June 2010
JEL No. O11,I12,J11,J13

                                             ABSTRACT

Using country- and region-level data, I investigate the effect of HIV/AIDS on fertility in Africa during
1985-2000. Results differ depending on the variation used and the estimation method. Between estimates
that exploit cross-sectional variation suggest a positive significant effect of HIV/AIDS on fertility,
whereas within estimates that are identified of off time-series variation show both positive and negative
results depending on the HIV/AIDS variable used. These within estimates are insignificant in most
of the specifications.


Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu
1         Introduction
“Economics is judged ultimately by how well it helps us understand the world, and how well
we can help improve it.” Gary Becker.


        Nobody doubts that AIDS is the plague of the 21th century. The impact of the epidemic
on economic development is, on the other hand, a fiercely debated issue.1 One of the main
underlying reasons for this debate is the ambiguity surrounding the effect of the epidemic
on the fertility behavior. So far, the empirical literature that investigates the impact of the
disease on the fertility behavior has focused on a single country or on a small set of countries
and delivered a widely varying set of estimates. For example, Young (2005) using household
data on fertility from South Africa and relying on between cohort variation in country level
HIV infection, estimates a large negative effect of HIV prevalence on fertility. Young (2007)
reaches a similar conclusion using similar survey data from 27 countries. Both of these papers
use country level HIV data and individual level fertility data (births). On the other hand,
recent studies using the newly available HIV data based on individual testing from population-
based surveys find no significant effect of the disease on individual fertility behavior. Using
data from 13 countries, for instance, Juhn, Kalemli-Ozcan, Turan (2008) find no significant
effect of the community HIV prevalence on the fertility behavior of HIV negative women.
Fortson (2009) and Fink and Linnemayr (2008) arrive at the same conclusion using the same
data and employing different empirical specifications.
        This paper tries to understand the reasons behind these different results in the literature.
The main difference between these papers seems to be the nature of the HIV data used and
the sample of countries. Thus, we ask the following question: Can we get a general result
concerning HIV/AIDS epidemic and fertility by using a comprehensive data set from many
African countries over time and using different measures for HIV/AIDS?2 I investigate the

    1
      While most of the researchers find negative effects of the epidemic on economic growth, some find no
effect and some even find positive effects. Bloom and Mahal (1997) run cross-country regressions of growth
of GDP per capita on HIV/AIDS prevalence and find no effect. Papageorgiou and Stoytcheva (2007) find a
negative significant effect of AIDS on income per worker but the effect is small. Werker, Ahuja, and Wendell
(2006) instrument HIV/AIDS prevalence by national circumcision rates and show that there is no effect of the
epidemic on growth of the African countries. Corrigan, Gloom, and Mendez (2005) show calibration results
that imply large negative effects of the epidemic on growth. The results of Lorentzen, McMillan, and Wacziarg
(2007) imply significant long-run costs of AIDS on various outcome variables.
    2
      In a related paper, Kalemli-Ozcan (2010b), I focus only on South Africa and replicate Young (2005) using

                                                      1
effect of the epidemic on the total fertility rate (TFR), using country-, and region-level data
both for fertility and HIV from a panel of 44 African countries during 1985–2004. The cross-
time nature of the data allows me to exploit both between and within variation with the same
data set. This is important since different papers in the literature use different sources of
variation; cross-sectional versus time-series. I use four different indicators for HIV/AIDS, two
of which are available both at the country and at the regional level.
    Results differ depending on the estimation method. Between estimates based on country-
and region-level data from Africa suggest a positive effect of HIV/AIDS on fertility. Within
estimates that exploit time series variation show both positive and negative effects depending
on the HIV/AIDS variable used, yielding an insignificant effect in most of the specifications.
    The results contrast with those of Young (2007), who find a strong negative effect of the
epidemic on fertility using similar data from a subset of African countries and also exploit
within country-over time variation. Specifically, Young (2007) and this paper use the exact
same HIV data, though Young (2007) has less countries. The reason for this is the fact that
Young (2007) uses individual level fertility data (births) from surveys whereas this paper uses
country level total fertility rate (TFR) complied by the World Bank to increase the number of
countries. In addition this paper uses AIDS data. Nevertheless, to reconcile the differences, I
replicated Young (2007) result using his data. I show that Young (2007) estimates also turns
out to be statistically insignificant, once the standard errors are clustered at the country level.
This is the appropriate clustering since the treatment is at the country level given the country
level HIV variable.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature. Section 3
examines the data. Section 4 presents the econometric framework and the empirical analysis.
Section 5 concludes.



2     Possible Fertility Responses
Growth models in the tradition of Becker and Barro (1988) that endogenize fertility show
that fertility may decrease as a response to increased life expectancy.3 Hence, declines in

the exact data and the simulation model he used in Young (2005) for South Africa.
   3
     See Cervellati and Sunde (2007), Tamura (2006), Soares (2005), Kalemli-Ozcan (2002), Boldrin and Jones
(2002), Lucas (2002), Galor and Weil (1999), and Ehrlich and Lui (1991) among many others.

                                                    2
mortality could lead to a quantity-quality trade-off where parents have fewer children but
invest more in each child. These models suggest that fertility and mortality are positively
related and behavioral response in fertility can undo and even reverse the initial rise in pop-
ulation size due to higher life expectancy. In the context of these models, HIV/AIDS is a
shock to adult/child longevity, where fertility should respond positively. However, there are
characteristics of HIV/AIDS which suggests that this formulation is overly simplified. First,
field evidence suggests that there is a direct biological impact of the disease which lowers
the fecundity of infected women, an effect which should be considered separately from the
behavioral responses.4,    5


       Second, since it is a sexually transmitted disease, the impact on fertility can come through
changes in sexual behavior, assuming individuals have accurate information about the disease.
The impact of the disease on sexual behavior in Africa has proven to be much debated topic,
where the estimates so far are inconclusive.6
       Third, regardless of changes in sexual behavior, it may be the case that infected women
who know their own status and have knowledge about mother-to-child transmission would
want to reduce fertility rather than give birth to infected children. Again the field evidence
on this channel is mixed.7
       Last but not least, uninfected people, and people who think they are not at risk, might
behave differently. If they know that there is a high level of mortality in their surrounding

   4
      Many African studies, both clinic and cohort based, indicate lower fertility (around 40 percent) and
childbearing odds among HIV positive woman. See Lewis (2007) for a recent review of these studies.
    5
      It is hard to separate out the biological effect from the behavioral response without data on individual
HIV status. In Juhn, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Turan (2008), we take a first step in separating these two effects by
utilizing recent rounds of the Demographic Health Surveys which link an individual woman’s fertility outcomes
to her own HIV-status, based on testing.
    6
      Mwaluko et al. (2003), Bloom et al. (2000), Stoneburner and Low Beer (2004), Lagarde et al. (1996),
Lindan et al. (1991), Ngwshemi et al. (1996), Williams et al. (2003), Caldwell et al. (1999) all find no change
or very small change in sexual behavior. Oster (2005), using DHS data on sexual behavior from a subset of
African countries finds that sexual behavior changed relatively little since the onset of the epidemic. Other
researchers finds some evidence of risky behavior reductions in Zambia and Zimbabwe such as reductions in
multiple partners; see Cheluget et al. (2006), Fylkesnes et al. (2001).
    7
      Temmerman et al. (1990) find that in Nairobi a single session of counseling—which is common in most
African countries—has no effect on the subsequent reproductive behavior of HIV-positive women. Allen et al.
(1993) using cohort data from Kigali, Rwanda, find that in the first 2 years of follow-up after HIV testing,
HIV-negative women were more likely to become pregnant than HIV-positive women. However, among HIV-
positive women, those with no children were more likely to become pregnant than those with children and
married women are more likely to become pregnant than unmarried women. The desire to have children
among HIV-positive women altogether was 45 percent. On the other hand, Noel-Miller (2003) using panel
data from Malawi shows that women who have higher subjective HIV risk perceptions for themselves were
less likely to have children.

                                                      3
population, they might reduce their risky sexual activity which will lead to lower fertility as
a by-product, or they might increase their fertility along the lines of the above cited models
since the epidemic causes a rise in adult and youth mortality. Overall, there might be various
responses of fertility to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, which are summarized in Table 1. In principle
AIDS variable supposed to be related to the mortality channel since AIDS cases are related
to AIDS mortality. HIV, given it is about infection, can work via other channels but it can
also represent risk of dying. Hence, it is hard to separate out the respective channels and
responses based on the use of HIV or AIDS variables.8
        A reduction in age-specific fertility rates among HIV positive woman due to the biological
responses may serve to reduce total fertility in a high HIV prevalence country in the absence
of any behavioral response from the uninfected woman. Behavioral response from the infected
women (if they know their own status or have high risk perception) might also cause a reduc-
tion in fertility. Uninfected womens’ fertility might also decrease due to a reduction in risky
sexual behavior. Put it differently, for fertility to increase as a result of the epidemic any
positive behavioral response of uninfected women have to overcome the negative biological
and behavioral responses.



3         Data: Sources and Issues

3.1        Country Level

Fertility:
I use country level data on total fertility rates (TFR) both from World Bank, World Devel-
opment Indicators (WDI) and from Demographic Health Surveys (DHS). TFR is defined as
the number of children that a woman would have if she lived through all of her child-bearing
years and experienced the current age-specific fertility rates at each age. TFR is the sum of
age-specific fertility rates; it is an approximation for the average lifetime fertility of women.9

    8
     There might also be differences across countries as far as the links between AIDS and mortality and HIV
and AIDS are concerned. We use country-specific time trends to partially account for this. A better approach
will be country-year dummies which cannot be used given the fact that this is the exact variation we exploit.
   9
     The way it is calculated by World Bank and by DHS is as follows. The total number of births over
the previous 36 months for women in each 5-year age category based on age at birth is divided by the total
number of women-years in each 5-year age category. This ratio gives the age-specific fertility rate, then these
age-specific fertility rates are summed up and multiplied by 5 (since each woman is present in each age-group


                                                      4
    The World Bank (WB) uses United Nations (UN) World Population Prospects for every
2 years and update the UN data with the latest survey data such as DHS. UN data comes
from the countries vital registration system. However, given the weakness of these systems
in Africa, WB data involves several interpolations. Hence, it is important to use DHS data.
Given the fact that WB data has been used extensively in other work, we use both WB and
DHS data to get a comprehensive picture. WB data on TFR are available for 44 countries
and 10 years between 1985–2004. DHS data on births per woman ages 15–49 are available
for 34 countries, where most countries has only 1 or 2 surveys. Only 3 out of 34 countries
have 4 surveys, 10 countries have 3 surveys, 10 countries have 2 surveys and the remaining 11
countries has 1 survey. Survey years fall between 1986–2004.10
    Figure 1 plots TFR from DHS for Kenya, a high prevalence country, and shows that after
more than a decade of rapid decline, the total fertility rate actually increased starting in the
late 1990s. Westoff and Cross (2006) find the increase in fertility in Kenya is most pronounced
for the least educated group of women. They also find a significant increase in the percentage
of women who report wanting more children for each age group. Similar data from 10 other
countries show either an uptick for fertility, such as in Nigeria and Mozambique, or a stall in
fertility transition, such as Uganda and Cote D’Ivoire, as shown in figure 2.11
HIV/AIDS:
I use four different indicators for HIV/AIDS at the country level, none is perfect and all have
different problems. For AIDS, I use data that come from UNAIDS/WHO, Epidemiological
Fact Sheets (2003). These are the number of reported AIDS cases available for each country
in every year between 1985–2004. I multiply the number of reported cases by 100,000 and
divide by the country’s population in each year, to obtain rate per 100,000 per country per
year. According to UNAIDS, AIDS case reports come from surveillance systems of varying
quality. Reporting rates vary substantially from country to country and low reporting rates
are common in developing countries due to weaknesses in the health care systems. Hence
there can be systematic biases such as in countries with worse medical institutions (which is
probably correlated with other country characteristics) underreporting will be worse. AIDS

for 5 years) to end up with the TFR.
  10
     I also use data on desired fertility rate per woman ages 15–49, available for 34 countries, from DHS. Details
of the variables and a full list of countries and survey years are provided in the appendix.
  11
     Each countries survey year is on or around the dates shown on the x-axis.


                                                        5
Figure 1: Fertility in Kenya, Demographic Health Surveys: 1989, 1993, 1998, 2003



                                        7


                                 6.5
     Total Fertility Rate, DHS




                                        6


                                 5.5


                                        5


                                 4.5


                                        4
                                                1989           1993                1998                      2003




                                        Figure 2: Fertility in Africa, Various Demographic Health Surveys

                                            8

                                        7.5
            Total Fertility Rate, DHS




                                            7

                                        6.5

                                            6

                                        5.5

                                            5
                                                          Cameroon          Chad            Cote d'Ivoire
                                        4.5               Ghana             Mozambique      Kenya
                                                          Niger             Nigeria         Tanzania
                                                          Uganda
                                            4
                                                   1988              1994            1998                   2004
                                                                            Year




                                                                            6
case reporting provides information on transmission patterns and levels of infection approx-
imately 5-10 years in the past, limiting its usefulness for monitoring recent HIV infections.
Despite these caveats, AIDS case reporting is useful in estimating the burden of HIV-related
mortality.
      For HIV, I use three different indicators. First, I use data on HIV prevalence rates among
pregnant women that are from the U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveillance Database (2005).
UNAIDS/WHO also provides similar data. This is the indicator that is used by most re-
searchers. Both U.S. Census and UNAIDS databases collect regional estimates of HIV/AIDS
prevalence since the early 1980s. The main indicator for the epidemic is the percent HIV-1
incidence among pregnant women for each country and year. However, these estimates are
in general very high. Representativeness of these estimates for the general population is also
debatable since they are based on pregnant women and high risk groups, which in turn is
the main reason for these inflated estimates.12 More recently, DHS started providing results
from population-based HIV testing. These new estimates are much lower than the UNAIDS
and U.S. Census estimates.13 The new population based DHS estimates are only available
for a limited set of countries for their latest survey though and hence do not provide enough
information about variation over time, as the HIV estimates from the Surveillance Database.
On the other hand, the time series variation in these prevalence rates from the Surveillance
Database of U.S. Census and UNAIDS is far from perfect. UNAIDS (2006) notes that it is not
possible to use previous reports to compare prevalence over time. Using the U.S. Census HIV
surveillance database suggests that HIV rates are flat or falling over the 1990s in virtually all
countries in Africa, which seems inconsistent with the casual observation. A close inspection
of these estimates shows that there is considerable year to year variation which calls into
question the reliability of the time variation in these data. It has been suggested by many
that selection of locations that the estimates are collected are changing over time. Based on
these problems, Oster (2007) develops a methodology to estimate HIV prevalence over time
from mortality data. To avoid the problem of lack of official mortality statistics for Africa she
takes advantage of sibling mortality histories in the DHS. She has HIV estimates only for 9
countries since mid-1980s though. I use her estimates as a second indicator for HIV.

 12
      See Timberg (2006) and McNeil (2007).
 13
      See Juhn, Kalemli-Ozcan and Turan (2008) for a comparison of the various estimates.


                                                     7
       As a third indicator for HIV, I use the projected HIV from the U.S. Census Bureau,
International Programs Center. The International Programs Center uses Estimation and
Projection Package (EPP) from WHO/UNAIDS to project adult HIV prevalence among 15–
49 year old from U.S. Census Surveillance data between 1985–2004. While EPP can be used
in all countries with sufficient surveillance data, it is specifically recommended for countries
with “generalized epidemics.” Generalized epidemics are those that have broken out into the
general population or consistent HIV prevalence at over 1 percent in low risk individuals. The
proxy for low risk individuals is women attending antenatal clinics. Thus, the inputs to EPP
in countries with generalized epidemics are the same surveillance data on HIV prevalence
among pregnant women. EPP estimates the trends over time of HIV prevalence by fitting
an epidemiological model to data from urban and rural sites.14 Although EPP model fits a
somewhat flexible curve to a not so long time series, the modeling is still an issue of concern
given the dynamic nature of the epidemic.
       The correlation between different indicators is around 80 percent on average. The indi-
cators in general suffer from different biases. Classical measurement error is one but there
can also be other errors that are not classical. For example, since most of the indicators are
based on estimates from antenatal clinics, the measurement error might be correlated with
the population attending the clinics, which itself might be correlated with fertility. In case of
AIDS the bias is in general downwards since estimated mortality is almost always lower than
what is should be.15
Other Controls:
All other controls such as female schooling, child mortality, contraception, and GDP per capita
are taken from World Bank, WDI, and from DHS. The details of these data are provided in
the appendix.

  14
      It chooses a set minimizing least squares and projects future course based on fitted parameters, such as a
parameter for the start year of the epidemic; one for the force of infection (how explosive the epidemic is in
its initial stage); one for the fraction of new entrants to the population going into to the at-risk category (a
parameter largely determines where the epidemic levels off); and one for the recruitment (a high value means
people are brought into the at-risk population as people die of HIV, thus helping to sustain the epidemic at a
higher level).
   15
      I also use data on perceptions, specifically the variable “know someone died of AIDS.” The data on the
percent female who know someone personally who has the virus that causes AIDS or has died of AIDS are
from DHS. This is the ideal measure for the purpose of this paper however since this question has only been
asked in the most recent surveys the data are available only for 22 countries whose survey years fall between
1993–2004. The results with this measure are available upon request.


                                                       8
3.2     Regional Level

Fertility:
I use data on regional total fertility rates from DHS. They are available for 71 regions from
14 countries, whose surveys years fall between 1988–2004. A full list of regions is provided in
the appendix.
HIV/AIDS:
The data for regional HIV rates come from U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveillance Database
(2005) and available for 40 regions from 13 countries between 1985–1990. The overlap between
the regional fertility rates and HIV rates give us 32 regions from 12 countries.



4      Econometric Framework and Empirical Analysis

4.1     Framework and Identification

Theoretical models of the demand for fertility have the following empirical predictions as
summarized in Schultz (1997): 1) increased education of women raises the cost of childbearing
and reduces fertility; 2) reduced child mortality, assuming the demand for surviving children is
price inelastic, is associated with a decline in fertility; 3) increased income per capita increases
demand for children since they are normal goods. Thus, I control for these determinants, that
are shown to be significant in the other empirical studies. Other potential determinants of
fertility such as urbanization, average age of population, dependency ratios are all found to
be insignificant in the previous studies and hence I do not control for these variables in the
main analysis.16 I estimate Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of the following form,
using both country and regional level data:


                                T F Ri = α + βHIV /AIDSi + X0i γ + i ,                                       (1)

where T F Ri is the total fertility rate for country i, HIV /AIDSi is the indicator for HIV or
AIDS for country i, Xi is a vector of other covariates, and i is a random error term.17 The

  16
    Controlling for these variables in the robustness analysis yielded same results. See also Schultz (1997).
  17
    This regressions is also run at the regional level with country dummies included, i.e., for region r: T F Rr =
αi + βHIV /AIDSr + X0r γ + r , where αi is the country dummy.



                                                        9
coefficient of interest is β, the effect of the epidemic on fertility. Recall that four different
indicators for HIV/AIDS are used: I use AIDS cases per 100,000 per country per year from
UNAIDS. I will call this variable “AIDS.” Next, I use the HIV prevalence rates among pregnant
women that are from the U.S. Census Bureau. I will call this “HIV.” I also use Oster (2006)
estimates, which I will call “HIV-Oster.” Finally, I use the projections of the U.S. Census
Bureau, which I will call “HIV-EPP.”
   Notice that the regression presented in equation (1) only exploits variation between coun-
tries, using averaged data over time, i.e., it is a “between regression.” A “within regression”
framework to identify the parameters using only within country variation over time is prefer-
able since this framework controls unobserved country heterogeneity. However, as summarized
above the information on the time variation is noisy hence I am hesitant to rely solely on within
country time variation by using first differences or country fixed effects, which further exac-
erbates the measurement error. I will present results for both frameworks to get a better
insight.
   To obtain the “within” estimates, I run a panel regression both with country and time
fixed effects. I also run the same regressions with a general time trend and country specific
time trends. The “within regressions” are of the form:


                        T F Rit = µi + λt + ψHIV /AIDSit + X0it θ + εit ,                      (2)


where T F Rit is the total fertility rate for country i at time t, µi is the country fixed effect,
λt is the time fixed effect, HIV /AIDSit is one of the four indicators for HIV/AIDS, Xit is a
vector of other covariates, and εi is a random error term.
   The econometric framework presented in equations (1) and (2) posits an endogeneity prob-
lem since HIV/AIDS is related to sexual behavior and marriage markets, both of which are
independently related to fertility. Areas with initially higher levels of sexual behavior will have
higher HIV rates and they may also have higher rates of fertility. Also there are compelling
reasons to believe that HIV infection is higher in areas with greater population density and
economic activity. Then, country level HIV rates suffer from an omitted variables bias since
countries that are the most economically active may have both higher infection rates and
lower fertility, the latter being due to possibly the higher cost of women’s time. Failing to


                                                10
control any variable that is negatively correlated with the epidemic such as female education
will cause a downward bias. There might also be a bias due to simultaneity that are not
captured by the fixed effects.
       The conditioning variables should take care of the large part of the effect of the differential
development levels. The “within regressions” are immune to the unobservable factors that are
time-invariant such as religion, climate and culture. However, individuals may start taking
less risks as a result of the epidemic over time or across places, which will bias not only
“between” but also “within” estimates. In the case of the “within” estimates the bias works
against finding a positive effect of the disease on the fertility behavior though. If people start
taking less risks (more condoms, fewer partners or abstaining) because of HIV/AIDS then
fertility will decrease as a by-product, and hence a negative relation between fertility and
HIV/AIDS will be the result. This would be true assuming that despite changes in sexual
activity HIV rates remain high. Ultimately, it is plausible that, societies which lower their
level of risky sexual activity are likely to experience declines in HIV rates and in fertility levels.
I do not expect this ultimate effect effect to be dominant for the time period that this paper
is concerned with.18 For the “between” regressions, I will undertake a falsification exercise
that investigates the relationship between pre-AIDS fertility and current HIV.19


4.2       Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 shows the mean, maximum, minimum, and standard deviation of the dependent and
independent variables. Fertility rates vary from 2 children to 8 children with a mean of 6
children. For AIDS, the most affected country has prevalence that is 160 times higher than
that of the least affected country. The difference in the HIV prevalence between the highest
and lowest prevalence country is 250 times in UNAIDS and U.S. Census data but only 10
times in the Oster (2006) estimates. GDP per capita moves between 100 and 6000 dollars.
The remaining variables also show extensive variation.

  18
     If sexual behavior declines for some other reason than HIV/AIDS, then this will lead a positive association
between fertility and the epidemic since both will decline as a result. One cannot rule this out.
  19
     In a previous version of the paper, I also undertook an IV exercise, which yielded similar results.




                                                      11
4.3       AIDS, HIV and Fertility: Between Regressions

Table 3 reports the results of the OLS estimation of equation (1). Columns (1)-(3) of table
3 uses the average values of dependent and independent variables over 1985−2000 and show
that the first two indicators of the epidemic, namely, AIDS and HIV, are positively significant
at 1 percent and at 5 percent level respectively, whereas the other indicator, i.e., the HIV-
EPP is not statistically significant. Using both indicators AIDS and HIV in a horse race,
leads a positive significant coefficient on AIDS (0.23 with a standard error of 0.09) and a
negative insignificant one on HIV. Female schooling measured as secondary school enrollment
is negative and significant at 1 percent level, while GDP per capita is insignificant, a result
which is probably due to the high correlation between GDP per capita and female schooling.20
Another important control is infant and child mortality, which is positive and significant at 1
percent level.
       To visually test for outliers, figure 3 shows the partial correlation plot for the regression
shown in column (1), hence the slope of the solid blue line is 0.14. Note that the reason
to use 33 or 35 countries in the regressions as opposed to 44 countries is partly driven by
data availability for the controls but also driven by the existence of the outliers. Using other
countries lead to partial correlation plots where the relationship is defines by outliers as
opposed to the one shown in figure 3. If I omit Congo, Rep. the coefficient goes down to 0.10
but stays statistically significant at 5 percent level as shown by the dashed red line.
       Columns (4)-(6) shows similar regressions using data on fertility from DHS. The fertility
observations are averaged over the survey years, which change between 1987–2004 and from
country to country.21 The point estimates for HIV and AIDS are larger and significant at
1 percent level for fertility rate. The coefficient estimates for HIV-EPP are insignificant as
before and hence not reported.22
       The indicators of HIV/AIDS are used in logs following Oster (2007). Although using the
log of HIV/AIDS makes the quantitative interpretation harder, it has several econometric
advantages such as dampening the outliers and making the estimated coefficient immune to
the scale effect due to underreporting, assuming underreporting is similar across countries.

  20
     Using other measures of female schooling yield similar results.
  21
     See Appendix for details on survey years.
  22
     I also used desired fertility from DHS obtaining very similar results and hence I do not report them but
they are available upon request.

                                                     12
                                              Figure 3: Partial Correlation Plot for AIDS and Fertility
                                  1.5

                                                                                                                                        Congo, Rep.

                                    1


                                                                                                                  Burkina Faso
                                  0.5                                                                             Niger
                                                                                                    Nigeria       MaliEritrea
           Total Fertility Rate



                                                                                                                           Gabon
                                                                                                                            Kenya Rwanda
                                                                                                                                     Burundi
                                              without Congo, Rep.                                                      Togo
                                                                                                                    Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                            Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                                                             Mauritania
                                                                               Senegal                Angola          Chad
                                    0                                                                                Equatorial Guinea
                                                                                                                    Cameroon        BotswanaMalawi
                                                                                                                        GhanaCote d'Ivoire
                                                                                         Liberia
                                                                                       South Africa
                                                   Comoros      Sudan
                                                                                                               Ethiopia
                                                                                                           Guinea
                                  -0.5                                                          Gambia, The                      Tanzania


                                                                             Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                      Mozambique
                                   -1




                                  -1.5
                                         -4             -3              -2                -1                  0             1               2         3
                                                                                               Log AIDS




There might be a concern in using the log form though since log specification in principle
compares the countries that have any AIDS to those that don’t. I would argue that this is
not a serious concern in the case of Africa. First of all due to averaging over time, I do not
have any zeros in HIV/AIDS; the only zeros for the initial years of epidemic for few countries
are averaged out. Second of all, the sample I am using are composed of countries that are
classified as “generalized epidemic countries” with the exception of Comoros, Madagascar,
Mauritania, and Sudan. The results are robust to excluding these four countries. The results
are also robust to, even stronger, using the non-logged proxies for HIV/AIDS and available
from the author upon request.
   To deal with the possibility that unobserved country heterogeneity are driving the results,
I will undertake a falsification exercise. Table 4 represents the results from a regression, where
I regress fertility rates from 1980s, on the current HIV/AIDS, averaged over 1995–2004 and
the other controls. Fertility in 1980s is the average of rates in 1980, 1982, 1987. There is
no statistically significant relationship between current HIV/AIDS and fertility in 1980s as
shown in columns (1) and (2) and further in figure 5. The 95% confidence interval implied



                                                                                               13
                                                      Figure 4: Falsification Plot for AIDS and Fertility


                                            3
                                                                                    Congo, Rep.

                                            2                                              Malawi
            Total Fertility Rate in 1980s


                                                                                   Burundi         Botswana
                                            1                                                                Rwanda
                                                                                          Tanzania Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                        Congo, Dem.
                                                            Gabon          Equatorial
                                                                            Rep.
                                                                         Chad                                    Kenya
                                                                                       Ghana
                                                                              Mozambique    Togo
                                                                EthiopiaGuinea-Bissau Eritrea
                                                                            Cameroon Burkina Faso
                                                                            Guinea
                                            0                                    Guinea       Mali    Niger
                                                                                                        Angola
                                                                                     Gambia, Nigeria
                                                                                             The
                                            -1
                                                                                        Liberia
                                                                                                South Africa
                                                                                                Senegal
                                            -2                                        Mauritania
                                                                             Sierra Leone

                                                                                           Sudan
                                            -3
                                                 -2      -1.5      -1      -0.5       0        0.5          1    1.5   2
                                                                                   Log AIDS




by the estimate and the standard error in column (1) does not include the estimates from
table 3, however this is not the case for the column (2). Thus, this exercise suggests that time
invariant unobserved country heterogeneity is not driving the results, at least in the case of
AIDS indicator.


4.4     Country Level HIV and Fertility: Within Regressions

Table 5 reports results of the OLS estimation of equation (2) using country level data.23
Standard errors are clustered by country to deal with the possible serial correlation among
residuals.24 For each of the three indicator of HIV/AIDS both pooled regression results with a

  23
     To deal with zero HIV/AIDS we pursued two different strategies where we dropped the zero observations
and we use the HIV as log(1 + HIV ). Both of these strategies yielded similar results.
  24
     I also perform Weighted Least Squares (WLS) panel regressions; where all observations are weighted in the
second step with the inverse of the estimated standard deviations from the first step. Weighting by country’s

                                                                              14
common time trend (that captures the declining trend of fertility in the absence of HIV/AIDS)
and “within” regression results with both country and time fixed effects are shown in columns
(1)-(6).25 AIDS is positively significant both in the pooled and in the fixed effects regressions,
HIV is only significant in the pooled regressions, and as before HIV-EPP is not significant.
All other control variables yield similar results as before.
   I also use country-specific time trends as shown in the last 3 columns of table 5. The first
two indicators gave insignificant results, however the third indicator, that is HIV-EPP yields
a negative significant result. Recall that this variable never turned out to be statistically
significant up until this specification. It is hard to interpret this finding but since this variable
is composed of built-in trends, accounting for those trends explicitly makes HIV-EPP and
country specific trends highly correlated. To investigate this further, I run a regression similar
to a diff-in-diff specification such as I regress change in fertility from 1990 to 2004 on the
change in HIV/AIDS from 1990 to 2004, obtaining a positive significant result for AIDS and
a negative insignificant result both for HIV and HIV-EPP.
   Overall, the mixed results can be explained by the use of within country time variation
as the main identifier. Although this is the preferred strategy given the need to control
country specific time invariant factors, the available country level HIV data does not lend
itself naturally for this estimation. Figures 6, 7, and 8 show time series path of HIV data from
three countries, Ethopia, Kenya, Malawi, respectively, where there is a lot of noise. Exploiting
noisy variation can lead to different results depending on different specifications. Of course
for the HIV-EPP variable the projection package generates a smooth curve but it is not clear
why this estimated HIV-EPP variable should be preferred over HIV variable or AIDS variable
or vice versa. As argued before all of these measures have errors, each having pros and cons
and hence one should investigate the effect of each to get a clearer picture.26

population or log population yields similar results.
  25
     I also experimented with a common non-linear quadratic and cubic trend obtaining similar results.
  26
     The results with HIV-Oster are similar and available upon request. For robustness we have also tried
many other control variables such as contraception, population age and size, and so on; all of the results
remain the same and available upon request.




                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H IV P r e v a le n c e (% )



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25




             H IV P r e v a le n c e ( % )                                      H IV P r e v a le n c e ( % )




                             25
                             30
                             35
                             40
                                                                            0
                                                                                   5
                                                                                         10
                                                                                               15
                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                            25
     19                                                             19
        8                                                              8
     19 5                                                           19 1
        86                                                             85
     19                                                             19
        8                                                              8
     19 7                                                           19 6
        8                                                           19
                                                                       87
     19 8
        8                                                              8
     19 9                                                           19 8
        9                                                              89
                                                                    19
     19 0                                                              9
        91                                                          19 0
     19                                                                91
        9                                                           19
     19 2                                                              9
        9                                                           19 2
     19 3                                                              93
        9




16
                                                                    19
     19 4                                                              9
        9                                                           19 4
     19 5                                                              95
        96                                                          19
     19                                                                9
        9                                                           19 6
                                                                       97
     19 7
                                                                                                                 Figure 6: Kenya HIV



        9                                                           19




                                             Figure 7: Malawi HIV
                                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 5: Ethopia HIV




     19 8
        9                                                           19 8
                                                                       99
     20 9                                                           20
        0                                                              0
     20 0                                                           20 0
        01                                                             01
     20                                                             20
        0                                                              0
     20 2                                                           20 2
        0                                                              03
     20 3                                                           20
        04                                                             04
                                                                                                                                       1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
4.5       Regional Evidence

This section uses regional data on fertility and HIV from 12 African countries. I have data on
32 regions. These are the regions with overlapping data on regional total fertility rates and
HIV prevalence rates. Each country’s survey year falls between 1998–2004. If there is more
than 1 survey year during this period, than the data on the total fertility rate are averaged.
I regress the regional total fertility rates on the logarithm of regional HIV prevalence rates
among pregnant women averaged over 1990–1995, including country dummies. Unfortunately,
the other controls are not available at the regional level.
       Table 6 shows the results of the OLS regressions. Both columns show that results are
positive and significant at 1 percent level. To deal with the potential serial correlation across
residuals given the regional data, I cluster at the country level, which raises the standard
errors as shown in column (2). Though the results are still significant at 1 percent level. I also
tried a “Weighted Least Sqaures (WLS)” specification, where in order to limit the influence of
small regions, I weighted by the population and also alternatively by the logarithm of regional
population from DHS, averaged over the survey years. Results were similar and hence not
reported. The results requires some caution since there might still be heterogeneity in spite of
the country effects and clustering the standard errors, due to variation in proximity to road
networks and urban-rural differences.27


4.6       Reconciling the results with those of Young (2007)

Instead of TFR, Young (2007) uses data on individual level fertility from Demographic Health
Surveys (DHS) and the country level HIV projections, that is “HIV-EPP” and exploits within
country variation over time. For his 27 country sample there are only 2 countries have 4
surveys, 10 countries have 3 surveys, 8 countries have 2 surveys, and the remaining 7 countries
have only 1 survey. Thus the identification rests on limited observations from 20 countries
with questionable quality of the time variation as argued before.
       Table 7 shows the replication of Young’s (2007) results. Every regression has controls for
age and education and also country and year effects. Columns (1)-(4) undertake a Poisson

  27
    I also run IV regressions for a smaller sub-sample. In spite of a strong first stage the second stage
regressions gave statistically insignificant results.



                                                   17
estimation of past year births following Young (2007) and columns (5)-(8) perform an OLS
exercise. The difference between column (1) and (2) and similarly the other column pairs is
the inclusion of control variables, which are marital status, urban/rural location, the number
and square of born and living children, and the presence of a radio, television, refrigerator or
bicycle (each entered separately) in the household.
       Columns (1) and (2) replicates regressions of Young (2007) by clustering at individual level
(on case-id). Not clustering at all give very close results. Columns (1) is an exact match to
Young (2007) and column (2) is very close.28 However, when I cluster by country in columns
(3) and (4), the standard errors for the HIV coefficient get large and the coefficient ceases to be
significant. The same story holds for the OLS estimation as shown in columns (4)-(8). Given
the fact that the treatment is at the country-time level, it is preferable to cluster either by
country-time or by country, to deal with possible serial correlation. Since the autocorrelations
can be positive or negative it is possible for the non-clustered standard error to under or over-
estimate the true standard error. In the case of HIV, positively serially correlated residuals
lead to underestimated standard errors and hence false significance.
       Peterson (2007) and Bertrand et al. (2004) report that, it had been common practice that
researchers does not adjust the standard errors for possible dependence in residuals in the
panel data sets. Peterson (2007) reports that 42 percent of the papers published in the last
five years in finance using panel data by firm and by time does not adjust standard errors
at all. He shows that the true standard error is 11 times the estimated and 81 percent of
the time t-statistics are falsely significant at 1 percent. Bertrand et al. (2004) have drawn
attention to robust standard error estimation in the context of a special fixed effect model,
that is “Differences-in-Differences (DD),” where they show 65 percent of the time, there is
false significance because of non-clustering. Out of 92 DD papers only 36 deal with the
issue. Peterson (2007) and Bertrand et al. (2004) both show using simulations that clustered
standard errors adequately account for the residual dependence created by the state (or firm
or country) effect and thus provide unbiased estimates.29 Peterson (2007) argues that if there

  28
     Column (1) is an exact match to the working paper version of Young (2007). Differences might be due to
different controls. Although I tried to match the controls in Young (2007), some of his specifications do not
detail the set of controls used.
  29
     Peterson (2007) shows this for the standard OLS regression but he reports that his results generalizes to
non-linear models too. Bertrand et al. (2004) focuses on a DD model such as; Yist = As +Bt +cXist +βIst +ist ,
for individual i, state s, and time t. They also show simple parametric corrections, such as fitting an AR1


                                                      18
are both country and time fixed effects the best practice is to cluster at both levels or if the
number of clusters is small in one dimension, like the time dimension, then use a fixed effect
for that dimension and cluster on the other dimension, where more clusters are available.30
As a result the cross-country finding of the negative significant effect of HIV on fertility by
Young (2007) is not robust.



5     Conclusion
Using country- and region-level data from a panel of 44 African countries during 1985−2000,
I show a positive effect of the epidemic on fertility in between country and between region
comparisons. I find no robust effect of the disease on fertility in within country comparisons,
however. The within estimates range from positive to negative significant, depending on
which country level HIV/AIDS variable is used, yielding an insignificant effect in most of
the specifications. Replicating Young (2007) also suggests an insignificant effect, once the
standard errors are clustered by country.
    What is the main conclusion then? Although there seems to be a robust positive effect of
the disease on fertility in a cross section of countries, this effect is not there once we compare
countries over time instead of to each other. The usual explanation for these type of findings is
that the cross-sectional results are driven by unobserved country-level heterogeneity which is
controlled through the inclusion of country fixed effects in the panel regressions. However, we
also get a positive significant result in the regional estimation that also controls for country
fixed effects. In addition panel estimation may not be credible here given the noisy time
variation of the country level HIV/AIDS data, which explains the variety of results found in
the panel specifications.

process for the error structure, or non parametric corrections, such as block bootstrap, only works with large
number of states/cross-sectional units. They show that clustering at state level not just at state-year cell is
the best solution.
  30
     Kezdi (2004) shows clustered standard errors can be too large in a fixed effects model but he also shows
only clustered standard errors are unbiased irrespective of having a country effect, as also shown by Peterson
(2007). Peterson (2007) also shows the generalization of the results for the GLS case. Kezdi (2004) shows
that the general robust standard error estimator known as the cluster estimator is not only consistent in
general but it behaves well in finite samples. His Monte Carlo simulations shows that only cluster estimator
gives unbiased results even in small cross-sectional samples. He shows in a fixed effect model with short time
series (as here), serial correlation in the error process and the right hand side variables induce severe bias in
conventional standard errors. Clustered estimator applied to mean-differenced data is consistent and behaves
well in finite sample and it does not get biased with high T or small N.

                                                       19
      As a result the main message of this paper is to argue that we should not use HIV/AIDS
at the country level, for Africa, since doing so can generate any result. A researcher who
just happened to be started with one of the country level HIV/AIDS measures can easily
find a totally different result then another researcher who uses another indicator for country
level HIV/AIDS. The current paper, by showing estimations with all the available country
level measures of the disease, for Africa, tries to make this point. Based on the country level
HIV/AIDS there is not a robust effect of the disease on fertility.
      The future research should make use of the newly available HIV data based on blood-testing
from DHS surveys. Indeed the results of this paper are consistent with the results from the
recent micro studies that started to make use of this new HIV data based on blood-testing
from DHS surveys and find no effect of the disease on the fertility behavior.31




 31
      See Juhn et al. (2008), Fink and Linnemayr (2008), and Fortson (2009).


                                                     20
Appendix
Country Level Data:
Countries with survey years: Benin (1996, 2001), Burkina Faso (1992/1993, 1998/1999,
2003), Burundi (1987), Cameroon (1991, 1998), Central Republic of Africa(1994/1995), Chad
(1996/1997), Cote D’Ivoire (1994, 1998), Ethiopia (2000), Gabon (2000), Ghana (1988, 1993,
1998, 2003), Guinea (1999), Kenya (1989, 1993, 1998, 2003), Liberia (1986), Malawi (1992,
2000), Mali (1987, 1995/1996, 2001), Mozambique (1997), Namibia (1992, 2000), Niger (1992,
1998), Nigeria (1990, 1999, 2003), Rwanda (1992, 2000), Senegal (1986, 1992/1993, 1997),
South Africa (1998), Tanzania (1992, 1996, 1999), Togo (1988, 1998), Uganda (1988, 1995,
2000/2001), Zambia (1992, 1996, 2001/2002), Zimbabwe (1988, 1994, 1999).
    The following countries have no surveys. Angola, Botswana, Comoros, Congo Democratic
Republic, Congo Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Lesotho, Mauritania, Mauri-
tius, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Swaziland.


   • AIDS: The AIDS data come from UNAIDS/WHO, Epidemiological Fact Sheets (2003)
     and US Census Bureau HIV/AIDS Surveillance Database (2005). These are the number
     of reported AIDS cases for each country in every year and available for 44 African
     countries for 1985–2004. I multiply these number of reported incidents by 100,000 and
     divide by the country’s population in each year, converting them to incidence per 100,000
     per country per year.

   • Enrollment Rates: Gross school enrollment rates are from World Bank, Word Develop-
     ment Indicators (2006). They are available for 35 countries and years between 1985–2004.

   • GDP per capita: GDP per capita (PPP 2000 $s) is from World Bank, World Development
     Indicators (2006).

   • HIV: HIV prevalence rates among pregnant women are from the U.S. Census Bureau,
     HIV Surveillance Database (2003). UNAIDS/WHO also provides similar data. Both
     Census and UNAIDS databases collect all studies and estimates of HIV/AIDS prevalence
     since the early 1980s. They provide information on prevalence, population and other
     factors and also provide regional estimates. The main indicator for the epidemic is the
     percent HIV-1 incidence among pregnant women for each country and year.

   • HIV-EPP: The International Programs Center of the Census Bureau uses Estimation
     and Projection Package (EPP) from WHO/UNAIDS to estimate and project adult HIV
     prevalence among 15–49 year old from surveillance data between 1985–2004. While
     EPP can be used in all countries with sufficient surveillance data, it is specifically rec-
     ommended for countries with generalized epidemics. Generalized epidemics are those
     that have broken out into the general population or consistent HIV prevalence at over 1
     percent in low risk individuals. The proxy for low risk individuals is women attending
     antenatal clinics. The input to EPP in countries with generalized epidemics is surveil-
     lance data from various sites and years showing HIV prevalence among pregnant women,
     as well as data from national population-based surveys. EPP estimates the trends over
     time of HIV prevalence by fitting an epidemiological model to data from urban and

                                              21
     rural sites. It tests possible epidemiological parameters, chooses a set minimizing least
     squares and projects future course based on fitted parameters, such as a parameter for
     the start year of the epidemic; one for the force of infection (how explosive the epidemic
     is in its initial stage); one for the fraction of new entrants to the population going into
     to the at-risk category (a parameter largely determines where the epidemic levels off);
     and one for the recruitment (a high value means people are brought into the at-risk
     population as people die of HIV, thus helping to sustain the epidemic at a higher level).
   • Infant Mortality: Infant mortality is the rate per 1000 live births and from World Bank,
     World Development Indicators (2006). The data are available for 8 years (1985, 1987,
     1990, 1992, 1995, 1997, 2000,2004).
   • Total Fertility Rate: Data on total fertility rates are from World Bank, World Develop-
     ment Indicators (2006) and available for 10 years (1985, 1987, 1990, 1992, 1995, 1997,
     2000, 2002, 2003, 2004) and 44 countries. DHS data on total fertility rate per woman
     ages 15–49 are from DHS, www.measuredhs.com, MEASURE DHS, Macro International
     Inc. The data are available for 34 countries whose survey years fall between 1986–2004.

Regional Level Data:
Regions:
Benin: Atacora Province, Atlantique Province, Borgou Province, Mono Province, Oueme
Province, Zou Province.
Ethiopia: Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa, Gambella, Harari.
Ghana: Accra, Northern region, Upper East region, Upper West region.
Lesotho: Maseru, Leribe district, Mafeteng district, Quthing district, Mokhotlong.
Madagascar: Antananarivo, Antsiranana, Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga, Toamasina, Toliary.
Malawi: Lilongwe, Blantyre, Mangochi, Mulanje, Mzimba, Thyolo.
Mali:Bamako, Koulikoro, Mopti, Sikasso.
Niger:Dosso, Maradi, Niamey, Tahoua, Zinder.
Nigeria: North East zone, North West zone, South East zone, South West zone.
Rwanda: Butare, Byumba, Gisenyi, Kigali, Ruhengeri.
South Africa: Eastern Cape Province, Free State Province, Gauteng Province, Mpumalanga
Province, Northern Cape Province, Northern Province, North-West Province, Western Cape
Province.
Tanzania: Dar es Salaam, Rukwa region, Arusha region, Zanzibar area.
Togo: Kara, Plateaux, Savanes.
Zimbabwe: Harare, Bulawayo, Manicaland, Masvingo, Mashonaland West Province, Mata-
beleland South.


   • Fertility Rates: Regional fertility rates are from DHS, www.measuredhs.com, MEA-
     SURE DHS, Macro International Inc., and available for 14 countries, whose surveys
     years fall between 1988–2004.
   • HIV Rates-US Census: Regional HIV data come from U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveil-
     lance Database (2005) and available for 14 African countries. The data are available for
     1985–1990 and also for later years for a smaller number of regions.

                                              22
Individual Level Data:
Individual level data are used for 27 countries from 57 Demographic Health Surveys: Benin
(1996, 2001), Burkina Faso (1992/1993, 1998/1999, 2003), Burundi (1987), Cameroon (1991,
1998), Central Republic of Africa(1994/1995), Chad (1996/1997), Cote D’Ivoire (1994, 1998),
Ethiopia (2000), Gabon (2000), Ghana (1988, 1993, 1998, 2003), Guinea (1999), Kenya (1989,
1993, 1998, 2003), Liberia (1986), Malawi (1992, 2000), Mali (1987, 1995/1996, 2001), Mozam-
bique (1997), Namibia (1992, 2000), Niger (1992, 1998), Nigeria (1990, 1999, 2003), Rwanda
(1992, 2000), Senegal (1986, 1992/1993, 1997), South Africa (1998), Tanzania (1992, 1996,
1999), Togo (1988, 1998), Uganda (1988, 1995, 2000/2001), Zambia (1992, 1996, 2001/2002),
Zimbabwe (1988, 1994, 1999).

   • Educational Attainment: This is a categorical variable for woman’s educational attain-
     ment level. Categories are “No Education”, “Primary Education”, “Secondary Educa-
     tion”, “Tertiary Education” (v106).

   • Fertility: Measured as number of births or pregnancies in last year for each woman
     (v209).

   • Controls: Other control variables from are: Age (v121), year of survey (v007), presence of
     radio in the household (v120), presence of television in the household (v121), presence
     of refrigerator in the household (v122), presence of bicycle in the household (v123),
     urban/rural (v102), number of born children (v201), number of living children (v201-
     v206-v207).




                                              23
References

Allen, S., Serufilira, V., Gruber, S., Kegeles, P., Van de Perre, M., Carael , and T.J. Coates,
      “Pregnancy and Contraception Use among Urban Rwandan Women after HIV Testing
      and Counseling,” American Journal of Public Health 83 (5) (1993), 705–710.

Becker, G. S., R. J. Barro, “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 103 (1998), 1–25.

Bell Clive, Devarajan Shantayanan, and Hans Gersbach, “The long-run economic costs of AIDS:
      theory and application to South Africa,” June draft. University of Heidelberg, World
      Bank (2003).

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust Difference in Dif-
     ferences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1) (2004), 249–275.

Bloom, David and Ajay Mahal, “Does the AIDS Epidemic threaten Economic Growth” Jour-
     nal of Econometrics 77 (1997), 105–124.

Bloom, Shelah, Charles Banda, Gloria Songolo, Samantha Mulendema, Amy Cunningham, and
     J. Ties Boerma, “Looking for Change in Response to the AIDS Epidemic: Trends in
     AIDS Knowledge and Sexual Behavior in Zambia, 1990 through 1998,” Journal of Ac-
     quired Immune Deficiency Syndrome XXV (2000), 77–85.

Boldrin, Michele and Larry E. Jones, “Mortality, Fertility, and Saving in a Malthusian Econ-
     omy,” Review of Economic Dynamics 5 (4) (2002), 775–814.

Caldwell, John, I.O. Orubuloyeb, and Pat Caldwell, “Resistances to Behavioural Change to
     Reduce HIV/AIDS Infection in Predominantly Heterosexual Epidemics in Third World
     Countries,” Health Transition Center, (1999).

Cervellati and Sunde, “Human Capital, Mortality, and Fertility: A Unified Theory of Demo-
     graphic Transition,” IZA Working Paper 2905 (2007).

Cheluget, B., G. Baltazar, P. Orege, M. Ibrahim, L. H. Marum, J. Stover, “Evidence for Pop-
     ulation Level Declines in Adult HIV Prevalence in Kenya,” Sexually Transmitted Infec-
     tions 82, Supplement 1 (2006), 121–126.

Corrigan, Paul, Gerhard Gloom, and Fabio Mendez, “AIDS Crisis and Growth,” Journal of
     Development Economics 43 (2005).

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis T. Lui, “Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, Intrafamily Trans-
      fers and Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy 99 (1991), 1029–1059.

Fink, G., S. Linnemayr, “HIV and Fertility: Long-term Evidence from sub-Saharan Africa,”
      Harvard University, mimeo, (2008).

Fortson, Jane, “HIV and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1–3
      (2009), 170–194.

                                              24
Fylkesnes K., Musonda R. M., Sichone, M. Ndhlovu, Z. Tembo, F. Monze, “Declining HIV Preva-
     lence and and Risk Behaviors in Zambia: Evidence from Surveillance and Population-
     Based Surveys,” AIDS 15 7 (2001), 907–916.

Galor, O. and D. N. Weil, “From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern Growth,” American Eco-
     nomic Review 89 (1999), 150–154.

Juhn, C., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and B. Turan, “HIV and Fertility in Africa: First Evidence from
     Population Based Surveys,” NBER WP 14248, (2008).

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, “Does Mortality Decline Promote Growth?” Journal of Economic
     Growth 7(4) (2002), 411–439.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, “HIV and Fertility Revisited” (2010b), mimeo.

Kezdi, G., “Robust Standard Error Estimation in Fixed-Effects Panel Models,” University of
     Budapest, mimeo, (2004).

Lagarde, Gilles Pison Emmanual and Catherine Enel, “Knowledge, attitudes and perception
     of AIDS in rural Senegal: relationship to sexual behaviour and behaviour change,” AIDS
     10 (3) (1996), 327-34.

Lewis, James, Carine Ronsmans, Alex Ezeh, and Simon Gregson, “The population impact of
     HIV on fertility in sub-Saharan Africa,” AIDS 18 (2) (2004), 35–43.

Lindan, C, S Allen, M Carael, F Nsengumuremyi, P Van de Perre, A Serufilira, J Tice, D Black,
     “Knowledge, attitudes, and perceived risk of AIDS among urban Rwandan women: re-
     lationship to HIV infection and behavior change,” AIDS 5 (8) (1991), 993-1002.

Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg, “Death and Development,” Stan-
     ford University, mimeo (2007).

Lucas, R. E., Lectures on Economic Growth. Cambridge: Harvard (2002).

McNeill, Donald, “U.N. to Say It Overestimated AIDS Cases by Millions,” New York Times,
    November (2007).

Meltzer, David, “Mortality Decline, the Demographic Transition and Economic Growth,”
     Ph.D Dissertation, University of Chicago (1992).

Mwaluko, Gabriel, Mark Urassa, Raphael Isingo, Basia Zaba, and J. Ties Boerma, “Trends in
    HIV and Sexual Behavior in a Longitudinal Study in a Rural Population in Tanzania,
    1994–2000,” AIDS XVII (2003), 2645–2651.

Ng’weshemi, JZ, JT Boerma, R Pool, L Barongo, K Senkoro, M Maswe M, R Isingo, D Schapink,
     “Changes in male sexual behaviour in response to the AIDS epidemic: evidence from a
     cohort study in urban Tanzania,” AIDS 10 (12) (1996), 1415-20.

Noel-Miller, C. M., “Concern Regarding the HIV/AIDS Epidemic and Individual Childbear-
     ing, Evidence from Rural Malawi,” Demographic Research, online (2003).


                                            25
Oster, Emily, “Sexually Transmitted Infections, Sexual Behavior, and the HIV/AIDS Epi-
     demic, ” Quarterly Journal of Economics May (2005), 467–514.

Oster, Emily, “Routes of Infection: Exports and HIV Incidence in Sub-Saharan Africa”, Uni-
     versity of Chicago, mimeo (2007).

Papageorgiou, Chris and Petia Stoytcheva “What Do We Know About the Impact of AIDS
     on Cross-Country Income So Far?,” LSU, mimeo (2007).

Peterson, M., “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Ap-
     proaches,” Northwestern University, mimeo, (2007).

Sah, K. Raaj, “The Effects of Child Mortality Changes on Fertility Choice and Parental Wel-
     fare,” Journal of Political Economy 99 (1991), 582–606.

Schultz, T. Paul, “Demand for Children in Low Income Countries.” In Mark R. Rosenzweig
     and Oded Stark (eds), Handbook of Population and Family Economics, (1997) Amster-
     dam: Elsevier Science.

Soares, Rodrigo, “Mortality Reductions, Educational Attainment, and Fertility Choice,” Amer-
     ican Economic Review 95(3) (2005), 580-601.

Staiger, D. and Stock, J. H (1997), “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,”
      Econometrica, 65(3): 557–86.

Stock, J. H. and Yogo, M. (2001), “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,”
     mimeo, Harvard University.

Stoneburner, Rand and Daniel Low-Beer, “Population-Level HIV Declines and Behavioral Risk
     Avoidance in Uganda,” Science 304 (2004), 714-718.

Tamura, R., “Human capital and Economic Development”, Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics 79 (1) (2006), 26–72, .

Temmerman, M. S. Moses, D. Kiragu, S. Fusallah, I. A. Wamola, and P. Piot, “Impact of sin-
    gle session post-partum counselling of HIV infected women on their subsequent repro-
    ductive behavior,” AIDS 2 (1990), 247–252.

Timberg, Craig, “How AIDS in Africa Was Overstated,” Washington Post, April 6 (2006).

Thornton, Rebecca, “The Demand for and Impact of Learning HIV Status: Evidence from a
     Field Experiment,” American Economic review, forthcoming (2008).

UNAIDS/WHO, Global Report (2006).

UNAIDS/WHO, Epidemiological Fact Sheets (2003).

U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveillance DataBase (2005).

UNAIDS Reference Group on Estimates, Modeling and Projections, “Improved methods and
    assumptions for estimation of the HIV/AIDS epidemic and its impact,” AIDS (2002),
    W1-W14.

                                            26
Werker, Eric, Amrita Ahuja, and Brian Wendell, “Male Circumcision and the Economic Im-
     pact of AIDS in Africa, ” Harvard Business School, mimeo (2006).

Westoff, Charles, and Anne Cross, “The Stall in the Fertility Transition in Kenya,” DHS An-
     alytical Studies No. 9, (2006).

Williams, Brian, Dirk Taljaard, Catherine Campbell, Eleanor Gouws, Lewis Ndhlovu, “Changing
      Patterns of Knowledge, Reported Behavior and Sexually Transmitted Infections in a
      South African Gold Mining Community,” AIDS XVII (2003), 2099–2107.

World Bank, World Development Indicators (2006).

Young, Alwyn, “The Gift of the Dying: The Tragedy of AIDS and the Welfare of Future
    African Generations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (2005), 423–466.

Young, Alwyn, “In Sorrow to Bring Forth Children: Fertility Amidst the Plaque of HIV, ”
    Journal of Economic Growth (2007).




                                            27
Table 1: Possible Fertility Responses (assuming individuals have a basic level of knowledge
about the disease)


     Behavioral Response:

                                                       HIV – women     HIV + women

     Know own status and risk perception low               – or +            NA

     Know own status and risk perception high                 –         – (maybe +)

     Do not know own status and risk perception low        – or +          – or +

     Do not know own status and risk perception high       – or +          – or +


     Biological Response:                                     0               –
                               Table 2: Descriptive Statistics


                                       No. of Countries    Mean     Std.dev.      Max     Min

  Total Fertility Rate, WB                            44   5.71        1.22    8.06       2.08
  Total Fertility Rate, DHS                           34   6.07        0.87    7.40       3.90
  AIDS (per 100,000)                                  42 22.38        32.84 162.16        0.02
  HIV                                                 44   0.08        0.07    0.25      0.001
  HIV-EPP                                             38   0.06        0.05    0.21      0.004
  Secondary School for Female (%)                     38 24.55        23.62 112.82        4.24
  GDP per capita (PPP 1996 $s)                        44 798.24     1217.78 6168.33      95.92
  Infant Mortality (per 1000)                         44 100.30       36.06 176.75       14.99
  Mortality Under 5 (per 1000)                        44 159.11       63.80 295.76       17.60

Notes: All variables are averaged over 1985−2000 and 44 countries depending on the avail-
ability. Total Fertility Rate is the sum of age-specific fertility rates (number of children that
a woman would have if she lived through all of her child-bearing years and experienced the
current age-specific fertility rates at each age); from World Bank (WB), World Development
Indicators (WDI) and from DHS, www.measuredhs.com, MEASURE DHS, Macro Interna-
tional Inc., respectively. The survey years for the data from DHS fall between 1986–2004.
Data Appendix reports the survey years for each country. AIDS represents the number of
officially reported AIDS cases per 100,000 per country per year, calculated as multiplying the
officially reported AIDS cases by 100,000 and dividing by population; from WHO/UNAIDS,
Epidemiological Fact Sheets. HIV represents percent HIV-1 sero-prevalence infection rate
among pregnant women attending antenatal clinics; from U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveil-
lance Database. HIV-EPP represents estimated national HIV prevalence among 15 to 49
year olds calculated by fitting an epidemiological model to data (Estimation and Projection
Package-EPP) from urban and rural surveillance sites; from U.S. Census Bureau, Interna-
tional Programs Center. Secondary Schooling is the gross enrollment rates from WDI. GDP
per capita is the Gross Domestic Product (PPP 1996 $) divided by population; from WDI.
Infant Mortality is the infant mortality rate per 1000 births; from WDI. Mortality under 5 is
the age 5 and under mortality per 1000 births; from WDI. See Appendix for more information
on the variables.
              Table 3: AIDS, HIV and Fertility: Between Regressions

                      Dependent variable: Total Fertility Rate (TFR)

   Source for TFR:          WB         WB         WB              DHS       DHS        DHS
                            (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)       (5)        (6)

   Log AIDS                0.14***       –         –             0.20***      –          –
                            (0.05)       –         –              (0.08)      –          –

   Log HIV                    –       0.14**       –               –       0.20***       –
                              –       (0.07)       –               –        (0.09)       –

   Log HIV-EPP                –          –       –0.04             –          –          –
                              –          –       (0.11)            –          –          –

   Know Someone Died          –          –         –               –          –       0.20***
   of AIDS                    –          –         –               –          –        (0.07)

   Female Schooling       –0.02***   –0.02***   –0.02***     –0.02***      –0.03***   –0.02***
                           (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.009)       (0.01)     (0.009)

   Log GDP per capita      –0.11      –0.10      –0.11           –0.01      –0.12      –0.13
                           (0.06)     (0.08)     (0.07)          (0.17)     (0.20)     (0.19)

   Infant Mortality        0.02***   0.02***    0.01***          0.01***   0.01***    0.01***
                           (0.003)    (0.003    (0.003))         (0.004)    (0.01)    (0.007)

   R2                       0.84       0.88       0.80            0.63       0.61       0.67
   Observations              33         35         30              26         26         22
Notes: Robust standard errors (White correction) are in parentheses. The Between Regres-
sions report the results using country averages depending on availability, and including a
constant. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 percent significance respectively.
              Table 4: AIDS, HIV and Fertility: Falsification Exercise

                      Dependent variable: Total Fertility Rate in 1980s

                                      (1)                  (2)

                      Log AIDS        0.01                  –
                                     (0.06)                –
                      Log HIV          –                  0.08
                                        –                (0.10)
                      Controls        Yes                 Yes
                      R2              0.70                0.72
                      Observations     32                  33
              Table 5: AIDS, HIV and Fertility: Pooled and Within Regressions

                                           Dependent variable: Total Fertility Rate (TFR)


                     Pooled      Pooled       Pooled      Within       Within       Within       Within      Within       Within
                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (8)         (9)          (10)

 Log AIDS             0.09**        –            –         0.09**         –            –         –0.06          –            –
                      (0.04)        –            –         (0.04)         –            –         (0.05)         –            –

 Log HIV                –         0.12**         –           –          –0.01          –            –         –0.08          –
                        –         (0.06)         –           –          (0.05)         –            –         (0.05)         –

 Log                    –           –          –0.01         –            –           0.10          –           –        –0.15***
 HIV-EPP                –           –          (0.07)        –            –          (0.10)         –           –         (0.05)

 Female             –0.02***    –0.03***      –0.02***   –0.004***    –0.001***    –0.002***    –0.03***    –0.003***    –0.03***
 Schooling           (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.008)      (0.01)

 Log GDP              –0.10       –0.12        –0.12       –0.27        –0.29        –0.43       –0.27        –0.29        –0.13
 per capita           (0.06)      (0.08)       (0.07)      (0.31)       (0.27)       (0.29)      (0.27)       (0.27)       (0.24)

 Infant              0.01***     0.01***      0.01***    0.003***     0.006***     0.004***     0.007***     0.01***     0.005***
 Mortality           (0.002)     (0.032)      (0.002)     (0.01)       (0.004)      (0.01)       (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.004)

 Common Trend       –0.05***    –0.04***      –0.03***       –            –            –            –           –            –
                     (0.02)      (0.01)        (0.01)        –            –            –            –           –            –

 Country Effects       No          No           No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year Effects          No          No           No          Yes          Yes          Yes          No          No           No
 Country Trends        No          No           No          No           No           No           Yes         Yes          Yes

 R2                    0.76        0.82         0.76        0.87         0.87         0.87        0.95         0.95         0.95
 Observations          111         153          139         111          153          139         111          153          139
 Countries              33          35           30          33           35           30          33           35           30

Notes: Robust standard errors (White correction; clustered on countries) are in parentheses. The Within Regressions report
results using country fixed effects. See table 2 for the detailed explanation of the variables. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 percent
significance respectively.




                                                                 31
      Table 6: HIV and Fertility: Between Regressions at the Regional Level

                           Dependent variable: TFR in 1998–2004


                                                      (1)        (2)

                           Log HIV in 1990–1995     0.29***    0.29***
                                                     (0.05)     (0.08)

                           Country Dummies            Yes        Yes

                           Cluster                  Region    Country

                           R2                         0.79      0.79
                           Observations                32        32
                           Countries                   12        12

Notes: Robust standard errors (column 1: clustered on regions, column 2: clustered on coun-
tries) are in parentheses. All regressions report results using country fixed effects. Regional
TFRs are from DHS, various survey years (mean: 5.07, std dev.: 1.60, max: 8.7, min: 1.9).
Each country’s survey year falls between 1987–2004. The data are averaged over the survey
years. Regional HIV rates (percent HIV-1 sero-prevalence among pregnant women) are from
the U.S. Census Bureau, HIV Surveillance Database (2003) (mean: 0.047, std dev.: 0.079,
max: 0.3094, min: 0). HIV prevalence rates are averaged over 1990–1995 or used as a single
year depending on the availability.




                                              32
        Table 7: HIV and Individual Fertility in a Panel of African Countries

                                     Dependent variable is Last Year Births


 Estimation           Poisson      Poisson       Poisson      Poisson      OLS           OLS          OLS            OLS

 Cluster:           Individual    Individual    Country       Country    Individual   Individual    Country      Country
                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)

 Projected HIV       –1.260***    –0.963***      –1.260       –0.963     –0.218***    –0.234***      –0.218      –0.234
                      (0.380)      (0.385)       (1.17)       (0.908)     (0.057)      (0.054)       (0.201)     (0.190)


 Primary             –0.294***     0.071***    –0.294***      0.071***   0.060***      0.010***     0.060***    0.010***
 Education            (0.054)       (0.057)     (0.005)        (0.001)    (0.009)       (0.010)      (0.001)     (0.000)

 Secondary           –0.798***     0.252***    –0.798***      0.252**    -0.132***     0.029***    –0.132***    0.029***
 Education            (0.091)       (0.102)     (0.005)       (0.012)     (0.010)       (0.012)     (0.001)      (0.002)

 Tertiary            –1.190***     0.759**     –1.190***      0.759***   –0.155***     0.116***    –0.155***    0.116***
 Education            (0.445)      (0.461)      (0.007)        (0.036)    (0.030)       (0.033)     (0.001)      (0.007)

 Age                    Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Age2                   Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

 Controls               No           Yes           No           Yes         No           Yes           No            Yes

 Country Effects        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Country Trends         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

 Observations         403100        350586       403100       350586      403100        350586       403100      350586

Notes: Countries and survey years are Benin (1996, 2001), Burkina Faso (1992/1993, 1998/1999, 2003),
Burundi (1987), Cameroon (1991, 1998), Central Republic of Africa(1994/1995), Chad (1996/1997), Cote
D’Ivoire (1998/1999), Ethiopia (2000), Gabon (2000), Ghana (1988, 1993, 1998, 2003), Guinea (1999), Kenya
(1989, 1993, 1998, 2003), Liberia (1986), Malawi (1992, 2000), Mali (1987, 1995/1996, 2001), Mozambique
(1997), Namibia (1992, 2000), Niger (1992, 1998), Nigeria (1990, 1999, 2003), Rwanda (1992, 2000), Senegal
(1986, 1992/1993, 1997), South Africa (1998), Tanzania (1992, 1996, 1999), Togo (1988, 1998), Uganda (1988,
1995, 2000/2001), Zambia (1992, 1996, 2001/2002), Zimbabwe (1988, 1994, 1999). Other controls in the
regressions are marital status (never, currently or formerly married), urban/rural location, the number and
square of born and living children, and the presence of a radio, television, refrigerator or bicycle (each entered
separately) in the household. Robust standard errors (clustered as indicated) are in parentheses. ∗ ∗ ∗ denotes
1% significance.




                                                         33
