                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TRADE LIBERALIZATION WITH HETEROGENOUS FIRMS

                                          Richard E. Baldwin
                                            Rikard Forslid

                                         Working Paper 12192
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12192


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




This paper is a substantially revised version of the Baldwin and Forslid (2004) working paper with an
identical title. The present paper, however, also includes elements from Baldwin (2005), which has not and
will not be submitted for publication anywhere. We are grateful for comments from Elhanan Helpman and
Marc Melitz as well as other participants at ERWIT 2004. Any remaining errors are our own. Forslid thanks
The Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation (Reg. no. J2001-0684:1) for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2006 by Richard E. Baldwin and Rikard Forslid. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Trade Liberalization with Heterogenous Firms
Richard E. Baldwin and Rikard Forslid
NBER Working Paper No. 12192
April 2006
JEL No. H32, P16

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of trade liberalization with heterogeneous firms using the Melitz
(2003) model. We find a number of novel results and effects including a Stolper-Samuelson like
result and several results related to the volume of trade, which are empirically testable. We also find
what might be called an anti-variety effect as the result of trade liberalization. This resonates with
the often voiced criticism from antiglobalists that globalization leads the world to become more
homogenous by eliminating local specialities. Nevertheless, we find that trade liberalization always
leads to welfare gains in the model.

Richard E. Baldwin
Graduate Institute
11a Avenue de la Paix
1202 Geneva
SWITZERLAND
and NBER
baldwin@hei.unige.ch

Rikard Forslid
Stockholm University
10691 Stockholm
SWEDEN
rf@ne.su.se
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                           1


                  Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms♣
                                               Richard E. Baldwin and Rikard Forslid
                                                                   March 2006


                                                                   Abstract
________________________________________________________________________________
This paper examines the impact of trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms using the Melitz
(2003) model. We find a number of novel results and effects including a Stolper-Samuelson like
result and several results related to the volume of trade, which are empirically testable. We also find
what might be called an anti-variety effect as the result of trade liberalisation. This resonates with
the often voiced criticism from antiglobalists that globalisation leads the world to become more
homogenous by eliminating local specialities. Nevertheless, we find that trade liberalisation always
leads to welfare gains in the model.

________________________________________________________________________________

JEL: H32, P16.
Keywords: trade liberalisation, heterogeneous firms, anti-variety effect




1. INTRODUCTION
Empirical work over the past decade shows that the standard new trade theory assumption of
identical firms glosses over many important aspects of reality. For instance, not all firms even trade
in traded goods sectors, and productivity is also typically higher among exporting than non-
exporting firms in a sector (Aw, Chung and Roberts 2000, Bernard and Jensen 1995, 1999a,b, 2001;
Clerides, Lach and Tybout 1998; Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz 2004; see Tybout 2003 for a survey)

This empirical evidence has lead to the development of trade models which are modified to allow
for a more sophisticated view of firms. The microeconomic link between trade liberalisation and
firm productivity is explicitly modelled in Eaton and Kortum (2002), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and



♣
  This paper is a substantially revised version of the Baldwin and Forslid (2004) working paper with an identical title.
The present paper, however, also includes elements from Baldwin (2005), which has not and will not be submitted for
publication anywhere. We are grateful for comments from Elhanan Helpman and Marc Melitz as well as other
participants at ERWIT 2004. Any remaining errors are our own. Forslid thanks The Bank of Sweden Tercentenary
Foundation (Reg. no. J2001-0684:1) for financial support.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                         2
                                                                   1
Kortum (2003), Melitz (2003), and Yeaple (2005). Extensions are found in Baldwin and Okubo
(2005), Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud (2005), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Schott (2003), Bernard,
Redding, and Schott (2004), Falvey, Greenaway and Yu (2004), Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple
(2004), Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), and Yeaple (2004).

In this paper, we examine the various positive and normative aspects of trade liberalisation with
heterogeneous firms using the Melitz (2003) model. The effect of lower trade costs as well as the
effect of lower regulatory barriers to trade (beachhead costs) when countries are asymmetric in size
are analysed. We find a number of novel results and effects including a Stolper-Samuelson like
result and several results related to the volume of trade, which are empirically testable. Moreover
we find what might be called an anti-variety effect, meaning that the consumed variety (the
available range of product varieties) may fall in a country, as a result of trade liberalisation.
Interestingly, the anti-variety effect resonates with the often voiced criticism from antiglobalists that
globalisation leads the world to become more homogenous by eliminating local specialities.
However, despite this anti-variety effect, we note that we find that trade liberalisation always leads
to welfare gains in the model.

Though distinctly different, our paper is related to Melitz and Ottaviano (2005), who analyse trade
liberalisation in a modified Melitz (2003) model, where a linear demand system à la Ottaviano,
Tabuchi and Thisse (2002) is used. This specification allows them to study pro-competitive effects,
which are absent in the standard model we use (as in all Dixit-Stiglitz based models). However,
contrary to our paper, trade integration always produces an increased variety for consumers in their
model specification. Another notable difference is that because Melitz and Ottaviano assume away
the fixed beachhead costs in each market, they can not analyse regulatory liberalisation.

The rest of the paper is organised in four sections. The next section presents the model. Section 3
studies the positive effects of two types of trade liberalisation – the standard reduction in the
marginal cost of trading goods and the reduction of fixed market-entry costs implied by so-called
technical barriers to trade. The fourth section presents welfare results, and the final section
concludes.




1
    Antecedents to these models are Montagna (2001) and Schmitt and Yu (2001).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                   3

2. THE MODEL
We work with the basic trade model with heterogeneous firms of Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple
(2003). There are two nations that are identical in all respects except that they potentially differ by
size. Each nation uses a single primary factor of production (labour L) to produce goods in two
sectors (the T-sector and the M-sector). The T-sector (traditional sector) is a Walrasian,
homogenous-goods sector with costless trade. The M-sector (manufactures) is marked by increasing
returns, Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition and iceberg trade costs. M-sector firms face
constant marginal production costs and three types of fixed costs. The first fixed cost, FI, is the
standard Dixit-Stiglitz cost of developing a new variety (I is a mnemonic for innovation). The
second and third fixed costs are what have been called ‘beachhead’ costs since they reflect the one-
time expense of introducing a new variety into a market (i.e. establishing a beachhead).
Specifically, the cost of introducing a new variety to domestic and non-domestic markets is FD and
FX, respectively (D for domestic and X for exports).

Crucially, the model allows for heterogeneity with respect to firms’ marginal production costs. Each
Dixit-Stiglitz firm/variety is associated with a particular labour input coefficient – denoted as aj for
firm j. These a’s are generated during a product innovation process that costs FI units of labour.
Specifically, just after paying FI entry cost, the firm is randomly assigned an ‘aj’ from the density
function G[a], whose support is 0 ≤ a ≤ a0. Intuition may be served by thinking of the entry-cum-
lottery as a single innovation process. That is to say, the innovation technology is stochastic since
sinking FI units of labour produces a ‘blueprint’ for a new variety with certainty, but the associated
marginal cost is random.

Our analysis exclusively focuses on steady state equilibria and intertemporal discounting is ignored;
the present value of firms is kept finite by assuming that firms face a constant probability of ‘death’
according to a Poisson process with the hazard rate δ.

Consumers in each nation have two-tier utility functions with the upper tier (Cobb-Douglas)
determining the consumer’s division of expenditure among sectors and the second tier (CES)
dictating the consumer’s preferences over the various differentiated varieties within the M-sector.

                                                                                    µ /(1−σ )
                                                                   ⎛            ⎞
                     U = ln E − ln P ; P ≡ ( pT )                  ⎜ ∫ pi1−σ di ⎟
                                                            1− µ
(1)
                                                                   ⎜            ⎟               ;   0 ≤ µ ≤1<σ ,
                                                                   ⎝ i∈Θ        ⎠
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                           4
where E is expenditure, pT is the price of the homogenous traditional good, pi is the consumer price
of variety i, and Θ is the set of all varieties consumed; σ is the constant elasticity of substitution
among varieties and µ is the Cobb-Douglas spending share on manufactures.

2.1.       Equilibrium
As is well known, constant returns, perfect competition and zero trade costs in the T-sector equalise
wages in the two nations. With a proper choice of units and numeraire, we have:

(2)                              pT = w = w* = 1 .
With nominal wages pinned down at unity, we can without ambiguity refer to a M-sector firm’s ‘a’
as its marginal costs.

Although each firm has its own marginal cost, intuition is boosted by grouping firms into three
types: firms that produce but only sell locally (D-types, short for domestic firms), firms that sell
locally and also export (X-types, short for export firms), and firms that do not produce (N types,
short for non-producers). Intuitively, firms whose FI investment yields a very high marginal cost
would sell very little if they produce and so, they will not find it worthwhile to sink the FD; these
become N-types. Firms that draw very low a’s (marginal costs) will sell a great deal if they produce
and so, they find it worthwhile to sink the beachhead costs in domestic and export markets; these
become X-types. Firms with intermediate a’s become D-types. We now turn to the formal cut-off
conditions for the three types.


    2.1.1.        The Cut-off Conditions
Given standard Dixit-Stiglitz results, the level of a firm’s sales in its local market is related to its
marginal cost and the marginal costs of its competitors according to:2

                      a 1−σ                         aD                          aX
(3)                         µE ;          ∆ = n ∫ a 1−σ dG[a a D ] + n * τ 1−σ ∫ a 1−σ dG[a a D ] .
                        ∆                          0                           0



Here ∆ (a mnemonic of the ‘denominator’ of the standard CES demand function) can be thought of
as a weighted average of the marginal costs of all firms active in the market, n and n* are the
masses of varieties produced in Home and Foreign, respectively, and τ is the iceberg trade cost;
G[a a D ] is the conditional cumulative density function (only varieties with a’s less than aD are



2
    See guide to calculations.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                       5
produced so that we use the conditional cdf when considering the marginal cost of firm j relative to
that of its competitors).

As usual with Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition, the operating profit earned in this market
will be 1/σ times the value of sales.3 Since the beachhead costs are sunk, firms consider the present
value of operating profit and the beachhead costs. Given the constant firm-death rate δ and the zero
discount rate, the present value of a given firm is just π/δ, where π is the operating profit the firm
would earn if it actually produces. For a Home-based firm, the cut-off levels of the marginal cost in
the local and export markets are, respectively, defined by:4

                             1−σ
(4)                     aD         B = fD ;      φa X 1−σ B* = f X ,

where

                               µE               µE *
                        B≡             , B* ≡          , 0 ≤ φ ≡ τ 1−σ ≤ 1,   f D ≡ σ δ FD ,   f X ≡ σ δ FX .
                                   ∆            ∆*

aD and aX are the cut-off marginal costs for entering the local market and the export market,
respectively, and we have grouped σ δ and the F’s for notational convenience; φ ranges from zero
when trade is perfectly closed (τ=∞) to unity when trade is perfectly free (τ=1); we refer to φ as the
                                                                                               1−σ
‘free-ness’ of trade. The cut-off conditions for a Foreign-based firm are a D*                       B * = f d , and
       1−σ
a *X         B = fX .

              However, as shown by Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2003), B=B* in this model even if
country size differs. The intuition for this is that free entry of firms will ensure that the expected
operating profit (and therefore sales) must be the same in both markets in equilibrium, since fixed
and variable costs are identical, trade costs are symmetric, and the distributions of a’s are identical.
Using that B=B* implies, from (4), that a D = a D* , and a X = a *X .

              One fact that has been firmly established is that only a fraction of all firms that produce in a
nation actually export (see Tybout 2003 for a survey of such findings). In terms of our model, this
means that aX<aD is a regularity condition. From (4), the necessary and sufficient condition for this
is that:




3
    See guide to calculations.
4
    See guide to calculations.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                          6
                         aX                        FX / φ
(5)                         <1         ⇔                  > 1.
                         aD                         FD

We will take this as the base case.


  2.1.2.             The Free Entry Condition
A potential entrant pays FI to develop a new variety with a randomly assigned ‘a’. After developing
the new variety and observing the associated ‘a’, the potential entrant decides whether to enter the
local market only, or the local and export markets, or neither. For Home and Foreign, the free entry
condition is that the ex ante (i.e. before ‘a’ is known) expected value of developing a variety equals
the investment cost, FI:

               aD                               aX
(6)        ∫0
                    {a 1−σ B − f D }dG[a ] + ∫ {φa 1−σ B − f X }dG[a ] =
                                               0
                                                                           fI .

          The first and second integrals in (6) show the ex ante expected value of the operating profit
net of beachhead costs arising from domestic sales and export sales (multiplied by σδ),
respectively; FI, which all firms must pay, is the sunk innovation cost. The free entry condition is
identical for the two countries because B=B*, a D = a D* , and a X = a *X .

An immediate implication from the free entry condition is that all active firms (D-types and X-
types) except firms with a’s exactly equal to aD earn pure profits throughout their entire life in the
sense of their revenue exceeding their variable costs by more than what would be needed to
amortize their sunk costs. The reason is that the ex ante expected value of pure losses on N-types is
balanced by the ex ante expected value of pure profits on D-types and X-types. These pure profits
are not a payment to reward the foregone consumption wrapped up in the sunk costs (we have zero
discounting), rather they are rents – rents earned for being lucky.


  2.1.3.             Solving the model with the Pareto distribution
All of the analysis up to this point has been conducted without resort to a functional form for G.
Indeed some of the subsequent analysis can also be conducted in this manner, but the reasoning is
clearer when we have explicit solutions, which requires an explicit G[a]. Following standard
practice, we adopt the Pareto distribution:

                                     a k
(7)                      G[a ] = (      )            0 ≤ a ≤ a0 ≡ 1,
                                     a0
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                              7
where k and a0 are the ‘shape’ and ‘scale’ parameters, respectively. We normalise a0 to unity
without loss of generality (we are free to choose units of M-sector goods).

Given

(7) and the regularity condition β≡k/(σ-1)>1 (so that the integrals in ∆ converge)5:

                                        a 1D−σ (1 + Ω)
(8)                              ∆=
                                           1 − 1/ β

where

                                                         FX               k
           0 ≤ Ω ≡ φ β T 1− β ≤ 1,                T≡        ,      β≡        > 1.
                                                         FD             σ −1

Here, Ω (a mnemonic for ‘openness’) summarises the impact of beachhead trade barriers and
iceberg trade barriers. The variable Ω summarises the two types of trade barriers in the model, so it
is worth pointing out four features of Ω that facilitate intuition and subsequent analysis: (1) Ω
measures the combined protective effects of higher fixed and variable trade costs; (2) Ω=0 with
infinite τ and/or infinite FX/FD, (3) Ω=1 with zero iceberg costs and FX=FD; (4) we can also express
Ω as φ(FX/FDφ)1-β which tells us that as long as the inequality in (5) holds, Ω is bound between zero
and unity.

Finally, with a zero discount rate, the foregone consumption necessary to create new varieties
requires no compensation, so the only source of current income is labour and thus:6

(9)                              E = L.
Using this, (3), the two cut-off conditions (4), the free entry condition (6), and (8), we get explicit,
closed form solutions for n, n*, aD and aX:7

(10)
                                                                                         1                            1
   ( L − ΩL*)µ ( β − 1)        ( L * −ΩL) µ ( β − 1)          ⎛ f ( β − 1) ⎞ k          ⎛ Ω( β − 1) f I              ⎞k
n=                      ; n* =                       ; a D = ⎜⎜ I           ⎟⎟ ; a X = ⎜⎜                            ⎟⎟ .
       (1 − Ω ) βf D
             2
                                   (1 − Ω ) βf D
                                         2
                                                              ⎝ f D (1 + Ω) ⎠           ⎝ (1 + Ω) f X                 ⎠

Unlike in the standard Dixit-Stiglitz trade model – not all varieties are consumed by all agents since
some are only sold locally. The number of consumed varieties in Home and Foreign are:8


5
  See guide to calculations.
6
  In essence, all operating profit is spent on creating ‘knowledge capital’ in the form of the three types of sunk cost for
the flow of new N, D and X types; labour income is spent on producing consumption goods.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                          8
                    L(1 − Ωψ ) − L * (Ω − ψ )                         L * (1 − Ωψ ) − L(Ω − ψ )               φ
(11)         nC =                                 ,           nC* =                                  ;   ψ ≡ ( )β ≤ 1 ,
                     f D β (1 − Ω 2 ) /( β − 1) µ                       f D β (1 − Ω 2 ) /( β − 1) µ          T

where nC and nC* are the number of varieties consumed in Home and Foreign, respectively, and ψ is
                                                       k
                                  ⎛a                 ⎞
the ratio of X-types to D-types, ⎜⎜ X                ⎟⎟ , in each nation.
                                  ⎝ aD                ⎠


    2.1.4.          Trade volume and pattern
One of the stark differences to the standard homogenous-firms trade model concerns the export
pattern. In particular, only a fraction of firms export their goods. This model displays standard intra-
industry trade in differentiated varieties produced by X-types, but the varieties of D-types are non-
traded even though they would be classified as being in a ‘traded goods’ sector.

The value of the exports of a typical X-type firm tends to infinity as ‘a’ approaches zero, and equals
fX for a=aX. For X-firms with intermediate a’s, the value of exports is: a1-σφµL/∆σ, but the export
cut-off condition tells us φµL/∆σ=fX/aX1-σ, thus:

                                              a 1−σ                         µΩ(L − ΩL∗ )
(12)                             v[a ] = (      ) fX ,                V =                   ,
                                             aX                                (1 − Ω )
                                                                                      2



where v[a] is the per firm export. Integrating over all X-types (weighting by frequency) and using
(10), we have V, which is defined as the total value of exports in terms of the numeraire, i.e.
nv[a]dG[a⏐aD] integrated from 0 to aX.

It is interesting to note that the standard approach to ‘horizontal’ intra-industry trade (IIT) and
vertical IIT fails in this model.9 Many studies use unit value indices to deduce product quality –
with higher prices indicating higher quality; the underlying assumption is that the trade
classifications are too broad and thus, group together goods that are fundamentally different. In this
model, the goods are absolutely symmetric in terms of product characteristics but nevertheless, they
have very different prices.




7
  See guide to calculations.
8
  nC equals n plus n* times the fraction of Foreign varieties exported, which equals (aX/aD)k; using (10) yields the
expression.
9
  An example is the study by Greenaway, Hine and Milner (1995).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                       9

3. POSITIVE EFFECTS OF LIBERALISATION
There are two natural definitions of trade liberalisation in this model, one concerns the variable cost
of trade φ and the other concerns the differential beachhead cost for local and imported varieties
FX/FD. As we shall see, the two types of trade barriers usually affect variables in an isomorphic
manner, since they are combined into the aggregate measure of openness, Ω.

3.1.      Lower marginal cost of trade; symmetric countries
We begin by considering reducing marginal trade costs, i.e. freer trade in the sense of dφ>0, when
nations are symmetric in size.




   Cut-off                                                         Cut-off
   points                Case: FX>FD                               points    Case: FX<FD


                                   aD                                        aD



                                        aX                                        aX




                                                                   φ                           φ
                                                          1                                1
Figure 1: Cut-off points


Inspection of (10) confirms the finding of Melitz (2003) that lower marginal trade costs (i.e. dφ>0)
lowers aD and raises aX in both nations. When trade is at zero freeness (i.e. infinite trade costs)
aX=0, so that even a firm with zero marginal cost does not export. Greater openness lifts aX while
lowering aD. Following Melitz (2003), we have FX/(φFD)>1 as our base case. However, for this to
hold for all φ∈[0,1], it must be that FX > FD.

          Figure 1 shows two cases. When FX<FD, the cut-off points cross at some level of openness
less than free trade. When aX>aD, the model predicts that the most efficient firms sell in both
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                           10
markets, while the most inefficient firms only sell to the export market. This prediction does not
agree with the facts and therefore, we take FX>FD as the focal case. 10


     3.1.1.       Anti-variety production and consumption effect
Turning to ‘n’ (the mass of produced varieties in a typical nation), an inspection of (10) with L=L*
shows that freer trade reduces n in each nation. The proportional change is:

                                                       Ω ˆ
(13)                                       nˆ = − β        φ
                                                      1+ Ω

where we have used the standard ‘hat’ notation for proportional changes (e.g. x̂ equals dx/x), and
Ω/(1+Ω) is the import share (i.e. the expenditure share on all imported varieties in a typical
market).11 Since the import share rises with openness, this expression tells us that the proportional
decline in ‘n’ is magnified, as trade becomes progressively freer, as shown in Figure 2.




10
   One could imagine a modification of the standard model where FX is an additional cost on top of FD. In particular, an
addition decision making stage for potential firms could be added. After sinking FI, they would have to decide whether
to sink the cost of a factory, say FF, and then they would decide whether to sink FD and FX. The domestic cut-off
condition would be aD1-σB=FF+FD, while the export cut off would be φaD1-σB=FX. Naturally, the standard equations –
cut-offs and free entry – would only be valid for levels of openness where aX<aD; for the level of openness in the
neighbourhood of free trade, a different set of equations would apply. However, in this article, we are considering the
standard model.
11
   The market share of imported variety j is φaj1-σ/∆, so integrating over all foreign varieties aj∈[0..aX], the import share
equals Ω/(1+Ω).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                     11
Figure 2: Varieties produced and consumed


       Mass of
       varieties

                                     nC (FX<FD)
                                                          nC (FX=FD)

                                                          nC (FX>FD)


                                                      n



                                                                                 φ



One of the great novelties of the monopolistic competition trade model was the fact the ‘varieties
effect’ i.e. the fact that an autarky-to-free-trade liberalisation could raise the number of varieties
available to consumers. In this model, that need not be the case.12 The potential ambiguity stems
from the fact that greater openness raises aX and thus, raises the fraction of Foreign-made varieties
that are imported to Home while, at the same time, there is a drop in locally produced varieties. It is
simple to characterise the ambiguity. Continuing to assume that L=L* and using (11) gives

                                                     (1 − 1 / β )µL(1 + φ β T − β )
(14)                                               =                                ,
                                                             f D (1 + φ β T 1− β )
                                              nC


which shows that the number of varieties bought by a typical consumer falls monotonically as the
freeness of trade rises – as long as T≡FX/FD>1. Thus, a lower variable cost of trade will produce an
‘anti-variety’ effect, i.e. the range of consumed varieties falls as trade becomes freer. If T≡FX/FD<1,
then freer trade results in the more standard pro-variety effect. The two cases, and the knife-edge
T=1 case, are shown in Figure 2.

The basic intuition for these results flows most easily by first examining the knife-edge case of no
fixed-cost protection, T=1, where an inspection of (14) shows that nC is constant with respect to φ.

12
  Melitz (2003) did note that the impact on the range of varieties available for a typical consumer could be ambiguous,
but nc was not calculated.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                     12
When T=1, there is no intrinsic difference between local and imported varieties, so that changes
such as trade liberalisation which introduce more imported varieties will produce a one-for-one
reduction in local varieties. More generally, when the ratio of beachhead costs FX/FD exceeds unity,
nC falls as φ rises because imported varieties have systematically lower prices than the domestic
varieties they displace. Restoring zero profits thus requires more than one D-type variety to be
displaced by each additional X-type variety that is imported. Conversely, if beachhead costs are
lower for imported varieties, the relationship is reversed and freer trade means a wider range of
varieties available to consumers.13




3.2.        Lower marginal cost of trade; asymmetric countries
The symmetric country case is useful for fixing ideas, but assumes away a range of interesting
interactions between country size and trade liberalisation. In particular, once asymmetric country
sizes are allowed, the model is marked by a modified version of the well-known ‘Home Market
Effect’ (HME)14.


     3.2.1.          Home Market Effect, HME Magnification and Delocation effects
A convenient way of expressing the HME is that a nation’s share of industrial firms grows more
than proportionally as its share of world expenditure on industrial goods grows. Note that from (10),
Home’s share of the worldwide mass of M-sector firms and the total mass of firms worldwide are:


(15)
                     s E − (1 − s E )Ω        µ ( β − 1)( L + L*)                n                          L
                                                                                                                 .
              sn =                     , nw =                     ;      sn ≡       , n w ≡ n + n*, s E ≡
                         (1 − Ω)                  (1 + Ω) f D β                 n w
                                                                                                          L + L∗

Using sE to denote Home’s share of world expenditure and sn to denote its share of the world’s M-
sector firms, log differentiation of n in (10) implies:

                                               sE
(16)                             sˆn =                    sˆ E .
                                                 Ω
                                         sE −
                                              (1 + Ω)

An inspection of this shows that the HME does hold since the coefficient on ŝ E is greater than
unity. We can also see that the HME is subject to the usual HME magnification effect (the shift in
firms to Home as Home’s expenditure share rises becomes stronger as trade becomes freer).


13
     It is also possible that the anti-variety effect could be reversed for some non-Pareto distributions.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                       13
Another feature of the monopolistic competition trade model is the so-called delocation effect,
namely the tendency of freer trade to ‘shift’ more industry to the large region. Log differentiation of
Home’s share of world M-sector firms with respect to ‘openness’ Ω yields:

                                         (2 s E − 1)Ω (1 − Ω) ˆ
(17)                             sˆn =                        Ω.
                                            s E − (1 − s E )Ω

An inspection of this shows that if Home is larger (i.e. L>L* so sE>½), then freer trade will increase
Home’s share of M-sector firms. Moreover, there is also a magnification effect since the strength of
the shift in M-sector production to the larger market becomes stronger as trade becomes freer. From
(15), it can be seen that the so-called sustain point when the entire M-sector is located at home is
reached when Ω = Ω S = L∗ L .


Non-monotonic production shifting effects

The actual mass of firms in Home varies very non-monotonically with openness since the HME
magnification, which tends to raise n, interacts with the overall drop in nW. The derivative of n with
respect to openness Ω is:


                                          2ΩL − L * (1 + Ω 2 ) .
                         = µ (1 − 1 / β )
(18)                  dn
                      dΩ                    f D (Ω 2 − 1) 2
The sign of this is ambiguous, e.g. when Ω=0, the derivative is unambiguously negative, but when
Ω=ΩS, the derivative is unambiguously positive. Naturally, the impact on the mass of firms in the
small region is unambiguously negative since the delocation effect and the drop in nw work in the
same direction. This is illustrated in Figure 3, where it may be noted that n=nw beyond Ωs.




14
     See e.g. Helpman and Krugman (1985).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                  14
Figure 3: Non-monotonic shifts in n and n*

   Mass of firms
                                                                                    Ωs=L*/L
                                                                                                          Ω=1




                                                                                                 n




                                                                           n*


                                                                                                                       Ω




  3.2.2.          Anti-variety effects; asymmetric nations
The fact that production is marked by non-monotonic relationships suggests that the number of
consumed varieties will also be marked by non-monotonicities. To study this, it proves useful to re-
write nC from (11) in terms of Ω and T using Ω≡ψT, namely:

(19)
        ⎛1 − Ω2 T     Ω(T − 1)     ⎞           ⎛1 − Ω2 / T       Ω(T − 1) ⎞                   µ (1 − 1 / β )
nC = υ ⎜⎜           −            * ⎟ ,   *
                                           = υ ⎜             * −          L ⎟;          υ≡                     > 0.
        ⎝ 1− Ω
               2
                  L
                      T 1− Ω 2
                               L
                                 ( ⎟
                                   ⎠
                                       n C
                                            )  ⎜
                                               ⎝ 1− Ω
                                                       2
                                                           L
                                                                       (
                                                                 T 1 − Ω 2 ⎟⎠   )                    fD

By inspection, we see that the first term of nC tends to increase with openness Ω when T>1, but the
second term tends to decrease with Ω; the magnitude of both effects depends upon T and Ω, as well
as on the relative size of the nations. Differentiation of nC with respective to Ω gives:


(20)
                      dnC
                          =υ
                                            (
                             (T − 1) 2ΩL − (1 + Ω 2 ) L *
                                                          .
                                                                   )
                      dΩ             T (Ω 2 − 1) 2
Evaluating this derivative in the base case with T>1 at no-trade, i.e. Ω=0, and at the sustain point,
i.e. Ω=L*/L gives:
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                            15

                                                                                                    ⎛ ⎛ L∗ ⎞ 2 ⎞
                                                                                                2 − ⎜1 + ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ ⎟
                                                                                                    ⎜ ⎝L⎠ ⎟
           dnC                − (T − 1) L *                    dnC                                  ⎝          ⎠
(21)                     =υ                 < 0,                              = υ (T − 1) L *                        > 0.
           dΩ     Ω =0             T                           dΩ    Ω =Ω S                       ⎛ ⎛ L∗ ⎞ 2 ⎞
                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                T ⎜ ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ − 1⎟
                                                                                                  ⎜⎝ L ⎠     ⎟
                                                                                                  ⎝          ⎠
Thus, openness is anti-variety for the large nation when trade barriers are initially high, but
openness is pro-variety when trade is close to the sustain point level of openness (i.e. when almost
all M-sector production is in the large region). Naturally, when trade is more open than Ωs, further
opening is anti-variety since all varieties are in the Home nation and we know that openness
unambiguously monotonically reduces the worldwide number of varieties.

For the small nation, the derivative of nC* with respect to openness is identical to that of the large
nation but with L and L* swapped. It is easily shown that d(nC*)/dΩ is negative for all permissible
values of Ω, given that T>1.15 The consumption variety effect, shown in Figure 4 (when
Ω(φ = 1) < Ω S ), thus resembles the production variety effect shown in Figure 3.




Figure 4: Mass of consumed varieties


               Mass of consumed varieties



                                                   nC

                          0.35

                                           n*C



                          0.25


                                                                                                                 φ
                                                                                                        1
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                       16
Trade integration implies fewer domestically produced varieties and, for a small country, also a
significant drop in total consumed variety. Nevertheless, as shown below, welfare always increases
with trade freeness, irrespective of country size. However, if some individuals have a very high
valuation of variety, or if one supposed there to be some intrinsic cultural or nationalist value in the
availability of traditional varieties, this unambiguous impact on individual welfare might be
mitigated or reversed in a social welfare evaluation. Indeed, many nations spend taxpayers’ money
on keeping old ways and goods alive.


     3.2.3.       Trade Volume and Pattern
From (12) we have that


(22)                 Vˆ = E
                                (         )
                         s 1 + Ω 2 − (1 − s E )2Ω ∧
                                                      Ω;           ˆ = β φˆ + (1 − β )Tˆ
                                                                   Ω
                                                   (
                         (s E − (1 − s E )Ω ) Ω 2 − 1        )
As inspection of this expression shows that, for large countries, M-sector export increases with the
level of trade freeness, φ. However, for sufficiently small countries, the inverse is true. This is due
to the fact that even though, from (8), aX and therefore the share of exporting firms increase, the
mass of firms decline in the small country.

There are a couple of more subtle points related to the trade volume that suggest empirically
testable hypotheses. First, the exports of each existing X-type firm expand in proportion. From (12),
the change in firm-level export as a function of ‘a’ (and thus the size of firms) is:

                      dv[a ]          σ − 1 da X
(23)                         = v[a ](      )     .
                       dΩ              a X dΩ

Second, every new exporter should be smaller (in the sense of the value of domestic sales) than
every existing exporter, since the drop in aX affects firms with a’s that were just below the cut-off
before the liberalisation.

The model also makes a number of predictions concerning ‘zeros’ in the trade matrix. Empirically
oriented trade economists have long know there to be many zero bilateral trade flows in the world.16
The facts have been more recently documented in a systematic fashion by Feenstra and Rose (1997)




15
  See guide to calculations.
16
  For example, the old gravity equation literature pondered on the best solution to this with some authors dropping
these observations, others performing Tobit regressions and others plugging in small positive values. See, e.g. Wang
and Winters (1992).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                        17
and Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2004). Stepping slightly outside our two-nation model, one
simple empirically testable implication of the model concerns the pattern of zeros.

First, as has already been indirectly pointed out by Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2004), the
pattern of zeros in bilateral aggregate trade flows should follow a geographical pattern, assuming
that trade costs increase with distance. This is easily testable and indeed this is confirmed by the
first stage of the Helpman-Melitz-Rubinstein results. One could also test for zeros at the very finely
defined commodity level using the time dimension of the data. For example, taking the US’s very
finely disaggregated export data, the likelihood of a zero (controlling for the usual gravity equation
issues like economic size of the importing nation) increasing with distance should be found.
Likewise, as a result of any well defined liberalisation exercise, such as the phase in of Uruguay
Round tariff cuts, it should be found that the impact of distance on the zeros diminishes as tariffs
are cut.

Second, some forms of trade liberalisations are more likely to reduce beachhead costs than variable
trade costs. One common source of beachhead costs is known as technical barriers to trade (TBTs),
many of which involve health, safety and environment certification of new products (see Baldwin
2000 for details). One way in which such measures are reduced is via international agreements –
e.g. Mutual Recognition Agreements either on testing (US-EU MRA) or product norms (New
Approach Directives in the EU). These agreements should diminish the probability of observing a
zero in any given bilateral trade flow that is affected. A simple difference-in-difference approach
should pick this up on aggregate or disaggregate data. Notice that a reciprocal MRA predicts that
the effects should be two-way in the affected sectors.

Third, and more to the heart of the model logic, one should find a pattern in firm-level zeros in the
data. Specifically, there should be a positive correlation between a firm’s domestic market share
(which varies with its marginal cost) and the number of markets to which it exports, or the
likelihood that it has a zero in any given market, controlling for standard market-specific factors. If
one expands the model to allow for the standard proximity-versus-scale FDI à la Helpman-Melitz-
Yeaple, the prediction is still true but it is for the number of markets in which the firm sells (via
location production is it is going for proximity; by exporting it is going for scale economies).
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                              18

3.3.      Lower beachhead costs
The classical notion of liberalisation is a reduction of marginal trading costs, however many of the
trade barriers remaining among industrialised nations that are related to standards and regulations
that make it difficult to introduce foreign-produced varieties into a market. These barriers, called
technical barriers to trade in industrial goods and sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures in food
trade, are some of the few remaining barriers to trade in manufactures among the US, Canada, the
EU and Japan. Moreover, since classic trade barriers were eliminated in Western Europe by the
mid-1970s, the last four decades of trade liberalisation in Western European nations have been
mainly concerned with TBTs. This suggests that it is important to analyse the positive and
normative implications of reducing the gap between the beachhead cost facing local and imported
varieties. In particular, in this section, we assume these regulatory barriers to be reflected in the
beachhead costs and that this explains why FX>FD, so the liberalisation involves a moving T=FX/FD
towards unity. Naturally, it is not possible to change T without changing FD and/or FX, so we must
be explicit about how T falls. To be concrete, consider a ceteris paribus reduction in FX as a fixed-
cost trade liberalisation, while a reduction of FD and FX in tandem (such that T is unaffected) is a
domestic de-regulation.

As an aside, we note that the formulation of the model makes FD and FX entirely distinct. That is, we
cannot think of FD being part of the cost of, say, establishing a product’s safety in the home market,
and FX as the extra (lower) cost of using the basic domestic results to establish the product’s safety
in the foreign market. If this were the case, the export and local market entry conditions would be
linked in the sense that the cost of entering the foreign market would be higher for firms that had
not entered the domestic market.

From (10), and (12), it can be seen that fixed cost trade liberalisation has qualitatively identical
effects as dφ>1 when it comes n, aD, aX and the volume of trade. The impact on the number of
varieties consumed differs and is, in principle, ambiguous. However, differentiating nC from (19)
with respect to Fx and evaluating this differential at FX=FD gives

                                  dnC
                                                     =υ
                                                          (φ   β
                                                                             )(
                                                                   L − L∗ φ β − φ 3 β   )>0   for Ω < Ω S ,
                                 − dFX     FX = FD                 (φ   2β
                                                                                  )
                                                                                  2
                                                                             − 1 FD


which indicates that at least for very low TBTs, further liberalisation will increase nC in both small
and large countries.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                       19

4. WELFARE EFFECTS OF LIBERALISATION
Next, we turn to the welfare effects of liberalisation in this model, focusing on the aggregate and re-
distributive impact of greater openness.


     4.1.1.       Aggregate Gains from Trade
As noted above, the utility of a typical agent in this model can be described by the indirect utility
function E/P, where from (1), P=pT1-µ ∆µ/(1-σ), and P*= pT1-µ (∆*)µ/(1-σ), and where the ∆’s are defined
in (3). Plugging in the equilibrium values for pT, n and n* and using the distribution for G in

(7), the price indices simplify to:

                                            µ                          µ
                             µ ⎛ µL ⎞                          µ ⎛ µL ⎞
                                      1−σ                            ∗ 1−σ
(24)                  P = a D ⎜⎜    ⎟⎟ ,               P* = a D ⎜⎜    ⎟⎟ .
                               ⎝ fD ⎠                            ⎝ fD ⎠

Since we showed that aD always falls as trade becomes more open (in a variable or fixed trade cost
sense) we see that both nations gain from integration regardless of size differences. Moreover, an
inspection of (10) shows that greater openness raises aD at an accelerating rate, as Ω approaches
unity (i.e. free trade).




     4.1.2.       Stopler-Samuelson-like result
Income distribution effects can also be easily worked out. Indeed, this model displays classical
Stolper-Samuelson-like behaviour.17 There is only one primary factor in this model; however we
can think of firm owners as owning ‘knowledge capital’. In particular, we can consider there to be
three types of capital in this model: D-type capital, X-type capital and N-type capital, where the
reward to D-type and X-type capital is the operating profit on D-type and X-type firms,
respectively. Recall that although the average reward to the three types of capital must be zero (zero
profit condition), this average consists of pure losses for some balanced by pure profits for others;
D-type and X-type firm owners earn pure profits while drawers of ‘losing’ varieties earn the flow
equivalent of minus FI.




17
  Our earlier draft Baldwin and Forslid (2004) derived the impact on nominal rewards to labour and the three types of
capital, while here we derive the real rewards, which is closer to the spirit of the original Stolper-Samuelson theorem;
this requires an additional assumption on σ.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                            20
Of course the owner of a unit of X-type knowledge capital does not hold this forever, since her
capital will eventually depreciate. But if the depreciation rate is chosen to give reasonable churning
rates, each of the owners of D-type and X-type knowledge capital will care about openness for a
very long time. As we shall see, under certain conditions, X-type capital owners win from
reciprocal liberalisation while D-type firms lose from it. Thus, X-type capital owners – the large,
efficient exporting firms – will support reciprocal trade liberalisation, while it will be opposed by
D-type capital owners. Assuming that the durability of capital is high compared to the electoral
cycle, such effects could be important in determining firm-level political support for multilateral
trade negotiations.

The reward to capital is a firm’s Ricardian surplus; its sales times the Dixit-Stiglitz operating profit
margin 1/σ. Thus

                                             1−σ                                             1−σ
                                ⎛ a     ⎞                     fD                 ⎛ a    ⎞          fD
(25)                  rX [a] = ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟         (1 + φ )        ;   rD [a] = ⎜⎜      ⎟⎟              ,
                                ⎝ aD     ⎠                    σ                  ⎝ aD    ⎠         σ

where we define rD and rX as the Ricardian surplus of typical D and X type firms.

Turning to the impact of openness on nominal factor rewards, the easiest is labour. Labour is the
numeraire, so that freer trade has no impact on the wage in terms of the numeraire good. The impact
on the rental rates on D-type and X-type capital is also as simple to derive. As noted above, a firm’s
total operating profit is proportional to its sales. Using (10) and (25), we get:

           rˆD   −Ω                      rˆX    φ −Ω
(26)           =    ≤0,                      =              ≥0,                 wˆ = 0.
             ˆ
            φ 1+ Ω                        φ (1 + φ )(1 + Ω)
                                           ˆ

Next, turning to real factor rewards, it is easily shown that if the elasticity of substitution among
varieties is sufficiently high (specifically, σ>1+µ), we get a Stolper-Samuelson chain:18

(27)                  rˆD − Pˆ < 0 < wˆ − Pˆ < rˆX − Pˆ .

                                                                                         ∧         ∧
Note that this holds for countries irrespectively of size, since P = P * from (24), and that even if σ
violates the condition σ>1+µ, we still have that the real gain to X-types exceeds that of D-types.

An interesting implication of (27) when combined with the fact that rental rates are inversely
proportional to a’s is that the income distribution among active-firm owners follows a fractals-like
pattern. That is, capital rental rates will follow a Pareto distribution with the shape parameter ρ+1-
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                         21
σ. Thus if, for example, y% of the gains from liberalisation accrue to the top x% of the income
distribution, the same is true for the top x% of the top x%. This fractal-like income distribution has
received some empirical support from income distribution studies.

It is important to recall that each D-type and each X-type earns pure profits throughout its life time,
so that these Stolper-Samuelson results are not transitory. They are permanent, firm by firm.
Naturally, new firms that become active will not experience an increase in their Ricardian surplus,
but they will earn a reward that is higher than it would have been without the liberalisation.

The Stolper-Samuelson-like result in (26) should be testable via stock market data for large and
small firms. The impact of a clearly defined liberalisation ‘treatment’ should be asymmetric for
large and small firms. Simply put, the rise in a firm’s stock market price in reaction to a reciprocal
trade liberalisation should be positive for firms that are sufficiently large and negative for firms that
are sufficiently small.


     4.1.3.       Fixed cost liberalisation

An inspection of (25) and (10) shows that the income distribution impact of fixed cost trade barrier
liberalisation will be quite different compared to variable trade cost liberalisation, at least for X-
type firms. In particular, reducing FX reduces aD and this, as per (25), reduces the reward to both X-
type and D-type capital. In other words, greater regulatory liberalisation reduces both operating
profits by the same proportion, but does not affect the wage. The intuition for this result is clear.
The beachhead costs create barriers to enter that must, in equilibrium, be compensated by higher
operating profits. Reducing the beachhead costs thus reduces the flow reward to active firms.




5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Trade models with heterogeneous firms and beachhead costs constitute an important new
instrument in the toolbox of international trade theorists. Of course, nothing under the sun is
entirely new – many, many trade theorists have published models where firms have different
marginal costs, and the late 1980s saw a flourishing of papers and books on models with beachhead
costs. Nevertheless, the assumption of continuous marginal-cost heterogeneity in a monopolistic
competition setting teamed with beachhead costs constitutes more than just an incremental
improvement on existing models, since it allows us to consider a broad range of real-world facts –

18
     See guide to calculations.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                       22
those concerning firm-size and trade issues – that the standard monopolistic competition trade
models had to assume away.

This paper works out the impact of great openness, in terms of variable and fixed trade costs, and
develops a sequence of testable hypotheses. The paper also studies the impact of greater openness at
both the firmlevel and the aggregate level, focusing on changes in the numbers and types of firms,
trade volumes and trade prices. Contrary to the standard Dixit-Stiglitz trade model, global variety
falls as the result of trade liberalisation, and it may be that consumed variety falls in a country. The
normative effects of liberalisation are also studied and here, the paper focuses on aggregate gains
from trade, and income redistribution effects, showing inter alia that the model is marked by a
Stolper-Samuelson-like effect.

REFERENCES
Aw, B., Chung, S. and Roberts, M., 2000, ‘Productivity and Turnover in the Export Market: Micro
       Evidence from Taiwan and South Korea’, World Bank Economic Review 14, 65-90.
Baldwin, Richard E. (2005). “Heterogenous Firms and Trade: Testable and Untestable properties of
      the Melitz Model”, NBER working paper 11471.
Baldwin, Richard E. (2000). "Regulatory Protectionism, Developing Nations and a Two-Tier World
      Trading System," Brookings Trade Forum, S. Collins and D. Rodrik (eds), The Brookings
      Institution, Washington DC, pp 237-293, 2000. Re-published in Quantifying the impact of
      technical barriers to trade: Can it be done? K. Maskus and J.S. Wilson (eds), Michigan
      University Press, 2001.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Rikard Forslid (2004). “Trade liberalisation with heterogenous firms,”
      CEPR Discussion Paper 4635.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Toshihiro Okubo (2005), "Heterogeneous firms, agglomeration and
economic geography: Spatial selection and sorting", NBER Working Paper 11650.
Baldwin, R. and F-R Nicoud (2005). “Trade and Growth with Heterogenous Firms“.CEPR
      Discussion Paper 4965.
Bernard A. and Jensen B., (2001). ‘Why Some Firms Export’, NBER working paper 8349
Bernard A. and Jensen, B., (1999b). ‘Exporting and Productivity: Importance of Reallocation’,
       NBER working paper 7135.
Bernard, A. and Jensen, B., (1999a). ‘Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or Both?’
       Journal of International Economics 47, 1-26
Bernard A. and Jensen B, (1995). ‘Exporters, Jobs and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing, 1976-1987’
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 67-119
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding, Peter K. Schott (2004), “Comparative Advantage and
       Heterogeneous Firms,” NBER Working Paper No. 10668.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum (2003). “Plants and productivity in
       international trade”, American Economic Review, 93, 4, 1268-1290.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                  23
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter Schott (2003). “Falling Trade
       Costs, Heterogeneous Firms and Industry Dynamics”, mimeo, Tuck Business School.
Cabral, L. M. B. and J. Mata (2001) “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
       Theory”, CEPR Discussion Paper 3045. Forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Clerides S., Lach, S. and Tybout, J., (1998). ‘Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-Dynamic
       Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133,
       903- 904
Eaton J, and Kortum S.(2002). “Technology, Geography and Trade”, Econometrica, Vol. 70.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2004), “Dissecting Trade: Firms,
       Industries, and Export Destinations", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
       94, 2004, 150-154.
Falvey, Rod, David Greenaway and Zhihong Yu (2004). “Intra-industry Trade Between
       Asymmetric Countries with Heterogeneous Firms,” GEP Research Paper 04/05.
Feenstra, R. and A. Rose, (1997). “Putting Things in Order: Patterns of Trade Dynamics and
       Macroeconomics”, NBER working paper 5975.
Greenaway, David, R.C. Hine, and Chris R.Milner (1995). “Horizontal and Vertical Intra-Industry
      Trade: A Cross Industry Analysis for the U.K. Economic Journal 105, 1505-1518.
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman (1985), Market structure and Trade, MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2003). “Export versus FDI”, NBER Working
      Paper no. 9439.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Stephen Yeaple (2004). “Export versus FDI with
      heterogeneous firms,” American Economic Review, 94, 1, 300-317.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Yona Rubinstein, (2004). “Trading Partners and Trading
      Volumes”, preliminary and incomplete pdf file, August 24, 2004.
Melitz, M. (2003). “The impact of trade on intraindustry reallocations and aggregate industry
        productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.
Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2005), “Market Size, Trade and Productivity”, NBER
        working paper 11393.
Montagna, Catia (2001). "Efficiency Gaps, Love of Variety and International Trade", Economica
      68, pp. 27 -44.
Ottaviano Ginamarco, Takatoshi Tabuchi and Jacques-Francois Thisse (2002). “Agglomeration and
       Trade Revisited”, International Economic Review 43, 409-436.
Schmitt, Nicolas and Zhihao Yub (2001). “Economies of scale and the volume of intra-industry
       trade,” Economics Letters 74:1 , pp. 127-132.
Tybout, J., (2003). “Plant- and Firm-level Evidence on "New" Trade Theories”, in E. K. Choi and J.
      Harrigan (eds) Handbook of International Trade Blackwell, Oxford.
Wang, Z. K. and Alan Winters, 1992, “The Trading Potential of Eastern Europe,” Journal of
      Economic Integration, Vol. 7, 1992, 113-136.
Yeaple, S. (2005), Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages, Journal of International
       Economics, 65(1), 1-20.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                             24
Yeaple, S. (2004). “Export versus FDI with heterogeneous firms,” American Economic Review,
       94, 1, 300-317.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                        25

GUIDE TO CALCULATIONS FOR REFEREES AND READERS
Calculations refered to in 2.

The standard CES demand function is:

                     cj=µE(pj)-σ/( ∫ i∈Θ pi
                                                    1-σ
                                                          di )

multiplying both sides by pj, we get:

                     pjcj=µE(pj)1-σ/( ∫ i∈Θ pi
                                                          1-σ
                                                                di )

for variety j, where the integral is over all competing varieties (i.e. i∈Θ), and µE is total expenditure
on all varieties in the market, since µ is the Cobb-Douglas share of expenditure on M-goods. Given
the well-known Dixit-Stiglitz feature called mill price, the price-marginal cost mark-ups are all
identical and thus cancel out, so

          pjcj=µE(pj)1-σ / ({ n ∫
                                         a
                                                                                    ∫
                                                                                        a
                                                 a 1 − σ dG[a a D ] + n * τ 1 − σ               a 1 − σ dG[a a D ] },
                                             D                                              X

                                        0                                               0



since ndG[a a D ] gives the mass of varieties with marginal cost ‘a’. That is, G[a a D ] is the

condition density of a, given that the variety is actually produced, and there is a mass of ‘n’ on each
‘a’; for a proof that this is the conditional density in equilibrium, see Melitz (2003).

Note that we have here included all D-type varieties produced in the local market in the first
integral and all varieties that are imported from the other market (i.e. varieties with a’s between zero
and aX) in the second integral. Here, φ≡τ1-σ measures the iceberg trade costs that are passed on by
foreign firms. Multiplying by aj yields the expression in the text.

Calculations referred to in footnote 3:

A typical Dixit-Stiglitz first-order condition is p(1-1/σ)=wa, where w is wage and p is price;
rearranging, the operating profit, (p-wa)c, equals pc/σ with c defined as consumption. Thus,
operating profit, (p-wa)c, is proportional to revenue, pc; the factor of proportionality is 1/σ.



Calculations referred to in footnote 4:

Defining π[a] as the steady-state operating profit earned by a firm with marginal cost ‘a’, the
present value with a discount rate ρ and the Poisson firm-death process assumed is: π[a]
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                        26
    ∞
∫0
        e - ρt e -δt dt since the probability of the firm still being alive at t is e-δt. Setting ρ=0 and solving the

integral yields the expression in the text.



Calculations referred to in footnote 5:

The expression for ∆ follows directly from (4) and

(7); specifically

             ∆={k/(1-σ+k)}(aD1-σ)(1+φ(aX/aD)1-σ+k).

Using the ratio of the cut-offs, β≡k/(σ-1) and our definition of Ω,

             ∆={1/(1-1/β)}(aD1-σ)(1+Ω).



Calculations referred to in footnote 7.

To find n, plug ∆ from (8) into the D-type cut-off condition. To find aD, plug the closed form
solution for n into the free entry condition using the ratio of cut-off conditions to evaluate
G[aX]/G[aD]. aX then follows from this the expression for aD and the ratio of the cut-off conditions.

Using the solution for ∆ (and the corresponding expression for ∆*) in the domestic cut-off condition
for the Home nation, we see that the aD drops out to leave:

                      µL(1 − β ) / β
                                          = fD .
                           n + n*Ω

Doing the same for the Home export cut-off condition, we get a similar expression where the aD
does not drop out, but the expression involves the ratio of aD and aX:

                          a X 1−σ µL * (1 − β ) / β
                      (      )                      = f X /φ .
                          aD         nΩ + n *

We eliminate the ratio of aD and aX by using the ratio of the cut-off conditions, and simplify to
obtain:

                      µL * (1 − β ) / β
                                            = fD .
                            nΩ + n *

Solving these two expressions for n and n* yields the result in the text.
Baldwin & Forslid: Trade liberalisation with heterogeneous firms                                                27
Calculations referred to in footnote 15.

The derivative is:

dnC*    2Ω(T − 1) L * −(1 + Ω 2 )(T − 1) L
     =υ                                    and naturally, the entire action is in the numerator, which
dΩ               T (1 − Ω 2 ) 2

                       ⎛     1 + Ω2 L ⎞
can be re-written as: ⎜⎜ 2 −           ⎟Ω(T − 1) L * . Since Ω is bound by zero and unity, and L/L*>1,
                       ⎝        Ω L * ⎟⎠

the term in the large parentheses is always negative. This proves the assertion in the text.



Calculations referred to in footnote 18.

Noting that a firm’s Ricardian surplus is 1/σ times its sales, the proportional change in the r’s is
identical to the proportional changes in sales. Thus, we know that rˆD < 0 = wˆ < rˆX . To establish real
factor reward changes, we must compare these to the proportional change in P shown in (24). The
                                                                               φ ˆ
real changes are: rˆD − Pˆ = (σ − 1 − µ )aˆ D , rˆX − Pˆ = (σ − 1 − µ )aˆ D +      φ and wˆ − Pˆ = 0 − aˆ D .
                                                                              1+ φ
Since â D is negative when trade freeness rises (dφ>0), we know that workers always gain, and

σ>1+µ is a necessary and sufficient condition for D-type firm owners to lose. The X-type firm gains
                                                                   ∧   1 Ω      ∧
in the foreign market but loses at home. Using (10) a D = −                   β φ , we get that
                                                                       k 1+ Ω
             (σ − 1 − µ ) Ω ∧   φ ˆ
rˆX − Pˆ = −                φ+     φ . Since φ > Ω for T>1, we have that rˆX − Pˆ > 0 .
               1−σ 1+ Ω        1+φ
