NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRIVATE VALUE OF SOFTWARE PATENTS
Bronwyn H. Hall
Megan MacGarvie
Working Paper 12195
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12195

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

This is a revision of a paper written in April 2005. We thank Anne Layne-Farrar and LECG for the
use of the Corptech data, and we thank Jim Bessen for helpful suggestions and for supplying us with
the list of software patents used in Bessen and Hunt (2003). We are also grateful to two anonymous
referees and to Stu Graham, Bala Iyer, Michael Salinger, Lucia Silva, numerous participants in the
Empirical Patent Research Conference, St. Helena, California, February 2005, the IIOC, Atlanta, April
2005, the ZEW Conference on Patents and Innovation in Mannheim, September 2005, the Seventh
CEPR Conference on Applied Industrial Organization, Madeira, May 2006, the NBER Summer Institute
2006, the First Annual EPIP Conference, Munich, September 2006, and seminars at UCSD, University
of Kansas, University of Michigan, University of Maastricht, LMU-Muenchen, and RIETI, Tokyo
for extremely helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Private Value of Software Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie
NBER Working Paper No. 12195
May 2006, Revised January 2010
JEL No. O34,L63,L86
ABSTRACT
We investigate the value creation or destruction associated with the introduction of software patents
in the United States in two ways. The first looks at the cumulative abnormal returns to Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) firms around the time of important court decisions that impacted
software patents, and the second analyzes the relationship between firms’ stock market value, the sector
in which they operate, and their holdings of software patents. We conclude that the market evaluated
software patents as a negative development ex ante. Ex post, a greater number of firms in all ICT sectors
invested in these patents, and these firms had slightly higher market values than those with no software
patents. However, while we obtain clear evidence that the technological importance or quality of patented
innovation mattered for the market value of hardware firms both before and after the legal changes,
it is less clear that the marginal patent right per se was associated with increases in market value, and
there are no significant valuation effects associated with patents for pure software firms after the change.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Dept. of Economics
549 Evans Hall
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
Megan MacGarvie
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 522H
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mmacgarv@bu.edu

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

The Private Value of Software Patents
Bronwyn H. Hall and Megan MacGarvie2
December 2009

1.

Introduction
Ever since software became generally patentable in the United States in 1995, the

wisdom of such a change has been widely debated. Proponents of the change argue that there is
no statutory reason to exclude software (or computer-implemented) inventions from
patentability, and also that patenting software has social benefits from disclosure and from the
fact that it enables software components to be reused by others (Cohen and Lemley 2001).
Critics, who are numerous, base their arguments on a series of considerations: that such patents
have often been of low quality, that they discourage rather than encourage innovation, and that
they have a negative effect on the growing open source model of innovation (Kasdan 1994;
Barton 2000, 2002; Hunt 2001; Bakels and Hugenholtz 2002; Lunney 2001; Dreyfuss 2000,
2001; Meurer 2002). In a recent article in PC magazine, the columnist John Dvorak argued that
software patenting is even bad for Microsoft, the largest patent holder among the pure software
firms (Dvorak 2005). In Europe, patentability of software is still being debated, with no clear
conclusion emerging (Blind et al. 2001; European Commission 2002; Spindler 2003).
The economic view of the patent system sees this debate as an inevitable one, given the
nature of patents: with a patent grant we trade off short term exclusive (monopoly) rights to the

2

UC Berkeley, University of Maastricht, NBER, and IFS London; Boston University and NBER.

2

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

use of an invention in return for two things: 1) an incentive to create the innovation; and 2) early
publication of information about the innovation and its enablement. The argument is that without
the patent system, fewer innovations would be produced, and those that were produced would be
kept secret as much as possible to protect their returns from appropriation by others. In
considering the economic impacts of a subject matter extension to software and business
methods, the tradeoff between these benefits and the welfare cost of the grant of a monopoly
right are at least as important as they are in any other technological arena.
Recent analysis also says that although competition may suffer when we grant a
monopoly right to an inventor, it will benefit if this right facilitates entry into the industry by new
and innovative firms (Hall 2003)3. Second, innovation will benefit from the incentive created by
a patent but may suffer if patents discourage the combining and recombining of inventions to
make new products and processes (Scotchmer 1991, 1996; Heller and Eisenberg 1998). There
are several reasons to think that facilitating entry (the benefit of patents for competition) and
discouraging recombination of elements (the cost of patents for innovation) may be particularly
salient factors when considering the effects of patentability on the software industry. The
software sector is characterized by low tangible assets and high intangible assets, which means
that it is more important to have intellectual property rights in order to secure funding for
investment. Software itself is typically cumulative and composed of a number of components
which may come from a number of different sources, and where interoperability standards are

3

Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006) find evidence that firms holding patents are more likely to enter
software markets. However, increases in the extent of patenting by other firms in the market reduce the rate of entry.
Hall (2005) finds that firms in the ICT sector that enter the publicly traded sector after changes in patenting behavior
in this sector in the mid-1980s have much higher patent valuations than those that enter earlier.

3

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

important. Both factors mean that combination and recombination of inputs is an essential part of
software creation.
Evaluating the tradeoff between the benefits and costs of the introduction of software
patents is a formidable, perhaps impossible, task. It is not made easier by the fact that the most
important expansion of software patentability occurred in 1994-1995, exactly coincident with the
internet revolution and the beginnings of its impact on the global economy’s use of software for
a wide range of new applications.4 To evaluate the impact of software patentability properly
would require an examination of a counterfactual world without software patents and
measurement of the differential impact on welfare and innovative activity in existing firms, new
entrants, downstream buyers, and consumers. In this paper we look at one ingredient of the
overall problem: the private returns to established computer hardware and software firms from
the expansion of software patentability. If the patentability of software is beneficial for the
economy, we expect that such firms will experience positive returns to its introduction, even if
the overall economic effect is neutral or negative. That is, a finding that existing firms do not
benefit financially from the introduction of software patents makes it probable that the impact on
the economy as a whole is not positive either.
Existing research on software patents reveals a dramatic increase in the propensity to
patent software over the last two decades, and argues that this indicates that holding patents on
software has become both easier and more valuable to firms (Bessen and Hunt 2003). In this
paper we explore the relationship between firm value and the patenting of software in two
4

It is possible that this timing is not a coincidence. The expansion of patentability has often come about as
a result of the expansion of economic activity in a particular area. E.g., see Murmann (2003) on the chemical
industry in Germany and Britain in the late 19th century. However the rapidity with which attempts to patent
software followed on the introduction of the internet makes the causal explanation improbable. It seems more likely
that the changes in software patenting in the mid-nineties were driven by the introduction of the personal computer
in the mid-eighties and the consequential increased importance of stand-alone software firms.

4

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

different ways. First we conduct a series of event studies that look at the immediate market
impact of changes in the patentability of software on firms in sectors where software patenting is
prevalent.5 Second, we use the methodology of Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005) to estimate
the market value of software patents using various patent-related measures and we explore the
effect of changes in the patentability of software over time on the market value of publicly traded
firms that hold such patents.6
In performing these analyses, we separate the software firms in the sample into those that
are “upstream” and those that are “downstream,” which corresponds to the position of their
products in the computing stack, from the basic operating system layer to end user application
software products (Raduchel 2006). We hypothesize that firms producing software that relies on
hardware or software that is upstream from their software in order to operate may face more
negative consequences than other firms from the introduction of software patents (at least
initially), because they are more likely to need licenses for patented software technology in order
to ensure that their products will operate successfully in a particular computer environment.
The paper is organized in the following way: the next section reviews the recent history
of software patenting in the United States. This is followed by a discussion of our data, which
consists of a panel of publicly traded firms in the ICT sector; we also spend some time
evaluating a number of definitions of “software” patents that are based on keyword searches and
patent classification systems. The next two sections present our empirical results: first a series of

5

Based on a review of the industry sectors where firms obtain software patents described later in the paper,
we identified the relevant two-digit industries as 35 (machinery including computing equipment), 36 (electrical
machinery, 38 (instruments), 48 (telecommunications), and 73 (business services including software).
6

Noel and Schankerman (2006) perform a similar analysis of the market value effects of software patents,
and obtain conclusions similar to ours. They also study the relationship between market value and measures of the
cost of transacting with rival patenters, and conclude that market value is enhanced when rivals’ intellectual property
is concentrated among fewer parties.

5

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

studies of the immediate stock market impact of software patentability decisions in the courts,
and then the results for the relationship between firm market value and the ownership of patents.
The latter results are presented for two subperiods, before and after the general acceptance of
software patenting by the USPTO guidelines. The final section concludes.

2.

Background
The law concerning the patentability of software in the United States has evolved through

a series of decisions following the passage of the 1952 Patent Act (which did not exclude any
subject matter statutorily), to the point where algorithms may be patented if “there is practical
application for the algorithm or if it is associated with a tangible medium (Sterne and Bugaisky
2004, p. 221). Although a complete history of the use of intellectual property protection in the
software industry is beyond the scope of this paper, we provide a brief summary here and refer
the reader to Graham and Mowery (2003) for more detail.
In 1972, the Supreme Court’s ruling in Gottschalk v. Benson held that because software is
essentially a collection of algorithms, it could not be patented. In 1980, Congress confirmed that
the appropriate intellectual property protection for software was copyright (Samuelson 1984).7
However, in 1981 the court allowed for patenting of software tied to physical or mechanical
processes, such as the program implemented in the method for curing rubber at issue in Diamond
v. Diehr, a decision which seems consistent with the present day European Patent Convention. 8

7

Patents and copyrights protect very different aspects of software. Copyrights are awarded to creators of
“original works of authorship” and protect the specific computer code as an “original expression.” Copyright does
not cover the functions performed by the code. What a software program actually does may be protected by a patent.
8

The European Patent Convention’s (EPC) treatment of patentable subject matter differs markedly from
that of the United States Patent Act. Whereas in the US, the 1952 Patent Act opened the door to judicial expansions
of patentable subject matter by not including any explicit limits on statutory subject matter, Article 52 of the EPC
expressly excludes several categories of inventions, among them mathematical methods, schemes, rules and

6

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

However, this and subsequent decisions by the court during the next 15 years led the US Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO) to modify its position with respect to software patents,
ultimately to one that allowed them even when not embodied in a physical process. As Figures 1
and 2 show, the growth of software patenting increased from a 5-10 per cent level prior to 1981
to a 15 per cent level afterwards, and then increased again in the mid-1990s, as the internet boom
took off and the USPTO issued new guidelines for software patenting in response to a series of
court rulings described later in the paper.
Following the Diamond v. Diehr decision, the software patenting standard was
substantially unchanged until the early 1990s when the rise of the personal computer industry
and the consequent vertical disintegration of the computing sector encouraged software and
information producers to test the subject matter exclusions with respect to software again. In
1993 Compton Encyclopedia attempted to enforce a broad patent on the display of multi-media
content on CD-ROMs against several firms; in response to complaints by these firms, the
USPTO re-examined and revoked the patent in March 1994, which halted assertion of this
particular software patent.
But then later in 1994 an important change occurred when the Court of Appeals of the
Federal Circuit (CAFC) stated (In re Alappat) that unpatentable software was that which
represented “a disembodied mathematical concept…which in essence represents nothing more
than a ‘law of nature,’ ‘natural phenomenon,’ or ‘abstract idea.’” Software that could be patented

methods for performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for computers “to the extent to
which a European patent application or European patent relates to such subject-matter or activities as such” (EPO
1989, emphasis added). In the case of software, the phrase “as such” has led to a number of software inventions
actually being patented via their embodiment in hardware. See Bakels (2005) for a detailed discussion of the
evolution of European policy in this area.

7

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

was “rather a specific machine to produce a useful, concrete, and tangible result.”9 A series of
additional decisions, described in more detail in section 4 of this paper, culminated in 1995 with
In re Beauregard, in which the CAFC ruled that the Patent Office’s rejection of a software patent
application by IBM was erroneous. The Commissioner of Patents then issued new guidelines on
the patenting of software, which allowed inventors to patent any software embodied in physical
media (which essentially reversed the Gottschalk decision). (Sterne and Bugaisky 2004, p. 223)
These decisions presumably lie behind the huge increases in software patenting during the 19961999 period shown in Figures 1 and 2.
A second important expansion of patentability took place in 1998 when Judge Rich
issued the famous opinion in State Street Bank and Trust v Signature Financial Corporation.10
The Signature patent at issue was a “pure” number-crunching type of application, which
implemented financial accounting functions. The Federal Circuit Court decision stated clearly
that Section 101 (the section of the patent code that deals with subject matter for patentability) is
unambiguous - “any” means ALL, and it is improper to read limitations into 101 not intended by
Congress. Therefore, mathematical algorithms are non-statutory only when “disembodied” and
thus lacking a useful application. The court went on to make sure that the decision was
precedent-setting by stating that with regard to the business method exception, “We take this
opportunity to lay this ill-conceived exception to rest.”
This decision was followed by an increase in applications for “business method” patents,
most of which are arguably also software patents, because they describe the implementation of a

9

In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526, 1544 (Fed. Cir. 1994), cited in Sterne and Bugaisky (2004), p. 222.

10

State Street Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
See Lerner (2002) for a fuller discussion of this case.

8

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

business method on a computer or the internet. However, they are still a small fraction of all
software patents (Hall 2003), at least when we use the relevant patent class (705) to define
them.11 Most of the analysis in this paper uses data that ends in 1999 or earlier, so these patents
will play a relatively small role.
2.1

The critique of software patentability
Much of the critique of software patents centers on the perception that such patents are

often of low quality, rather than the principle that software should never be patentable. The
“quality” of a patent is a somewhat ill-defined catchall term for all the characteristics that the
particular analyst would like patents to have. Hall (2003) and Hall et al (2003) review these
criteria and argue why the failure of issued patents to satisfy them may be costly for firms and
society. These criteria include satisfying the statutory definition of a patentable invention
(novelty, non-obviousness, and utility),12 sufficient disclosure to enable those “skilled in the art”
to understand the invention, and relatively little uncertainty over the validity of the patent. A
number of legal and technical scholars have critiqued the software patents issued after the series
of court decisions in 1994-1995 on all of these grounds.
First, because software development took place over a long period before software was
patentable, when the USPTO began to handle large numbers of patents in this area in 1994-1995,
they did not have examiners with the relevant training and lacked adequate data bases with
software prior art. For example, on February 7, 1995, the following exchange between a patent

11

While the majority of business method patents are found in this class, it should be noted that they can be
found in other classes as well, such as classes as 235, 380, 707, and 709.
12

See Lunney (2001) for an argument that the non-obviousness test has been weakened since the creation
of the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals in 1982.

9

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

examiner and the editor concerning access to non-patent prior art took place in Aharonian’s
Patent Newsletter:13
The examiner: “The problem with obviousness is evidence. When an
examiner uses common sense, attorneys scream hindsight. Also, a problem with
ordering non-patent publications or translations of foreign documents is the time
it takes to process these requests. An examiner cannot simply call a company
whose making, or is believed to have made, a product which appears to infringe
on a claim. At best, the examiner could ask a librarian at our library to call a
company to request info, but again that takes time. With ten hours to do a case,
movement is paramount.”
Aharonian: “Additionally for subjects like software, the cost of purchasing
copies of technical papers would exceed the application fee, so I doubt many
examiners would get the authority to spend such sums. Since for most software
patent applications, the most relevant prior art is non-patent materials, between
the statistics I cited on citing prior non-patent prior art (an average of two out of
about 30) plus the above and below comments, one could make a good case that it
is impossible for the PTO to conduct adequate novelty analyses.”
The result of lack of access to adequate prior art was that many poor quality software patents
were issued (Barton 2001; Kasdan 1994, 1999; Lunney 2001).
Second, this sector is an extreme case of cumulative innovation, where one person’s
invention depends on those of many other people and the transactions costs associated with
licensing a large number of patents for any particular software product may exceed the profits

13

Aharonian (1995). http:/www.bustpatents.com/

10

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

attainable from its creation and therefore discourage innovation altogether. Third, some claim
that the disclosure function of patents is particularly badly served by software patents, which
rarely include the source code implementation and are often quite vaguely and broadly worded.
Even in the case of patents in general, both Cohen et al. (2002) (using US survey data) and
Arundel et al. (2002) (using European survey data) report that firms rank a number of other
means of acquiring information such as customers, exhibits, conferences, journals, suppliers,
competitors, and nonprofit institutions ahead of patent disclosures as technical information
sources. Furthermore, in contrast to other industries, it has been argued that patents on software
do not generally serve to diffuse information about the patented technology. Mann (2004) states
that:
“It is clear that [disclosure] is an important benefit of patents in some industries,
although the software industry in its current form is probably not one of them…As others
have noted, with software cases the Federal Circuit has interpreted the disclosure
requirement in such a way as to minimize the likelihood that disclosures will require
information that is directly useful to competing inventors. Moreover, given the rapid pace
of innovation, it will not often be the case that information disclosure in a patent
application filed years earlier will be of immediate value to competitors in the industry.”
14

Finally, the growing open source movement has been extremely critical of such patents,
because of the obvious fact that coexistence of open source with patented software is
problematical. When independent invention is not a defense against infringement (as in the case
of patents), a developer that issues a GPL or copyleft license to others on code that he has

14

Mann (2004), p. 49-50

11

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

developed cannot be sure that he has the right to do so. Thus the presence of patents on some
innovations implemented via software may foreclose many avenues of open source development,
unless low cost methods of licensing are developed.15

3.

Data
To perform our study, we combine data on publicly traded firms and their market value

for the 1975-2002 period with a version of the NBER patent and citations dataset that has been
updated to 2002.16 The patent data are matched to Compustat data on firms in the following SIC
categories: 35 (machinery including computing equipment), 36 (electrical machinery), 38
(instruments), 48 (telecommunications), and 73 (business services including software). This
match was done using a version of Hall’s Compustat-assignee match updated to include firms
that were not included in the previous (1995) version.17 Using this updated match, we are able to
identify patenting entities associated with 1,290 of the 2,379 Compustat firms in the SIC classes
listed above. Our dataset is an unbalanced panel, and Appendix A3 lists the number of firms and
the number of software firms in the dataset in each year of the sample. Both series have
increased during the period, but software firms have clearly become more important as a share of
the ICT sector.
Table 2 contains summary statistics for the dataset. In order to identify the particular
software area in which our firms operate, we have also incorporated information from the

15

For more on the debate on software patents and open source, see Evans and Layne-Farrar (2004).

16

The update is available at http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/bhhall

17

Details on the matching algorithm can be found at
http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/bhhall/pat/namematch/namematch.html

12

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Corptech directory of technology companies on the type of software they produce (systems
software, middleware, applications, or software-related services).18
3.1

Defining a software patent
One difficulty that all researchers in this area encounter is that the definition of a software

patent is rather unclear (Layne-Farrar 2005). Many scholars in the area may feel that ”we know
one when we see one” but this is not a practical way to choose a particular set of patents out of
the 3 million or so in our datasets. Although all patents are classified into a number of
technology classes and simply choosing those patents that are associated with software classes
might seem the desirable way to go, it is an unfortunate truth that many of the relevant classes
are broad enough to contain both software and hardware patents, and some software patents end
up classified in classes that do not appear to have anything to do with software at first glance. 19
For this reason, different researchers have taken a number of approaches to identify software
patents. In early versions of this paper, we explored the use of several different definitions and
finally settled on a combination of them.20
The results reported in the body of the paper were obtained using a definition of a
software patent that combined three ways of defining software patents. The three definitions are
that used by Graham and Mowery (2003), that used by Bessen and Hunt (2003), and one that we

18

We gather this information from Corptech’s SOF product codes and the classification developed in Gao
(2005), which is listed in the appendix to this paper.
19

The four US patent classes with the largest number of patents assigned to our software firms are 382
(Image Analysis), 345 (Selective Visual Display Systems), 341 (Coded Data Generation or Conversion), and 700
(Data Processing: Generic Control Systems or Specific Applications), all of which can hold hardware as well as
software applications. On the other hand, there are over 1000 such patents in 435 (Molecular Biology) and over 500
in 84 (Music).
20

For comparison, results using each of the definitions are found in an appendix.

13

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

constructed based on the patent classes and subclasses that contain patents assigned to fifteen of
the largest software firms (which we call Hall-MacGarvie). Our combined definition was the
union of the set of patents in all relevant IPC and US patent classes (the union of GrahamMowery and Hall-MacGarvie) intersected with the set of patents found using a keyword search
of title and abstract (Bessen-Hunt).
As a check, we compare the results of these automated classification systems with the
sample of software and internet business method patents identified manually by John Allison via
a reading of the claims and description in the patents (Allison and Lemley 2000; Allison and
Tiller 2003). In the remainder of this section of the paper, we describe the definitions more fully
and present some comparative statistics based on them.
Graham and Mowery (henceforth GM) identify as software patents those that fall in
certain International Patent Classification (IPC) class/subclass/groups. Broadly defined, the
class/subclasses are “Electric Digital Data Processing” (G06F), “Recognition of Data;
Presentation of Data; Record Carriers; Handling Record Carriers” (G06K), and “Electric
Communication Technique” (H04L).21 Graham and Mowery selected these classes after
examining the patents of the six largest producers of software in the U.S. (based on 1995
revenues) between 1984 and 1995. Patents in these classes account for 57% of the patents
assigned to the hundred largest firms in the software industry.22
Bessen and Hunt (henceforth BH) define software patents as those that include the word
“software,” or the words “computer” and “program,” in the description and/or specification.
Patents that meet these criteria and also contain the words “semiconductor,” “chip,” “circuit,”

21

The groups included are G06F: 3,5,7,9,11,12,13,15; G06K: 9,15; H04L: 9.

22

Graham and Mowery, p. 232. The firms are Microsoft, Adobe, Novell, Autodesk, Intuit, and Symantec.

14

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

“circuitry” or “bus” in the title are excluded, as they are believed to refer to the technology used
to execute software rather than the software itself.23 Patents containing “antigen”, “antigenic”, or
“chromatography” in the description/specification are also excluded.
Our third algorithm for defining software patents (which we label HM) is similar to that
used by Graham and Mowery. We identified all the U.S. patent class-subclass combinations in
which fifteen software firms (Microsoft, Adobe, Novell, Autodesk, Symantec, Macromedia,
Borland, Wall Data, Phoenix, Informix, Starfish, Oracle, Veritas, RSA Security, and Peoplesoft)
patented and then categorized patents falling in these class-subclass combinations as “software.”
24

We refer to this definition of software patents as the Hall-MacGarvie definition.
As a check of the accuracy of these various definitions, we used a sample of manually

identified software and business method patents compiled by John Allison.25 Using a sample of
1000 patents issued between 1996 and 1998, Allison and Lemley (2000) identified 100 software
patents by reading the claims and descriptions. Allison and Tiller (2003) augmented this sample
with 230 internet business method patents, most of which are arguably members of the class of
software patents. Table 1 shows the results of comparing this list with the patents selected by the
three definitions, Bessen-Hunt, Graham-Mowery, and Hall-MacGarvie. From this procedure we
can learn whether our samples include patents identified by Allison, although we are unable to
ascertain how many patents in our sample would not have been labeled software by his

23

Bessen and Hunt, p. 4.

24

One complication in using the U.S. patent classification system is that patents are continually reclassified
as new classes are opened up. Software has been particularly subject to this reclassification, because there were no
specific software classes until the “700” classes were created after the issuance of the USPTO guidelines in 1996.
We are using the 2002 classification of all the patents in our dataset, which is late enough so that software should be
correctly classified.
25

We are grateful to James Bessen for making these patents available to us in machine-readable form, and
for updating the data to 2002.

15

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

procedure. That is, we can measure Type I error (missing a software patent we should have
identified) but not Type II error (calling a patent a software patent when it is not).
The results are fairly clear: the keyword method of Bessen and Hunt is much more
accurate in the sense of avoiding Type I error than either the International Patent Classification
(IPC)-based classification or the US patent class-based classification, either of which identify
only about half of these patents. Interestingly, Graham-Mowery is better at identifying software
patents, whereas Hall-MacGarvie is much better at internet business method patents. This is
probably because the US patent class system explicitly admits the existence of such patents,
while the IPC does not, so they may end up classified in a wide range of IPC classes.
Layne-Farrar (2005) describes an attempt to determine the Type II error in these different
definitions of software patents. She reports that when software experts read a random sample of
patents from each dataset to see if they were truly for software, they classified about 5 per cent of
the patents held by packaged software firms in the Graham-Mowery and Allison-Tiller sets as
not software.26 Layne-Farrar finds that a larger proportion of the Bessen-Hunt sample were
classified as not relating to software, which would suggest that using only this definition is
problematic. However, since the latter sample (BH) includes patents held by firms across all
industries, the results of the comparison between the three samples are somewhat difficult to
interpret.
However, because the GM definition does well on Type II error, and because GM and
HM seem to select different groups of patents, whereas BH seems to be more comprehensive

26

Layne-Farrar did not have access to the sample selected by our US patent class rule, because her paper
was written in 2005. It should also be noted that the Allison-Tiller sample consists of quite a specific set of internetrelated business method and software patents in classes 705, 707 and 709, and is not representative of software
patents more generally.

16

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

(better at Type I error), our preferred definition of software patents combines these definitions in
the following way: we take the union of the GM and HM samples, and then intersect this with
the BH sample. On the assumption that the HM US class/subclass approach does something
similar to the GM IPC class/subclass approach, this intersects a sample that should have
approximately 5% type II error (that is, it rarely misidentifies patents as software that are not
software) with an inclusive sample that covers almost all software patents plus many other
computing patents. The result is shown in the final row of Table 1: our new definition captures
over 80 per cent of the patents identified by Allison as software and internet patents, but not at
the cost of being too inclusive. We therefore chose to use this combined definition as our
preferred sample of software patents, and to present results using the other definitions in an
appendix.
Figures 1 and 2 show the trends in software patent growth using the four definitions
described above plus an aggregate software patenting series supplied by Aharonian (2001) in his
email newsletter.27 Figure 1 shows the absolute numbers and Figure 2 shows the share of
software patents among all granted patents. The Aharonian definition appears to track that from
the Bessen-Hunt keyword definition more closely than the others, whereas our combined
definition is conservative and lies somewhere between the two patent class definitions (those
using IPC and US patent classes). Using any of the definitions, there is substantial growth since
1976 that accelerates in around 1995-1996. The apparent jump from 1997 to 1998 using any of
the definitions results from a jump in applications three years earlier, that is presumably due to
the series of court decisions that are described in the next section of the paper.

27

Greg Aharonian is a patent agent specializing in Information Technology sector patenting who has been
tracking software patents using his own subjective evaluation of subject matter for some time. We include his
figures to give some idea of the view of an observer familiar with the sector and its patenting.

17

Hall and MacGarvie

4.

December 2009

Event studies
As discussed earlier, in 1994 and 1995, the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit

(CAFC) handed down a number of decisions that affected the scope of software patents. These
decisions include In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (1994, en banc); In re Warmerdam, 33 F.3d 1354
(1994); In re Lowry, 32 F.3d 1579 (1994), In re Trovato, 60 F.3d 805 (1995, en banc), and In re
Beauregard, 53 F.3d 1583 (1995). In response to the confusion created by the court’s
determination that much of software was patentable, the USPTO proposed new guidelines for
software patentability on May 12, 1995, and published these guidelines on March 29, 1996. In
this section of the paper, we describe the decisions and then present the results of several studies
of the effects of the decisions on the value of firms in the software industry or holding software
patents. Table 3 presents a timeline for the decisions we consider, with the abnormal returns
experienced by our firms around the date of each decision (these results are discussed in section
4.1)

In re Alappat
In 1988, Alappat filed an application for a patent on a means of smoothing the
appearance of a waveform displayed by a digital oscilloscope. The PTO rejected the
application’s claims as non-patentable subject matter. Alappat appealed the decision to the Board
of Patent Appeals, which reversed the PTO’s decision on June 26, 1991. The patent examiner
then requested a reconsideration of the decision by an expanded panel of the Board of Appeals,
which on April 22, 1992 reversed the decision of the original panel. On July 29, 1994, the CAFC
handed down a decision stating that the invention was not an “abstract idea”, but rather, “a

18

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

specific machine to produce a useful, concrete, and tangible result.”28 This decision was
interpreted as a clear expansion of the patentability of software.29

In re Warmerdam
The Alappat decision was followed on August 11, 1994 by In re Warmerdam, partly
affirming and partly reversing the decisions of the Board of Patent Appeals, which had upheld
the PTO’s rejection of an invention as non-patentable subject matter. The CAFC ruled that the
invention, a mechanism for generating data structures for collision avoidance systems, was
“nothing more than the manipulation of basic mathematical constructs, the paradigmatic ‘abstract
idea’”, and sustained the rejection of five of the patent’s six claims.30 However, the court
affirmed one claim, implying that a machine containing in memory the data structure created by
the mechanism would indeed be patentable (Huttner and Strobert 1995).

In re Lowry
Warmerdam was followed on August 26, 1994 by In re Lowry, which reversed the PTO’s
rejection of an application on the grounds that a data structure held in memory was unpatentable
under the “printed matter” doctrine. The “printed matter” doctrine provides that "an article of
manufacture which consists of printed matter on a substrate cannot be statutory if it differs from
other substrates only by the informational content of the printed matter except where there is

28

In re Alappat 33 F.3d 1526, 31 USPQ2d 1545

29

The decision was first mentioned in the Wall St. Journal on August 8, 1994. We also tried computing
abnormal returns around this date, but the CARs were not statistically significant.
30

In re Warmerdam, 3 F.3d 1354, 31 USPQ2d 1754

19

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

some functional interaction between the printed matter and the substrate."31 In this instance, the
PTO had held that Lowry had not shown that the data structures were functionally related to the
memory in which they were stored, but the CAFC ruled that the printed matter doctrine did not
hold when the information in question was processed by a machine rather than by the human
mind.

In re Trovato and In re Beauregard
In In re Trovato (December 19, 1994), the CAFC upheld the PTO’s rejection of a
software patent for containing non-statutory subject matter. The patent covered a new technique
for calculating the most efficient path of an object between states in physical space. The court
ruled that “[p]utting Trovato's claims in their most favorable light, the most they provide is a
systemic way in which to compute a number representing the shortest path. A new way to
calculate a number cannot be recognized as statutory subject matter.”32 On May 12, 1995, the
CAFC ruled in In re Beauregard that the PTO’s rejection of a patent’s claims under the printed
matter doctrine was incorrect given the precedent set in In re Lowry. The patent office admitted
its mistake in the case.33

New UPSTO Guidelines
In response to the above decisions, the USPTO proposed new guidelines for software
patentability on May 12, 1995, and published these guidelines on March 29, 1996. The
guidelines expanded on Warmerdam’s finding with respect to data held in the memory of a

31

USPTO 1995. See also In re Gulack, 703 F.2d 1381, 217 USPQ 401.

32

In re Trovato, 60 F.3d 805.

33

The Computer Lawyer, Vol. 12, No. 5; Pg. 30, May 1995

20

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

machine, stating that the PTO would begin to allow claims related to software embedded in
physical media. Claims should be considered processes unless they relate to some type of
machine or physical apparatus. The guidelines clarified the definition of the following criteria to
be used by examiners to distinguish between
“a) a computer or other programmable apparatus controlled by software as a statutory
‘machine’;
b) a computer-readable memory used to direct a computer, such as a memory device, a
compact disc or a floppy disk as a statutory ‘article of manufacture’; and
c) a series of steps to be performed on or with the aid of a computer as a statutory
‘process.’”34
The guidelines stated that inventions that were to be considered non-statutory included
data compilations or structures independent of physical elements, encoded information
representing creative or artistic expression, and processes that do "nothing more than manipulate
abstract ideas or concepts.”35
4.1

Null hypotheses on the effects of the patentability decisions
As stated previously, the expansion of the patentability of software may have had both

positive and negative effects. Firms already holding patents at the time of the decision may be
positively affected due to an increased ability to exclude competitors from a market or collect
licensing revenues. We will thus compare the effects of patentability on patent holders and nonpatent holders as of the time of the event, with the expectation that the market reaction should be

34

USPTO guidelines quoted in Huttner and Strobert (1995).

35

op. cit.

21

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

larger for patent holders. Note that another set of firms that may benefit from software patents
are start-ups for whom patents may help secure financing. Because we are focusing on the
market value of publicly traded firms, we are unable to study this effect.36
We also consider the potential negative effects of the decisions. For all firms, the
decisions may have increased costs by creating the need to engage in licensing negotiations and
by increasing the potential for hold-up. We hypothesize that the latter effect is especially relevant
for firms in “downstream” market segments, i.e., firms producing software that must interact
with or operate on top of other software or platforms. We thus test whether the market reacted
negatively for firms specializing in applications software and software-related services relative to
firms producing for “upstream” segments (middleware, systems software, and hardware).37
4.2

Results of the event studies
Table 3 contains the results of the event studies that identify the market’s response to

each of the above-mentioned decisions, for the entire sample of firms and for software firms
only. We calculate the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) associated with the events, and their
standard errors, using the standard market model approach as described in Appendix B. To
obtain the market model for each stock, we regress the stock returns for firms in our sample on
the market return (using the CRSP value-weighted market index) using data from the period (90, -30) relative to each event.38 We then estimate the excess returns for the period (-1,+3)

36

Cockburn and MacGarvie (2006) study the effects of patent “thickets” on entry in narrowly-defined
software product areas.
37

See the appendix for our classification of firms into these segments.

38

Our study includes some events that are less than one month apart. We choose the 30 day lag for the
window to minimize any contamination arising from overlapping events.

22

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

around the event by summing the forecasted residuals from the market model and computing
their standard errors, taking account of any correlation that might be present.
For each event we show the average CAR for all firms in our sample and for four
subgroups of firms: 1) firms that only produce software (firms whose primary SIC code is 73XX
and who do not also produce hardware), 2) firms that specialize in applications software or
software-related services, as defined by the Corptech directory or by our investigation using web
searches,39 3) firms that had not applied for patents in the year prior to the event, and 4) firms
that had not applied for software patents in the year prior to the event. We also performed rank
tests of the difference in the CAR distribution between the each group and other firms using the
methodology described in Appendix B.40 We group the CARs in this way because we expect the
effect of the decisions to differ depending on whether firms can expect to take advantage of the
increased strength of software patents. We expect that firms holding software patents at the time
of decisions that broaden patentable subject matter to include some types of software will be
positively affected relative to firms without patents. We also expect that firms in “downstream”
sectors – like applications software and software-related services – will be negatively affected
relative to upstream firms in hardware and middleware or systems software, because they may be
forced to license in patented technology in order to ensure that their products will function on top
of middleware or the operating systems.

39

As of the date of our data (2002), Compustat classified IBM into software services. Because of the
importance of this firm in software patenting in general and because for most of our time period IBM was primarily
a hardware firm, we have reclassified it into computing machinery. However, throughout this paper, we found that
estimates with and without including observations on IBM were substantially the same.
40

We found no significant differences for software firms versus hardware firms or application/services
firms versus the others, so the results of these tests are not shown in the table.

23

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

The first event we consider is the Supreme Court’s decision in Diamond v. Diehr,
Surprisingly, this decision has a positive overall return of almost one per cent in our sample, and
is also positive for all of the subsamples, although the number of software firms in the sample is
too small in 1981 to yield significant results. One possible interpretation is that this development,
which was a rather narrow extension of patentability to software embodied in hardware, was
viewed as positive for the majority of firms then in the sample, almost 90 per cent of whom were
not pure software firms.
The next two events were the assertion of the Compton patent and its subsequent
revocation.41 The assertion was announced on November 16, 1993 at Comdex.42 Clearly the
assertion was viewed as highly negative news for all ICT firms, and especially for software
firms, although the difference is not significant. There was little significant reaction to the
revocation of the patent, suggesting that the event was anticipated. What reaction there was is
slightly negative.
The In re Alappat decision is widely viewed as the groundbreaking one on software
patentability and this is reflected in the abnormal returns at the time of the decision.43 All firms
experienced negative abnormal returns, statistically significant at the 5 per cent level using the

41

Unfortunately, it is not possible to measure the reaction of the patent owner value to this event. Compton
Encyclopedia had been purchased by Encyclopedia Britannica, a privately-held firm, in 1961, so no market value
data is available. The patent was owned by Compton’s NewMedia, which was owned by the Tribune Company at
the time of its assertion.
42

John Eckhouse, writing in the San Francisco Chronicle the day before, reported that the patent had been
kept secret since it was issued in August, but that it would be publicly announced at Comdex the next day. He also
reported that “Attorneys who have seen some of the supporting documents say the patent will startle the industry
because of its unusual breadth.”
43

In reference to In re Alappat, Evans and Layne-Farrar (2004) state that “This ruling cemented the
statutory standing of software patents.” (p. 6). Mann (2004) says Alappat “cleared the way for software patents”
Cohen and Lemley (2001) state that “In 1994, the en banc Federal Circuit decided In re Alappat, opening a new era
in software patent protection”(p. 10).

24

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

rank test. The negative returns were primarily due to those firms that had not applied for
software patents by 1993 (the year preceding). However, the magnitude of the effects is small,
less than one half of a percent.
After Alappat, the next three decisions, In re Warmerdam, In re Lowry, and In re Trovato
had little impact. The first two followed closely on Alappat and all three took the form of
clarifying, partially affirming, and partially reversing that decision. In re Warmerdam was
viewed as having ambiguous implications, and was seen to counteract previous extensions of
software patentability while simultaneously affirming the patentability of a machine storing
“data structures” in memory.44 While this latter aspect of the decision is today viewed (with the
benefit of hindsight) as a step towards patentability, contemporary press reports suggest it may
have been primarily interpreted as a reversal. The headline in The Computer Lawyer in
September 1994 was “Federal Circuit Holds Collision Avoidance System Unpatentable.”45 In re
Lowry, a clear expansion of patentability but one that essentially confirmed Warmerdam and In
re Trovato had little impact.
In re Beauregard was a test case submitted by IBM in the wake of the Lowry decision,
essentially looking for confirmation from the courts that the “printed matter” doctrine did not
apply to software on physical media. In fact, the PTO conceded its mistake in rejecting the patent
application in this case and the CAFC never rendered a decision. The result was PTO
acknowledgement that a computer-readable medium qualifies as a statutory article of
manufacture to the extent program code stored on the medium and executable by a processor

44

Hollander (2003), Paragraphs 18-22.

45

See also Stobbs (1995), who contrasts Warmerdam with Lowry by writing “Warmerdam's data structure is

not patentable subject matter… Lowry's data structure is patentable subject matter.”

25

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

functionally defines the medium. The overall market reaction to this acknowledgement was
significantly positive, but that for firms without patents and without software patents was
significantly lower than for firms with patents.
On the heels of the Beauregard decision, the USPTO announced a set of proposed new
guidelines for software patents in May 1995. The announcement was viewed by the stock market
as significantly negative for all firms in ICT, and especially so for software firms. However, the
final issuance of the guidelines somewhat reversed this reaction, suggesting either the resolution
of uncertainty or confirmation that the expansion of patentability would not be as broad as
feared.

5.

Market value and software patenting
In this section of the paper we compare the financial market’s valuation of patents

identified as software-related to its valuation of patents in general, both before and after the
changes in software patentability rules in 1995. Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005 (henceforth,
HJT 2005) propose a methodology for estimating the contribution of patents and citationsweighted patents to market value (Tobin’s Q). We use a variation of their methodology that is
designed for the particular set of questions in which we are interested. In what follows, we first
describe the econometric specification, and then turn to describing results for the overall sample
followed by results for sub-samples of hardware and software, or applications/services and
middleware/systems software firms.
As noted in the HJT 2005 paper, economic theory is of limited help in determining the
specification of an equation that relates market value to patents and citations, and the
interpretation of the resulting coefficients can be difficult. There are two distinct problems: first,
the market value relationship is a (moving) equilibrium relationship rather than a causal
26

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

relationship and its coefficients measure the marginal shadow value of a particular asset at a
particular point in time. Second, the asset for which patents are a proxy contributes to value in at
least two ways: patents are both an indicator of the private value of innovative output and they
are also intrinsically valuable, since they represent the right to exclude others from practicing the
invention(s) which the innovation output incorporates. In the absence of patentability, the second
source of value would not be present. However, the two sources are inextricably linked, because
the private value of any particular innovation is inevitably related to the existence of the patent
right. For this reason, it is not possible to construct or indeed even to imagine a pure ceteris
paribus experiment using only market value data that would separate the two sources of value. 46
What we do here is attempt to provide some indication of the ways in which the
relationship between a firm’s patent holdings and its financial market valuation changed as a
result of changes in the patentability of software. To do this, we make use of the fact that we
have two patent measures: patent counts and a patent “quality” measure, the number of citations
subsequently received by the patent.47 By including both of these in our regression, we are able
to make at least a partial distinction between the value of the patented inventions, and the value
of the patent rights associated with them.
However, the separation into these two value components is not perfect for at least two
reasons. First, and related to the discussion above, we might expect that the pure value of a
patent right is correlated with the value of the underlying innovation. Second, measurement error

46

The best way to measure the value of the patent right is probably to use patent renewal data, which
measures the firm’s willingness to pay for the patent. However, such data is unable to say much about the value of
the more valuable patents, given the low level of renewal fees, and most of the value of the portfolio is in patents
renewed to full term. See Schankerman and Pakes () for an example of this methodology.
47

Harhoff et al. (1999) provide evidence from a survey of inventors that forward citations are significantly
positively correlated with the value of patents. Also see Nagaoka et al. (2010) for a recent survey of the use of patent
data.

27

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

in any of these variables will contaminate the coefficients of all the variables that are correlated
with that variable. In the case considered here, measurement error is inevitable, given that the
variables are integer counts that merely proxy for the underlying concepts. For this reason our
specifications will rely on variable constructions that are approximately orthogonal, in order to
minimize the biases from measurement error and correlations.48 The details of the specification
are discussed in the next section after we present the basic estimation model.
The HJT 2005 paper specifies a firm-level market-value equation that is linear and
additively separable [following Griliches (1981)]. In that paper, the market value of firm i in year
t was modeled as:
Vit = qt ( Ait + γ K it )σ t

(1)

where Ait stands for physical assets, and Kit the firm's knowledge assets. Some manipulation of
this equation yields a nonlinear expression for the log of Tobin’s q as a function of the
knowledge asset intensity.
In this paper we chose to use a simpler first order logarithmic expansion of the log of
market value for several reasons. The first was that our sample was very heterogeneous and skew
in its patenting behavior, especially in its software patenting behavior, and we were anxious to
mitigate the effects of outliers by using a robust functional form. The second was the presence of
the software patenting variables and our desire to model them in a transparent way, one that
made the results somewhat easier to interpret. Thus we started with the following simple
equation for the market value of a firm:

log Vit = f ( Ait , Kit )

48

See Hall (2004) “A Note on Measurement Error and Proxy Biases” for more on these biases.

28

(2)

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Because the knowledge assets K are not observed directly, we model them as function of
the R&D, patents, and citation-weighted patents:

 C SC

Kit = g  Rit , it , it , Pit , SPit 
Rit Rit



(3)

where Rit is firm i’s R&D capital stock in year t, Cit is a measure of citation stock in year t, Pit is
a measure of patent stock in year t, SPit is a measure of the software patent stock in year t, and
SCit is a measure of the software citation stock in year t.
The description of these variables is the following:
R&D stock (R) – the stock of past R&D spending
Citation stock/R&D stock (C/R) – a proxy for the success rate of the

firm’s R&D program, this measures innovative output relative to innovative input.
The citation stock is the discounted sum of citations received by granted patents
that have been applied for in the current year and prior years.
Software patent citation stock/R&D stock (SC/R) – a proxy for the

quality or success of the firm’s software efforts. Adding this variable to an
equation that also includes C/R allows software output quality to be measured as
in increment to that of other innovations.
Patent stock (P) – the stock of granted patents by application date
Software patent stock (SP) – similarly for software patents only; note

that these patents are also included in P.
Substituting equation (3) into (2) and using a first order logarithmic expansion yields the
following estimating equation:

log(Vit / Ait ) = log Qit = log qt + γ 0 log Ait + γ 1 log( RDit / Ait ) + γ 2 log(Cit / RDit )
+γ 3 log( SCit / RDit ) + γ 4 log( Pit / Ait ) + γ 5 log( SPit / Ait ) + ε it

(4)

In this equation, the coefficient γ2 measures the impact of (patented) innovation success
controlling for the R&D that produces it and γ3 measures the premium or discount associated
29

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

with patented software innovation success when compared with ordinary innovation. Assuming
that C and SC control for the success and quality of innovation output, the coefficient γ4
measures the additional value of having patents on this output, and γ5 measures the premium or
discount assigned by the market to software patents. Note that success in innovation that is not
associated with patents will not be captured by this model and remains in the residual; this is
inevitable given our lack of measures of such success.
Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2005) provides evidence that citations to a firm’s own
patents (self-cites) are about twice as valuable as other citations. This result suggests that selfcites proxy for stronger appropriability of a particular technology as well as for the “quality” of
that technology. That is, if a firm cites its own patents heavily, those patents have presumably
been important in opening up a particular technological area to exploitation by that firm. In order
to control for this possibility, we include the log of the ratio of self-cites to R&D in the
regression as well.49
When estimating the model in equation (4), we included a complete set of year dummies
for each of the 5 two-digit industries in our sample (machinery, electrical machinery,
instruments, telecommunications, and software).50 The R&D, citation, and patent stock measures
are constructed using the usual declining balance method with a depreciation rate of 15 per cent:
K it = (1 − δ ) K i ,t −1 + Rit

(5)

49

Because self-cites to all patents are highly correlated with self-cites to software patents in our sample, we
did not include a separate variable for software patent self cites.
50

We include the interaction between year and industry to deal with the large increase in valuation for
software firms at the end of our sample period, which was presumably due to the dotcom “bubble”.

30

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

where Rit is R&D spending, granted patents applied for in year t, or citations to granted patents
applied for in year t.51
Our data include observations with no R&D, observations with no patents, observations
with no software patents, observations with no self-citations, and various combinations of these.
A simple way to deal with this problem without losing observations is to include a set of
dummies for each of the various combinations; unfortunately several of the cells thus generated
are either zero or very small, so that we need to drop some of them. In Appendix C, we present
the distribution of missing or zero observations and explain how we chose a slightly reduced set
of dummies for the analysis. The Appendix also presents a set of regression tables that are
similar to Tables 4 and 5, but that include only these dummies. The six dummies we ended up
using are the following (the left out category is nonzero R&D, patents, and software patents): 1)
has R&D but no patents; 2) has patents but no R&D; 3) neither patents nor R&D; 4) has no selfcitations; 5) has R&D and patents, but no software patents; 6) has patents but no R&D and no
software patents. The latter two dummies are only included in those regressions that also include
the continuous software patent stock variables.
5.1

Results for all sectors
Equation (4) was estimated using ordinary least squares, and the results are reported in

Table 4. Eicker-White standard errors clustered by firm were computed to ensure robustness to
heteroskedasticity. There are three columns in each of the two panels in the table, one set

51

Our patent data end in 2006 and our regressions in 2002. This means that we have four years to observe
the issuance of the youngest patents in the sample, which is enough time to observe most of them. However, it is not
sufficient time to observe forward citations for the most recent patents, so we have adjusted the number of citations
received by each patent by the ratio of the total number expected to be received by a patent in that technology class
to the average number such patents have received by the time of the relevant citation lag, using a methodology
described in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001).

31

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

corresponding to the whole period, one set for the pre-guidelines period (1980-1994) and one for
the post-1994 period (1995-2002), in order to focus on the question of whether financial markets
placed a higher value on software inventions and software patents following the Beauregard
decision and the Commissioner of Patents’ issuance of new guidelines on software patentability
in 1995.
The test for slope equality of the patent coefficients between the two periods rejects
strongly for the specification without software patents, but not at all when we include the
software patent variables. Thus the relationship between patenting and market value in the ICT
sector appears to be stable across the two periods, provided we allow software patents to be
valued differently (in fact, slightly more highly) from other patents. The coefficient on the log of
firm assets is also significantly less negative in the second period than in the first, while the
coefficient on the log of the ratio of R&D stock to assets increases slightly in both specifications.
The impact of the citation-R&D ratio (a measure of innovation output relative to
innovation input) is fairly stable across the two specifications, with a decline in the coefficient
after 1995 (from around 0.08 to around 0.03 in both specifications). For firms that have patents, a
one standard deviation increase in log cites per R&D increases market value by approximately
12 per cent in the earlier period and 5 per cent in the later. Self-citations earn a substantial
premium; however, it needs to be kept in mind that self-citations are only about 5 per cent of
total citations on average, so that the net effect of increasing them is roughly the same as that
given only by their own coefficient. Citations to software patents are valued the same as those to
other patents, suggesting that the correlation between market value and invention quality is
similar for software and ordinary patents.

32

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Once citations (that is, the quality of patent output) are controlled for, the ratio of patent
stocks to assets is negative and significant in the first period and insignificant in the second. This
implies that, holding constant the quality of the innovation, filing additional patents hurt market
value before the expansion of software patentability, and had no effect on value after the legal
changes. Presumably, this is because some of the patents were filed with uncertain benefits prior
to the legal change. In contrast, the ratio of the software patent stock to assets enters positively
and significantly in the pooled sample and the second period, but is insignificant in the first
period. For firms that have software patents, the net impact of a one standard deviation increase
in the log of software patent stock per assets is approximately zero in the first period and 3 per
cent in the second.53 Thus, the negative effect of patents on market value (for a given level of
invention quality) is mitigated if the patent is a software patent, and the value of both software
and non-software patents rose after 1994, but neither the change in the software patent
coefficient nor the coefficient itself are statistically significant.
Our F-test for differences in valuation between ordinary patents and software patents is a
test of whether the coefficients of the software patent citation stock-R&D ratio and the software
patent stock-assets ratio along with the two software patent dummies are nonzero. In the first
period this test marginally rejects (significance level 0.09) and in the second period it rejects
strongly. Although the number of firms with software patents and the number of software patents
do increase between the two periods, the increase is not large enough to account for the change
in significance via increased power of the test. It is more likely that the patents we have
identified as software were to some extent different (and more valuable) after the legal changes

53

The net effect of an increase in the log of software patents per asset is given by γ4 (SP/P)+γ5. The average
share of software patents for firms that have them is 27% pre-1995 and 35% afterwards, which yields -0.10 0.27 +
0.03 = 0 and -0.06 0.35 + 0.05 = 0.03.

33

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

in 1995. Note that the associated inventions do not appear to be more valuable, suggesting that
there may have simply been slightly improved appropriability.
Our conclusion from the results in Table 4 is that software patents were valued the same
as other patents prior to 1995, but that after the change in patentability the market valued them
somewhat more highly than other patents, even though the quality of the inventions themselves
was not significantly different. In the next section of the paper we look at the way these findings
differ across different ICT subsectors.
5.2

Results for hardware and software
In the top section of Table 5 we split the sample into software firms (5375 observations)

and hardware firms (13,192 observations on machinery, electrical machinery, instruments, and
telecommunications) and show the results for the same specification as in columns 4-6 of Table
4, but only for the pre-1994 period and the 1995-2002 period separately. In this table we show
only the R&D and patent coefficients for simplicity, although the regressions also include the
assets variable and the industry-time dummies. The bottom of Table 5 presents results from the
same regressions estimated separately for middleware/systems software (1092 observations) and
applications software/software-related services/internet firms (4283 observations).
These tables reveal some interesting detail obscured by the results based on aggregated
data in Table 4. We note first that the valuation of patents does not change between periods for
the hardware firms, while it changes significantly for the software firms, suggesting that the role
of patents did indeed change for these firms after the Alappat and related court decisions. In
addition, the premium for self-citations exists only for the hardware firms, and is insignificant for
software. Perhaps software firms benefit as much from inventions by other firms that build on

34

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

their inventions as from their own subsequent inventions. This is consistent with the idea that
software firms depend more on recombinant invention involving other firms.
However, in general the quality of inventions in software firms as proxied by
citations/R&D is not significantly correlated with market value in either period, regardless of the
type of citation. The software patent and citation elasticities have larger positive point estimates
than for the hardware firms, but also have larger standard errors and are always insignificant. For
software firms that patent the average share of patents that are software are 0.52 and 0.65 for the
two periods, which implies that the net effect of the patent-assets ratio is about zero in the first
period, and 0.06 in the second.
In the lower portion of Table 5, we dig deeper by separating the software category into
middleware/systems software (MS) and applications/software-related services (AS). We find
some differences between these two groups of firms. First, the MS group generally holds more
patents, even when we measure this relative to the size of their R&D program; 41 per cent of
these firms patent at least once during the period, whereas only 31 per cent of the AS firms have
a patent. Second, the negative value of holding patents relative to assets before 1995 was due
only to the AS firms; for the MS firms, the elasticity of patents/assets is statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Unfortunately, given the large standard errors (which are due to the
relatively small sample size), we cannot really conclude that patents do not affect value for these
firms, merely that we cannot detect an effect.
For AS firms prior to 1994, the coefficients suggest a surprisingly large elasticity with
respect to software citations per R&D dollar. A ten percent increase in the stock of citations to
software patents/R&D is associated with a 3% increase in market value. So patents are correlated
with value for AS firms in the early period, but only if they are “important” (highly cited) patents

35

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

– and especially if they are important software patents. This positive premium for software
citations disappears after 1994, which can be interpreted in two ways: either the marginal value
of a successful software invention has declined, or invention quality is proxied better by R&D in
the post-1994 period.
It is perhaps worthwhile to note here that these estimates are based on the analysis of the
correlation between a firm’s market value and its own patent stock, not factoring in the impact of
changes in rivals’ patent holdings. Noel and Schankerman (2006) perform a similar market value
analysis in which they also incorporate information on patent holdings by technological rivals, 58
concluding that “a 10 percent increase in rivals’ patent propensity reduces a firm’s value by 1.3
percent.” While our results are not directly comparable due to differences in specifications, it is
interesting to compare this number with the elasticities described above, which generally find
little benefit to firms of filing additional software patents. Noel and Schankerman’s estimate of
the negative externalities of an across-the-board doubling of patent propensities would seem to
exceed our relatively modest estimates of any positive effect on firm value of such a doubling. 59

6.

Conclusions
We obtain two sets of conclusions based on our two approaches to measuring the private

value of software patents. First, we conclude that, as measured by the stock market’s reaction to
legal decisions expanding the patentability of software, there is some evidence that the expansion

58

This is the sum over all rivals’ patent stocks divided by R&D stocks, weighted by the rival’s
technological proximity to the firm using a measure based on the Jaffe (1996) technological proximity measure and
the pattern of backward citations of the firm.
59

However, Noel and Schankerman also obtain much larger positive estimates for the value of the firm’s
own patents, with the result that they estimate a small net positive impact on firm value of an across-the-board
increase in patenting.

36

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

of software patentability was initially negative for firms in the software industry. There is limited
evidence of relatively negative effects on some types of software producers – applications
producers and providers of software-related services, and firms with no patenting experience at
the time of the decisions. The most important events from the perspective of news to the market
are the original assertion of the Compton multimedia patent, which affected all types of firms
negatively on average, and the announcement of proposed new guidelines for software patenting.
Our second approach examines the relationship between Tobin’s Q and firms’ patent and
citation stocks. We attempt to distinguish the quality of a patented invention from the patent right
itself using information on patent citations and patent stocks normalized so as to minimize the
correlation between these right-hand-side variables. We conclude that, while patenting
“important” (high-cited) inventions is clearly positively correlated with market value overall,
filing additional patents that do not increase the total stock of citations (i.e. increasing the patent
stock holding constant invention quality), is negatively associated with market value. Following
the expansion of software patentability in the mid-1990s, this negative relationship between
patents and market value largely disappears for software firms (but not for hardware firms), but
we cannot reject the hypothesis of no effect from filing additional software patents without
increasing the total quality of patented inventions (i.e. the stock of patent citations). We do find,
however, that firms without any software patents have lower market values on average than
firms with software patents (all else equal). This suggests that while the marginal software patent
filed may not be associated with much increase in market value, the decision of whether or not to
patent at all seems to have been an important one.
Combining these two sets of findings, we conclude that the market evaluated software
patents as a negative development ex ante and expected that the expansion of software

37

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

patentability would affect firms in downstream sectors and firms without patents relatively more
negatively. Ex post, of course, a greater number of firms in all ICT sectors invested in these
patents. While we obtain clear evidence that the technological importance or quality of patented
innovations mattered for market value both before and after the legal changes, it is less clear that
the patent rights per se were associated with increases in market value.
This story paints a picture of firms adjusting to a new environment and set of rules, which
were initially perceived by the market as negative for the software sector, and have resulted in
uncertain benefits, despite the large increases in the number of patents filed and in the share of
firms filing patents in this sector. Nevertheless we should also remind the reader that the majority
of the software patents acquired during the past twenty years have been acquired by nonsoftware firms in the ICT sector (in our sample the figure is 54 per cent for software patents and
75 per cent for all patents). In addition, two-thirds of the hardware firms have at least one patent
during the sample period, while only one-third of the software firms have patented. These facts
suggest that the growth in these patents has been driven to a great extent by the needs of
hardware firms for large patent portfolios rather than by the needs of software firms to protect
their inventions.

38

Hall and MacGarvie

7.

December 2009

References

Allison, J. R. and M. A. Lemley (2000). “Who’s Patenting What? An Empirical Exploration of
Patent Prosecution,” Vanderbilt Law Review 58, 2099-2148.
Allison, J. R. and E. H. Tiller (2003). “Internet Business Method Patents,” in W. M. Cohen and S.
A. Merrill (eds.) Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy, National Research Council, Washington:
National Academies Press, 259-284.
Aharonian, G. (2005). “Critiques of Software Patent Examination,” on
http://www.bustpatents.com/
Arundel, A., J. Cobbenhagen, and N. Schall (2002). The Acquisition and Protection of
Competencies by Enterprises. Report for EIMS project 98/180, DG Enterprise, European Union,
Luxembourg.
Bakels, R. (2005). “Current IPR Policies and Law Followed by Major Organisations in the
Domain,” in Ghosh et al, Report to the European Commission on The Effects of Allowing Patent Claims
for Computer-Implemented Inventions, August.
Bakels, R. and P. B. Hugenholtz (2002). “The Patentability of Computer Programs,” A Report to
the European Parliament, Amsterdam: IViR.
Barton, J. H. (2002). “Non-Obviousness,” IDEA Journal of Law and Technology 42.
__________. (2000). “Reforming the Patent System,” Science 287, 1933-1934.
Bessen, J. (2009). “Estimates of patent rents from firm market value,” Research Policy 38 (10),
1604-1616.
Bessen, J. and R. M. Hunt (2003). “An Empirical Look at Software Patents”, Working Paper.
http://www.researchoninnovation.org/swpat.pdf
Blind, K., J. Edler, and R. Nack (2001). “Micro- and Macro-economic Implications of the
Patentability of Software Innovations. Intellectual Property Rights in Information Technologies between
Innovation and Competition,” Karlsruhe/Munich: Fraunhofer Institute and Max Planck Institute.
Cockburn, I. and M. MacGarvie (2006). “Entry, Exit and Patenting in the Software Industry,”
Boston University: Working Paper.
Cohen, J. E. and M. A. Lemley (2001). “Patent Scope and Innovation in the Software Industry,”
California Law Review 89(1), 1-57.
Cohen, W., A. Goto, A. Nagata, R. Nelson, and J. Walsh (2002). “R&D Spillovers, Patents and
the Incentives to Innovate in Japan and the United States.” Research Policy 31,1349-1367.
Davidson, R., and J. G. MacKinnon (1993). Estimation and Inference in Econometrics, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

39

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Dreyfuss, R. C. (2001). “Examining State Street Bank: Developments in Business Method
Patenting,” Computer und Recht International 2001(1), 1-9.
___________ (2000). “State Street or Easy Street: Is Patenting Business Methods Good for
Business?” In Intellectual Property Law, Volume 6, Chapter 14. London: Juris Publishing Company, Ltd.
Dvorak, John (2005). “Software Patents: Microsoft’s Fatal Error,” PC magazine, April 18, 2005.
Eckhouse, J. (1993). “Key Patent to Shake Multimedia Industry,” San Francisco Chronicle,
November 15.
European Commission (2002). “Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the
Council on the Patentability of Computer-implemented Inventions,” Brussels, Belgium.
Evans. D. and A. Layne-Farrar (2004). “Software Patents and Open Source: The Battle Over
Intellectual Property Rights,” Virginia Journal of Law and Technology 9(10), Summer 2004.
Gao, L. (2005). “Essays On Investments And Financing Decisions In Complementary Networks
Systems”, unpublished doctoral dissertation, Boston University.
Graham, S. J. H. and D. C. Mowery (2003). “Intellectual Property Protection in the U. S.
Software Industry,” in W. M. Cohen and S. A. Merrill (eds.), Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy,
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Griliches, Z. (1981). “Market Value, R&D, and Patents,” Economic Letters 7, 183-187.
Hall, B. H. (2005). “Exploring the Patent Explosion,” Journal of Technology Transfer 30, 35-48.
Hall, B. H. (2003). “Business Method Patents, Innovation, and Policy,” NBER Working Paper
No. W 9717.
Hall, B. H. and Clint Cummins. (2005). TSP 5.0 Reference Manual, Palo Alto, CA: TSP
International.
Hall, B. H., S. J. H. Graham, S. J. H., D. Harhoff, and D. C. Mowery (2003). “Prospects for
Improving U.S. Patent Quality via Post-grant Opposition,” MIT Press: Innovation Policy and the
Economy 4, 115-143.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2005). “Market Value and Patent Citations,” Rand
Journal of Economics 36, 16-38.
Heller, M.A. and R.S. Eisenberg (1998). “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in
Biomedical Research,” Science 280, 698-701.
Hollander, Andrew J. (2003). “Patenting Computer Data Structures: The Ghost, the Machine, and
the Federal Circuit”, Duke Law and Technology Review, 0033.
Hunt, R. M. (2001). “You Can Patent That? Are Patents on Computer Programs and Business
Methods Good for the New Economy?” Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Business Review 2001(Q1),
5-15.

40

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Huttner, C. and A. Strobert (1995). “New Proposed Guidelines on Patentability Of ComputerImplemented Inventions,” New York Law Journal, September 25, 1995.
Kasdan, J. (1999). “Obviousness and New Technologies,” New York, NY: Columbia University
Center for Law and Economics Studies Working Paper No. 146.
_______. (1994). “Fascinatin’ Algorithm: Patent Protection for Computer Programs,” Columbia
University Center for Law and Economic Studies Working Paper No. 94.
Lerner, J. (2001). “Where Does State Street Lead? A First Look at Finance Patents, 1971-2000,”
Journal of Finance 57, 901-930.
Layne-Farrar, A. (2005). “Defining Software Patents: A Research Field Guide,” LECG, Chicago:
manuscript.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lunney, G. S., Jr. (2001). "e-Obviousness," Michigan Telecommunications Technology Law
Review 7, 363-422.
Mann, R. (2004). “The Myth of the Software Patent Thicket”, working paper.
Meurer, M. J. (2002). “Business Method Patents and Patent Floods,” Washington University
Journal of Law and Policy 8, 309.
Murmann, J. P. (2003). Knowledge and Competitive Advantage: The Co-evolution of Firms,
Technology, and National Institutions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nagaoka, S., K. Motohashi, and A. Goto (2010). “Patent Statistics as an Innovation Indicator,” in
B. H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science, forthcoming.
Noel, M. and M. Schankerman (2006). “Strategic Patenting and Software Innovation,” London:
LSE STICERD Working Paper No. EI43.
Raduchel, W. (2006). “The Economics of Software,” in D. W. Jorgenson and C. W. Wessner
(eds.), Software, Growth, and the Future of the U.S. Economy, Report of a Workshop, Washington DC:
National Academies Press.
Salinger, M. (1992). “Standard Errors in Event Studies,” The Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 27, No. 1 (March 1992), 39-53.
Samuelson, P. (1984). “CONTU Revisited: The Case Against Copyright Protection for Computer
Programs in Machine-Readable Form,” Duke Law Journal, 663-702.
Schankerman, M., and A. Pakes (1986). “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European
Countries During the Post-1950 Period,” Economic Journal 96, 1052-1076.
Scotchmer, S. (1996). “Protecting Early Innovators: Should Second Generation Products be
Patentable?,” Rand Journal of Economics 27, 322-331.
41

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

_________. (1991). “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent
Law,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 29-41.
Spindler, G. (2003). “The European Legal Framework for Software Patents,” paper presented at
the EPIP conference on New Challenges to the Patent System, EPO, Munich, Germany, April 24/25,
2003.
State Street Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368
(Fed. Cir. 1998).
Sterne, R. and L. Bugaisky (2004). “The Expansion of Statutory Subject Matter Under the 1952
Patent Act”, Akron Law Review 37, 216-229.
Stobbs, G. A. (1995). “Software Practice News: The Common Thread Unraveled”, Intellectual
Property Today, p. 6.
USPTO (1995). “Proposed Guidelines for Computer-Implemented Inventions,”
http://www.uspto.gov, 1 June 1995.

42

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Appendix A
Additional Tables and Figures
Differences between software patent definitions
We consider several different definitions of what constitutes a software patent (see p. 1217 for a discussion of these definitions). Figures 1 and 2 plot the total number of software patents
granted and the number of software patents as a percentage of all patents granted, for each of the
alternative definitions.
Table A2 presents results from the market value model for the Bessen-Hunt, GrahamMowery, Hall-MacGarvie, and “combined” (GM or HM intersected with BH) definitions. Each
column presents estimates for one of the definitions, and the differences between them highlight
the importance of the choice of definition.. For software firms, looking at the entire sample
period (1990-1999), software patents and forward citations are positively and significantly
associated with Tobin’s Q across all the definitions. The magnitudes of the elasticities are also
comparable across definitions.
However, there are differences between the definitions when we look at non-software
firms and when we consider the change in valuation over time. Here, the BH definition diverges
from the others, showing a positive and significant valuation of citation-weighted software
patents for non-software firms, even in the pre-1994 period, as well as a decrease over time in
the elasticity of market value with respect to software patents held by software firms. This may
reflect the fact that the BH set of patents appears to contain a considerably greater number of
hardware patents, at least according to the sample studied by Layne-Farrar.

43

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table A1
Category Definitions Based on CorpTech product codes (SOF codes)

Based on Gao (2005)

SYSTEMS SOFTWARE:
A.

Utility systems software 1

MIDDLEWARE SOFTWARE:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
D.

Utility systems software 2
Communications systems software
Internet tools
Software development systems
Artificial intelligence software
Database/file management software
Software development systems

APPLICATIONS SOFTWARE:
A.
Accounting, banking, financial, government, military, legal, real estate, insurance, health
services, public utilities, transportation, sales/marketing and distribution software
B.
Technical/scientific software
C.
Construction, facilities and communications management software
D.
Manufacturing software systems
E.
Media and communications software
F.
Office automation software
G.
Educational and training software
H.
Other applications software, not elsewhere specified
SERVICES:
A.

Software related services

44

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table A2
Elasticities from market value equations, by software/non-software and time period
Hardware firms

Software firms

GrahamMowery

HallMacGarvie

Combined

R&D/Assets
Patents/R&D
SW Pats/R&D

1980-1999 (2173 software, 8717 non-software)
0.331
0.322
0.317
0.321
0.287
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.009
0.007
0.017
0.022
0.021
0.019

0.289
0.016
0.004

0.289
0.017
0.002

0.289
0.017
0.004

R&D/Assets
Citations/Patents
SW Cites/Patents

0.317
0.000
0.022

0.316
0.000
0.022

0.314
0.001
0.021

0.316
0.000
0.023

0.286
0.022
0.016

0.287
0.034
0.003

0.285
0.035
0.004

0.287
0.034
0.003

R&D/Assets
Citations/Patents (excluding self-cites)
SW cites/Patents (excluding self-cites)

0.318
0.000
0.022

0.316
0.000
0.022

0.323
0.007
0.011

0.323
0.008
0.006

0.286
0.022
0.016

0.287
0.034
0.003

0.287
0.036
0.002

0.287
0.032
0.005

R&D/Assets
Patents/R&D
SW Pats/R&D

1980-1994 (924 software, 5989 non-software)
0.350
0.365
0.348
0.335
0.260
-0.020
-0.022
0.010
-0.023
-0.019
0.015
0.008
0.015
0.021
0.017

0.265
0.016
0.002

0.266
0.017
-0.001

0.265
0.017
0.001

R&D/Assets
Citations/Patents
SW Cites/Patents

0.356
-0.017
0.021

0.260
0.022
0.014

0.262
0.034
0.002

0.262
0.035
0.001

0.262
0.035
0.001

R&D/Assets
Patents/R&D
SW Pats/R&D

1995-1999 (1249 software, 2728 non-software)
0.296
0.301
0.295
0.298
0.339
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.012
0.026
0.013
0.025
0.020
0.022

0.333
0.023
0.018

0.329
0.021
0.021

0.333
0.023
0.017

R&D/Assets
Citations/Patents
SW Cites/Patents

0.293
0.001
0.029

0.292
0.001
0.027

0.297
0.002
0.021

0.293
0.001
0.027

0.338
0.028
0.016

0.336
0.036
0.009

0.332
0.034
0.014

0.336
0.036
0.009

R&D/Assets
Citations/Patents (excluding self-cites)
SW cites/Patents (excluding self-cites)

0.293
0.001
0.029

0.292
0.001
0.026

0.297
0.003
0.021

0.300
0.010
0.011

0.338
0.029
0.016

0.336
0.037
0.009

0.335
0.038
0.009

0.338
0.037
0.006

Bessen-Hunt

GrahamMowery

0.352
-0.017
0.023

HallMacGarvie

0.338
-0.008
0.019

Combined

0.351
-0.015
0.021

Bessen-Hunt

All regressions include a complete set of sector-year dummies and a dummy for missing R&D.
The quantities shown are the average elasticity of the market value with respect to the variable in the first column. The significance tests are
based on the corresponding coefficient and its heteroskedastic-consistent standard error.
Bold text indicates significance at the 5% level; Bold italics significance at the 1% level.

45

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table A3: Total number of firms and number of software firms in the sample, by year
Market value regressions
Event studies
Year
All firmsSoftware firmsApp/Services All firms Software App/Services
1980
406
47
23
1981
511
76
41
184
25
17
1982
555
89
50
1983
664
121
71
1984
709
134
83
1985
722
141
88
1986
751
156
93
1987
758
155
96
1988
731
161
103
1989
719
159
99
1990
708
153
91
1991
730
163
95
1992
763
181
112
1993
833
201
118
625
152
93
1994
889
216
120
706
175
95
1995
1,003
262
145
749
194
104
1996
1,065
295
144
864
238
123
1997
1,029
292
144
1998
879
269
122
1999
999
382
164
Total obs 15,424
3,653
2,002

46

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Appendix B
Computing the CARs and Significance Tests
There are at least two ways to compute the cumulative abnormal returns to holding a
share of stock. The first is that of Salinger (1992), which simply estimates a stock market beta
model for each firm that includes dummies for the event days and then combines the estimates
across firms. The model is
rit = α i + β i rmt + ε it

t = −90,...., −30

rit = α i + β i rmt + λt + ε it

t = −1,...,3

(1)

where rit is the rate of return to security i at day t, rmt is the market return, and the λs are the
excess returns for the period (-1,+3) around the event. Because the event is common across
firms, estimates from this set of equations using either seemingly unrelated regression on all
firms or single equation estimation firm by firm will be identical. That is, there is no efficiency
gain from joint estimation across firms because the right hand side variables are the same for
each firm and no cross-equation constraints are imposed (Davidson and McKinnon 1993, p.
313).
Given estimates of the αs, βs, and λs, the CAR for firm i over the period (-1,3) can be
estimated as follows:
3

CARi = ∑ λ̂it

(2)

t =−1

The standard error of this quantity (denoted si) must be estimated by taking account of the full
covariance matrix of the estimated parameters for each firm, but this is straightforward using the
delta method.60

60

This method is implemented by the ANALYZ command in TSP (Hall and Cummins 2005).

47

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Given estimates of the CARs and their standard errors, the best way to compute the mean
CAR across firms is to compute a weighted average, where the weights are the square root of the
precision of the estimates (the inverse of the standard errors):61
N

∑ CAR / s
i

CAR =

i

i =1

(3)

N

∑1/ s

i

i =1

Conditional on the si, the variance of this estimate is straightforward to compute:
Var (CAR) =

N



 ∑1/ si 
 i =1

N

2

(4)

In practice, it is easy to implement this computation of the average CAR and its standard error
using weighted least squares with weights equal to the inverse of the previously computed
standard errors squared.
One problem with the Salinger approach is that if the event itself changes the risk of the
security, a small amount of bias may be introduced by estimating the market model over the
event period. An alternative that avoids this problem is to estimate the market model for a period
prior to the event window and then compute the forecasted residuals for the event window period
based on the estimates. In this case, assume we have estimates for αi and βi. The estimate of CAR
can then be computed as follows:
3

CARi = ∑ (rit − αˆ i − βˆi rmt )

(5)

t =−1

61

This method is optimal if the excess return due to the event is the same for all firms. See Campbell, Lo,
and MacKinlay, p. 162, for further discussion.

48

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Once again, the standard error of this estimate is straightforward to compute using the delta
method, which takes account of the error in the estimated α and β. The mean CAR for any
sample can be computed as described above.
We used both methods to estimate the CARs and found that the results were qualitatively
similar and for the most part also quantitatively similar. In the case of the non-parametric rank
test described below, the results were identical, which suggests that the ranking of the firm’s
returns was unaffacted by the choice of estimation method. In the text we report estimates and
tests based on those computed using the pre-event market model method.

Nonparametric significance tests
We used the rank test method of Corrado (1989), which is also discussed in Campbell et
al. (1997), Chapter 4. Using this testing approach is desirable in the case of stock market returns,
which are frequently both non-normal and non-symmetric. It corresponds to asking whether the
average of the within-firm ranks of the event period returns are approximately equal to the mean
rank, as they would be under the null. The test is easily implemented using OLS regression once
the ranks are available. First, we obtain estimates of excess returns for the entire period:

λˆit = rit − αˆi − βˆi rmt

t = −90,..., −30; −1,..., +3

(6)

The estimated α and β are based on the pre-event period (-90, -30). For each period t, the returns
are ranked and assigned numbers from 1 to N (where N is the number of firms in the sample),
yielding a set of series Rit that correspond to the λit. Under the null hypothesis of no abnormal
returns, the expected value of the rank is a constant by construction, in this case equal to (66
+1)/2 = 33.5.
To obtain the test-statistic and its standard error given by Corrado (equations 8 and 9 of
that paper), one simply regresses the ranks Rit on a constant and a dummy variable that is equal
49

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

to one if t is in the event period, and zero otherwise.62 It is straightfoward to show that the
estimated coefficient of the dmmy and its standard error correspond precisely to the equations
given in the Corrado paper. The advantage of the regression approach is that it is easy to
implement further tests: for example, to test whether the shares of software firms responded
differently than those of hardware firms to the event, we simply include the event dummy
interacted with a dummy for being a software firm.

62

If desired, one can center the ranks before estimation by subtracting the mean and then there is no need
for a constant. Centering the ranks would also be useful if each firm has slightly different numbers of observations
(and therefore the expectation of the mean rank differs across firms).

50

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Appendix C
Additional Regressions
In this appendix we describe the way in which we dealt with the fact that our data include
many zeroes in the right hand side variables. Not all of our firms patent, and not all of our firms
do R&D. In addition, there are many firms with no self-cites, or with no software patents.
Because we use a log-log specification for our model, we had to include a set of dummy
variables to control for observations that were zero for one or more of the R&D stock, patent
citation stock, software patent citation stock, and self-citation stock.63 A complete set of such
dummies that included all possible interactions would number 16 = 24, but many of the cells
would be very small, and some are zero by construction (for example, zero patent citations but
non-zero software patent citations). After dropping these cells, the number of nonzero cells was
8; we reduced this number to seven by treating the absence of self-citations separately (that is, by
combining observations with and without R&D in that case). The left-out category was
observations with both R&D and patents (whether or not these included software patents, so that
we could test for their coefficients separately). The patterns of data presence and absence are
shown in Table C.1.

63

The correlation between self-citations to all patents and self-citations to software patents was so high
(0.88) that we dropped the latter variable and considered only self-citations to all patents.

51

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table C.1
Description
R&D, patents, SW pats, and self-cites
R&D, patents, SW pats, but no self-cites
R&D, patents, no SW pats, self-cites
R&D, patents, no SW pats, no self-cites
R&D but no patents
no R&D, but patents & SW pats, no self-cites
no R&D, but patents, no SW pats or self-cites
no R&D, no patents
Total

Obs

Share

2,989
763
3,189
2,332
7,287
79
302
1,626
18,567

16.1%
4.1%
17.2%
12.6%
39.2%
0.4%
1.6%
8.8%

Hardware
Obs
Share
2,304
346
3,013
2,063
4,374
20
230
701
13,051

17.7%
2.7%
23.1%
15.8%
33.5%
0.2%
1.8%
5.4%

Software
Obs
Share
685
417
176
269
2,913
59
72
925
5,516

12.4%
7.6%
3.2%
4.9%
52.8%
1.1%
1.3%
16.8%

About half the sample both does R&D and patents, and almost 40% do R&D but do not
patent. The remainder do no R&D but a small number of them (2%) patent. Software firms are
much less likely to patent (25% vs. 59%) and also somewhat less likely to do R&D (77% vs.
89%). Finally, over 90% of software firms have no self-citations, whereas only about half the
hardware firms have no self-citations. However, adjusted for the fraction of firms that patent, the
software firms are slightly more likely to cite their own patents.64
Tables 4 and 5 in the body of the paper include a set of dummy variables for zeros in
R&D and patenting as controls. When the continuous variables are also included in a regression,
these dummy variables become difficult to interpret and we therefore did not show their
estimates. However we thought it interesting to look at a regression that contained only the
dummies, given the measurement error inherent in patent and citation counts. In this appendix
we present the same regressions as in Tables 4 and 5 but with only the log of assets, the log of
the R&D stock-assets variable and the R&D and patent dummy variables, along with the usual
year-industry effects.

64

Compare 0.62 = 15.6%/25% for software to 0.58 = 40.8%/59% for hardware.

52

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

In the first panel of Table C.2 we include dummies for doing R&D without patenting,
patenting without doing R&D, doing neither, and having no self-cites to one’s patents. In the
second panel we add the two dummies for having software patents, with and without R&D.
These regressions are of some interest in themselves. First, we confirm the Hall-JaffeTrajtenberg (2005) finding that citing one’s own patents indicates value: there is a fairly robust
and significant 17-21% discount for firms with no self-citations, controlling for the fact that they
have patents. Some of this discount may be due to the fact that we have no citation count in the
regression, so that this variable also proxies for lower citation intensity, but the premium for selfcites survives even in the presence of citations (Table 4 in the text).65 The second finding in this
table is that firms with no R&D stock face a discount of about 30%, whether or not they have
patents. This discount corresponds to an R&D-assets ratio of approximately 0.2, which is
roughly at the 15% point in the R&D-assets distribution.66 That is, 15% of R&D-doing firms and
25% of all firms have a lower R&D-assets value. The implication is that firms that do no R&D
have a valuation that is similar to firms that do very little R&D relative to their size; that is, there
is no separate discount for these firms.
Note that doing R&D without patents earns a positive premium in the first period but not
in the second, suggesting the increased important of patents as a tool for appropriating value. If
some of those patents are software patents, the premium doubles, even for those few
observations with patents but no R&D.

65

The alert reader will note that it is possible in principle for a firm to have patents but no citations. In fact,
and partly because we use stocks, such observations are less than 1% of our sample and have an average patent stock
less than one, so we chose to treat them as though the patent stock was zero, for simplicity.
66

To compute the R&D intensity effect that corresponds to the dummy of -0.3, we set -0.3 = γ1 log(RD/A)
= 0.2 log(RD/A) and solve for RD/A = exp(-1.5) = 0.22.

53

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table C.3 corresponds to Table 5 in the paper, and repeats the same dummy variable
exercise for hardware and software firms separately and by subperiod. Although some of the
estimates are imprecise due to the small size of some of the cells, a few conclusions can be
drawn. We first note that the self-citation premium is associated only with hardware firms; for
software firms the presence of self-citations does not appear to add any value. Although the
dummies for no R&D with or without patents appear higher for software firms than for hardware
firms, because the R&D intensity of software firms is also higher, the “break-even” point is
again in the neighborhood of 10-15% in the R&D-assets distribution. Finally, the strongest result
is that during the second (post-Alappat) period, a software firm with software patents was valued
at a premium of 48% over similar firms without software patents, whereas holding software
patents was of no additional value for hardware firms except for those few that have patents but
no R&D. This finding confirms that financial markets perceived software patents to be valuable
for software firms after 1995 but not before.

54

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table C.2
Market Valuation of Patents in ICT
Dependent variable: log of Tobin's q
Observations (firms)

1980-2002

1980-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

1980-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

N

18567 (2062)

10605 (1433)

7962 (1552)

18567 (2062)

10605 (1433)

7962 (1552)

0.222***

0.200***

0.249***

0.211***

0.192***

0.237***

(0.014)

(0.016)

(0.018)

(0.014)

(0.016)

(0.019)

0.090**

0.141***

0.015

0.133***

0.168***

0.070

(0.043)

(0.048)

(0.060)

(0.043)

(0.048)

(0.060)

-0.284***

-0.284**

-0.265**

-0.314***

-0.321***

-0.275**

(0.099)

(0.118)

(0.120)

(0.093)

(0.112)

(0.116)

-0.349***

-0.278***

-0.421***

-0.300***

-0.246***

-0.360***

(0.060)

(0.076)

(0.076)

(0.060)

(0.077)

(0.077)

0.179***

0.143***

0.182***

(0.045)

(0.052)

(0.059)

0.449*

0.566*

0.277

(0.260)

(0.315)

(0.283)

Log R&D stock/assets
R&D but no patents
Patents but no R&D
No R&D or patents

Patents and R&D,with SW pats

Patents but no R&D,with SW pats
No self cites
Log assets

7,287
381
1,626

3,752

79
12,389

-0.199***

-0.187***

-0.210***

-0.171***

-0.169***

-0.176***

(0.045)

(0.051)

(0.059)

(0.046)

(0.051)

(0.061)

-0.073***

-0.100***

-0.040***

-0.084***

-0.110***

-0.051***

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.012)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs
across periods

2.31 (.056)*

1.28 (0.262)

F-test for SW patent coefficients
Standard error (R-squared)

0.857 (0.737)

0.793 (0.704)

0.928 (0.766)

9.2 (0.00)***

5.2 (0.00)***

5.0 (0.00)***

0.855 (0.738)

0.791 (0.705)

0.926 (0.767)

The method of estimation is least squares based on equation (4) of the text.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasicity in parentheses. Significance at the1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *.
55 elec. machinery, instruments, telecomms, software), as well as dummies
All regressions include a complete set of year dummies for each 2-digit sic (machinery,
for no R&D, no patents, no software patents, no self-cites, and their interactions.

Hall and MacGarvie

December 2009

Table C.3
Market Valuation of Patents and Software Patents
By sector and time period
N

1980-1994

N

1995-2002

N

1980-1994

Hardware
0.170

0.018

2946

0.205

0.050

Patents but no R&D

173

-0.187

0.103

*** 1455
*
99

No R&D or patents

407

-0.186

0.074

**

Patents and R&D,with SW pats

1392

0.133

0.052

**

9

0.220

0.423

5065

-0.199

0.051

Log R&D stock/assets
R&D but no patents

Patents but no R&D,with SW pats
No self cites

0.256
0.125

0.074

*

-0.310

0.118

***

298

-0.479

0.092

***

1318

0.069

0.071

11

0.721

0.364

**

-0.213

0.074

*** 2355

*** 2736

0.736 (0.664)

Std. error (R-squared)

0.246

0.035

1585

-0.090

0.159

66

-0.971

0.347

***

434

-0.511

0.187

***

347

0.045

0.199

23

1.135

0.474

0.041

0.212

***

0.895 (0.708)
5146 (930)

0.337

0.095

0.061

198

0.041

0.264

4

-0.634

0.249

0.224

0.037

1212

-0.127

0.172

32

-1.384

0.615

333

-0.504

0.204

***

R&D but no patents

354

-0.088

0.319

Patents but no R&D

19

-0.825

0.354

No R&D or patents

97

-0.628

0.387

68

-0.115

0.329

Patents and R&D,with SW pats

63

0.638

0.441

195

0.453

0.226

**

257

-0.078

0.214

Patents but no R&D,with SW pats

2

1.810

0.252

1

2.205

0.128

***

21

1.485

0.768

0.547

0.354

-0.192

0.223

-0.061

0.235

No self cites
Std. error (R-squared)

516

***

368

0.890 (0.819)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs.
Observations (firms)

**

1.00 (0.836)

**

1790

65

0.161

0.216

491

-0.198

0.129

756

0.478

0.110

**

36

-0.033

0.313

2300

-0.065

0.106

***

0.966 (0.827)
2816 (622)
0.209

0.032

1122

0.149

0.119

**

54

0.285

0.220

**

423

-0.191

0.139

527

0.483

0.125

35

-0.219

0.315

1914

-0.057

0.121

***

*

0.939 (0.757)

1.99 (.070)*
578 (103)

0.125

***

Applications SW/Services

0.305

***

1328

0.110

2559 (405)

Systems SW/ Middleware
Log R&D stock/assets

0.030

2.73 (.012)**

8046 (1028)

Observations (firms)

0.219

***

0.936 (0.767)

1.83 (.090)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs.

1995-2002

Software
0.025

***

N

***

***

0.956 (0.827)
2.57 (.018)**

514 (146)

1981 (311)

2302 (508)

The method of estimation is ordinary least squares based on equation (4) of the text.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasicity in parentheses. Significance at the1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *.
56 machinery, instruments, telecomms, software), as well as dummies for no R&D, no
All regressions include a complete set of year dummies for each 2-digit sic (machinery, elec.
patents, no software patents, no self-cites, and their interactions.

Figure 1
Software Patents Granted
45000
40000

Bessen-Hunt
(keyword)

35000

Aharonian

Number

30000
25000

Graham-Mowery
(IPC)

20000

Hall-Macgarvie (US
subclass)

15000

(GM or HM) and BH

10000
5000
0
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Figure 2
U.S. Software patents granted as share of all patents granted
30%
Bessen-Hunt
(keyword)

25%

Aharonian

Share

20%
Graham-Mowery
(IPC)

15%
Hall-Macgarvie (US
subclass)

10%

(GM or HM) and BH

5%

0%
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Figure 3
Share of publicly-traded US firms with granted software patents
(by date of application)
60.0%
50.0%

Middleware/
systems

40.0%
Applications/
services/
internet

30.0%
20.0%

ICT excl.
software

10.0%
0.0%
1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

Table 1
Overlap with Allison's Samples
Definition
Allison+

Original software
patent list (2000)
Share
Number
100
100%

Internet business
method patent list
Share
Number
230
100%

Union of the two lists
Share
Number
330
100%

Bessen-Hunt (BH)

92

92%

211

92%

303

92%

Graham-Mowery (GM)

60

60%

89

39%

149

45%

Hall-Macgarvie (HM)

40

40%

150

65%

190

58%

Combined*

83

83%

183

80%

266

81%

The table shows the number of patents according to each definition that are found in the lists supplied by
Allison.
+The original list is the set of patents given in Allison and Lemley (2000); the internet business method list is
that from Allison and Tiller (2003).
*This set of patents is the union of GM and HM intersected with BH.

Table 2
Summary statistics for 2,062 firms 1980-2001 (18,567 observations)
Standard
deviation
22.63
11.94
4.26
1279.86
1.73
0.28
107.88
451.34
0.50
0.41
0.48
122.52
1.96
2347.61
10709.66
3291.86
31.81
1900.34
8777.80
2622.03
29.03

Median
0.36
3.10
1.76
10.87
0.69
0.00
0.00
0.46
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.54
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.45
0.00
0.00

1st
Quartile
0.12
1.75
1.06
2.18
0.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

3rd
Quartile
1.28
6.95
3.28
44.66
1.61
0.00
1.00
5.42
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.25
18.44
106.90
0.00
4.51
16.61
100.45
0.00
4.20

Hardware firms only (11,323 obs)
R&D stock (millions of $96)
84.18
404.17
R&D Stock / tangible (book) capital
1.01
1.31
SW patent stock (combined definition)
1.77
17.55
Patent stock / real R&D stock
0.47
2.42
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)*
61.62
652.72
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)**
56.53
593.46

9.51
0.59
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00

2.21
0.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

36.10
1.21
0.00
0.38
0.00
0.00

Software firms only (7,244 obs)
R&D stock (millions of $96)
335.16
1976.11
R&D Stock / tangible (book) capital
1.78
2.15
SW patent stock (combined definition)
18.80
194.47
Patent stock / real R&D stock
0.16
0.82
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)*
564.94
5191.96
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)**
473.79
4118.98

14.32
0.95
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

2.11
0.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

62.83
2.49
0.53
0.08
7.02
6.65

1.92
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

61.40
2.44
0.27
0.07
2.12
2.12

Variable
Number of employees
Tobin's Q (market-to-book ratio)
Tobin's Q corr. for R&D stock
R&D stock (millions of $96)
R&D Stock / tangible (book) capital
D(no R&D this year)
Patents per year
Patent stock
D(no patent stock this year)
D(no software patent stock this year)
D(never patented)
SW patent stock (combined definition)
Patent stock / real R&D stock
Cite-weighted patents per year*
Cite-weighted patent stock*
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)*
Cite-wtd patent stock / real R&D stock*
Cite-weighted patents per year**
Cite-weighted patent stock**
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)**
Cite-wtd patent stock / real R&D stock**

Mean
4.17
6.96
3.12
182.10
1.31
0.08
12.92
54.45
0.47
0.79
0.37
8.41
0.35
273.78
1230.08
257.99
6.71
227.13
1033.94
219.32
6.07

Applications software and software services firms only (5,741 obs)
R&D stock (millions of $96)
313.46
1986.48
13.20
R&D Stock / tangible (book) capital
1.74
2.12
0.94
SW patent stock (combined definition)
19.35
212.73
0.00
Patent stock / real R&D stock
0.17
0.90
0.00
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)*
577.24
5710.61
0.00
Cite-wtd SW patent stock (combined)**
477.61
4510.65
0.00
*Corrected for citation truncation after 2006
**Corrected for citation truncation after 2006 and self-citations excluded.

Bronwyn H. Hall

Page 6

1/7/2010

Table 3
Excess Returns [CAR(-1,+3)] to ICT Firms around Various Software Patenting Events
CAR (-1,+3) in %

Event

Date

All firms
Description
patenting allowed for software embodied in rubber0.83***
1.26
curing process (in a physical process)
assertion of multi-media display patent held by
-1.65*** -2.37***
Compton
Compton's multi-media patent re-examined by
-0.36
-0.41
USPTO and revoked
33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (en banc). Narrowing
mathematical algorithm limitation on patentable
-0.26**
-0.02
subject matter and thereby expanding patentable
subject matter. - oscilloscope software

Diamond v Diehr

3-Mar-81

Compton patent

16-Nov-93

Compton revocation

28-Mar-94

In re Alappat
(5440676)

29-Jul-94

In re Warmerdam
(6089742)

partly affirmed, partly reversed PTO's rejection of a
data structure for collision avoidance systems as non11-Aug-94
patentable subject matter - machine containing the
data structure created by the mechanism patentable.

In re Lowry

In re Trovato

Software App SW/ SW
services only
firms

data structures are patentable if held in a machine
26-Aug-94 (printed matter doctrine does not apply) - confirming
Warmerdam
A new way to calculate a number cannot be
19-Dec-94 recognized as statutory subject matter - countered
growing trend of SW patentability

IBM appealed a decision to exclude using printed
12-May-95 matter doctrine, PTO admits mistake (had
contradicted in re Lowry )
USPTO new guidelines
new guidelines proposed to allow patenting on
30-May-95
proposed
software embodied in any hardware medium.
In re Beauregard
(5710578)

USPTO new guidelines
new guidelines issued allow patenting on software
29-Mar-96
final
embodied in any hardware medium.

Rank test for differences in
CAR

firms
without
patents

firms
without
without SW
patents patents vs with

without SW
pats vs with

1.40

1.40***

0.97***

0.91

1.40

-2.47***

-1.79***

-1.76***

-0.37

-0.54

-0.73

-0.30

-0.56

0.60

-0.54

0.25

-0.05**

-0.32**

0.65

-1.46

0.08

0.34

0.32

0.05

-0.01

-0.86

-1.39

0.16

-0.50

-0.69

0.36

0.23

1.35

0.86

-0.12

0.25

0.19

-0.04

-0.05

0.33

1.09

0.76***

0.90**

-0.40

0.32

0.47***

-2.44***

-3.06***

-1.04**

-0.85**

-0.86***

0.33

1.47

-0.32

0.35*

0.38*

-0.56

0.01

-1.00*** -1.43***
0.36**

-0.61

Each cell in the first panel shows the average Cumulative Abnormal Return in per cent for a 5 day window (-1,+3) around the event date.
The cells in the second panel show the result of a rank test for differences in the distribution of the CARs during the event period.
***, **, and * denote significance at the 1, 5, and 10 per cent level respectively, using a rank test.

Bronwyn H. Hall

Page 7

1/7/2010

Table 4
Market Valuation of Patents in ICT
Dependent variable: log of Tobin's q
1980-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

1980-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

18567 (2062)

10605 (1433)

7962 (1552)

18567 (2062)

10605 (1433)

7962 (1552)

0.250***

0.238***

0.269***

0.238***

0.230***

0.256***

(0.015)

(0.018)

(0.020)

(0.015)

(0.018)

(0.021)

Log Cite stock/R&D stock

0.049**

0.086***

0.034

0.049**

0.082***

0.029

(0.021)

(0.024)

(0.028)

(0.022)

(0.025)

(0.030)

Log Self Cite stock/R&D stock

0.088***

0.077***

0.090***

0.092***

0.078***

0.094***

(0.015)

(0.017)

(0.020)

(0.015)

(0.018)

(0.020)

Observations (firms)
Log R&D stock/assets

Log SW Cite stock/R&D stock
Log Patent stock/assets

-0.058***

-0.097***

-0.034

(0.017)

(0.021)

(0.023)

Log SW patent stock/assets
Log assets

-0.004

0.003

(0.037)

(0.032)

-0.079***

-0.102***

-0.058**

(0.019)

(0.023)

(0.025)

0.059***

0.030

0.050*

(0.022)

(0.033)

(0.028)

-0.075***

-0.102***

-0.043***

-0.084***

-0.109***

-0.053***

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.012)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs
across periods

2.70 (.009)***

1.30 (0.216)

F-test for SW patent coefficients
Standard error (R-squared)

-0.011
(0.027)

0.850 (0.741)

0.786 (0.710)

0.921 (0.769)

5.8 (0.00)***

2.0 (0.09)*

3.6 (0.01)***

0.847 (0.743)

0.784 (0.710)

0.918 (0.771)

The method of estimation is least squares based on equation (4) of the text.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasicity in parentheses. Significance at the1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *.
All regressions include a complete set of year dummies for each 2-digit sic (machinery, elec. machinery, instruments, telecomms, software), as well as
dummies for no R&D, no patents, no software patents, no self-cites, and their interactions.

Bronwyn H. Hall

Page 8

1/7/2010

Table 5
Market Valuation of Patents and Software Patents
By sector and time period
1980-1994

1995-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

Hardware

Software

Log R&D stock/assets

0.213

0.021

***

0.296

0.027

Log Cite stock/R&D stock

0.075

0.026

***

0.053

0.034

Log Self Cite stock/R&D stock

0.082

0.018

***

0.104

0.022

Log Patent stock/assets

-0.083

0.024

***

-0.073

0.030

Log SW Cite stock/R&D stock

-0.029

0.032

0.003

Log SW patent stock/assets

0.028

0.032

0.025

Std. error (R-squared)

0.728 (0.671)

0.220

0.032

0.084

-0.053

0.065

-0.021

0.072

0.011

0.049

-0.146

0.062

-0.029

0.049

0.039

0.186

0.130

0.078

0.059

0.032

0.052

0.102

0.080

0.053

0.095
***
**

***

**

0.929 (0.771)

0.962 (0.829)

8046 (1028)

5146 (930)

2559 (405)

2816 (622)

1980-1994

1995-2002

1980-1994

1995-2002

0.237

Applications SW/Services
0.038
0.034
*** 0.206

0.313

Log Cite stock/R&D stock

-0.106

0.207

-0.025

0.150

0.113

0.083

-0.064

0.070

Log Self Cite stock/R&D stock

-0.064

0.136

0.122

0.091

0.046

0.078

-0.011

0.057

Log Patent stock/assets

-0.075

0.180

-0.108

0.142

-0.204

0.077

***

-0.019

0.053

Log SW Cite stock/R&D stock

-0.150

0.222

0.101

0.138

0.279

0.132

**

0.080

0.065

Log SW patent stock/assets

0.177

0.192

0.010

0.149

-0.012

0.099

0.088

0.058

0.888 (0.821)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs.

0.999 (0.840)

***

0.926 (0.765)

2.17 (.018)**
578 (103)

***

1.94 (.031)**

Log R&D stock/assets

Observations (firms)

0.036

0.883 (0.716)

Systems SW/ Middleware
0.101
0.064
*** 0.338

Std. error (R-squared)

0.256

1.40 (.166)

F-test for equality of pat coeffs.
Observations (firms)

***

***

0.952 (0.828)

3.58 (.000)***
514 (146)

1981 (311)

2302 (508)

The method of estimation is ordinary least squares based on equation (4) of the text.
Standard errors robust to heteroskedasicity in parentheses. Significance at the1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *.
All regressions include a complete set of year dummies for each 2-digit sic (machinery, elec. machinery, instruments, telecomms, software), as well as dummies for
no R&D, no patents, no software patents, no self-cites, and their interactions.

