                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    UNCERTAINTY OVER CAUSATION
             AND THE DETERMINATION OF CIVIL LIABILITY



                          Steven Shavell




                      Working Paper No. 1219




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper 111219
                                           October 1983



                 Uncertainty Over Causation and
              The Determination of Civil Liability


                           ABSTRACT



                 Situations in which there is uncertainty
over the cause of harm are studied (e.g., was the lung
cancer due to normal exposure to medical x-radiation, to
smoking, to exposure to carcinogens discharged by a chemical
plant?); and the effects on incentives to reduce risk of
various ways of treating such uncertainty under the liability
system are identified using a theoretical model of the
occurrence of harm. The main points are these. Use of a
threshold probabilit' of causation (e.g., 50%) as a criterion
for determining liability may adversely affect behavior:
parties might face a diminished burden of liability (if
their probability of causation systematically fell below the
threshold) and thus do too little to reduce risk; or they
might face an extra burden (if their probability were sys-
tematically above the threshold), and thus do too much.
Second, the best all or nothing criterion for determining
liability (a critPTon under which a party is fully liable
if at all liable) is different in form from a threshold
probability criterion. Third, liability in proportion to
the probability of causation is superior to all other cri-
teria and results in socially ideal behavior.
     These points are demonstrated and analyzed in two types
of case: where the uncertainty involves a party versus
natural or "background" factors; and where it involves which
party among several was the author of harm. The importance
of the points is shown to depend on the type of case, and as
well on the form of liability (strict liability or the
negligence rule).
     The interpretation of the analysis and important quali-
fications to it are discussed in a concluding section.




                                          Steven Shavell
                                          Harvard Law School
                                          Langdell 260
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          617—495—7920
                                           NBER Working Paper #1219
                                           October 1983



                 Uncertainty Over Causation and
              The Determination of Civil Liability


                           ABSTRACT



                 Situations in which there is uncertainty
over the cause of harm are studied (e.g., was the lung
cancer due to normal exposure to medical x-radiation, to
smoking, to exposure to carcinogens discharged by a chemical
plant?); and the effects on incentives to reduce risk of
various ways of treating such uncertainty unaer me ilaDlJ.ity
system are identified using a theoretical model of the
occurrence of harm. The main points are these. Use of a
threshold probabi1it' of causation (e.g., 50%) as a criterion
for determining liability may adversely affect behavior:
parties might face a diminished burden of liability (if
their probability of causation systematically fell below the
threshold) and thus do too little to reduce risk; or they
might face an extra burden (if their probability were sys-
tematically above the threshold), and thus do too much.
Second, the best all or nothing criterion for determining
liability (a critTon under which a party is fully liable
if at all liable) is different in form from a threshold
probability criterion. Third, liability in proportion to
the probability of causation is superior to all other cri-
teria and results in socially ideal behavior.
     These points are demonstrated and analyzed in two types
of case: where the uncertainty involves a party versus
natural or "background" factors; and where it involves which
party among several was the author of harm. The importance
of the points is shown to depend on the type of case, and as
well on the form of liability (strict liability or the
negligence rule).
     The interpretation of the analysis and important quali-
fications to it are discussed in a concluding section.




                                          Steven Shavell
                                          Harvard Law School
                                          Langdell 260
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          617—495—7920
     Uncertainty Over Causation and the Determination
                    of Civil Liability


                                    *
                       S. Shavell


     What is the importance to the working of the liability
system of the possibility of uncertainty over the cause of
accidents?' What is the importance, for example, of the
possibility that it will not be known which of two hunters
fired the shot that struck another; that it will not be
clear whether the carcinogenic substance discharged from a
chemical plant or normal exposure to medical x-radiation and
other risks caused an individual's lung cancer; that it will
not be easy to say whether a surgeon's careless use of a
medical instrument, a nurse's mishandling of it, or a defect
in its manufacture was responsible for a patient's injury?
     The present article will employ a theoretical model of
the occurrence of accidents and of the effect of liability
on behavior to study such questions. It will be assumed for
simplicity in this model that parties act solely in their
financial self-interest. Moreover, because the chief concern
will be with the desirability of the incentives created to
reduce accident risks, it will be supposed that the measure
of social welfare depends only on the value of engaging in

risky activities, on accident losses, and on prevention
costs 2
                               2



     The conclusions reached in the model derive in essence
from the familiar notion that for parties to be led to
reduce accident risks appropriately, they should generally

face probability-discounted or Iexpected12a liability equal
to the increase in expected losses that they create. (This,
of course, is naturally the case in the absence of the

chance of uncertainty over causation, for parties then face
liability if and only if they cause losses.) The conclusions
that will be obtained may be summarized by three statements.
     (i) The use of a threshold probability as a criterion
for the determination of liability in cases where causation
is ambiguous has potentially adverse effects on behavior.
(According to this criterion, only if the probability that a
party caused an accident exceeds the threshold will the

relevant liability rule be applied; the usual more-probable-
than-not test3 thus involves a threshold of 50%.) Under any

threshold probability, two types of problem may arise. On
the one hand, a party's probability of causation in ambiguous
cases might be systematically less than the threshold, with
the result that he would escape liability in such cases,
that is, face a diminished burden of liability, and thus

might be inappropriately led to engage in risky activity or
might fail to take desirable steps to reduce risk. On the
other hand, a party's probability of causation in ambiguous
cases might systematically exceed the threshold, meaning
that he would always face liability in such cases, creating,
                              3



in other words, an extra burden of liability, and thus the
opposite difficulties.

     (ii) The best all-or-nothing criterion for determina-
tion of liability is different in form from a threshold

probability criterion. (An all-or-nothing criterion is any
criterion for deciding whether the relevant liability rule
shall be applied which preserves the usual feature of lia-

bility--that a liable party must pay damages fully equal to
the injured partys losses. A threshold probability is thus
an example of an all-or-nothing criterion.) The best all-or-
nothing criterion takes into implicit account not only the
probability of causation but also the magnitude of losses
and the effect of liability on deterrence.3a The criterion,
however, does suffer from the same two types of defect as
the threshold probability criterion (though to a lesser

degree).
     (iii) Liability in proportion to the probability of
causation would be superior to the best all-or-nothing

criterion and, thus, in particular, to any threshold proba-

bility criterion. (According to the proportional approach,
the relevant rule of liability will always be applied, but
the measure of damages will be set equal to the harm done
multiplied by the probability that the liable party caused
the harm.) Indeed, use of the proportional approach eliminates
in the model all problems due to uncertainty over causation;

it results in parties' facing expected liability equal to
the expected losses they impose and thus it leads to socially
desirable behavior.3b
                                                              4



             These points will be developed in two types of situation.
In Part I of the article, the attention will be with situa-
tions where the uncertainty is whether the harm was caused

by a party or by natural or "background" factors (the chemical
plant vs. normal exposure to medical x-radiation and the
like). And in Part II, the interest will be with situations
where the uncertainty involves which party among several was
the author of harm (one hunter vs. another, the surgeon vs.
4—1-.   __ £1A.L.
           •,, — -. e ,.-   •   1S ,-s
                                         LLI0.1UL
                                           .S
                                                   L LU.L. L. ) -,
                                               -C -_ -.4- .
                                                                     .1114-Liii.- —.   r—
                                                                                        0.1..    L ,-L1i- LII LL L
                                                                                          4- 4- 1-.     4—   - -_ 4—



will         also be with whether the parties act independently or
in concert. Significant differences will be shown to exist
in the importance of the three main points in Parts I and II
depending on the form of liability (either strict liability
or the negligence rule).3C
             The article will conclude first with comments on the

positive interpretation of the analysis--attempting to
explain why a fixed threshold probability test has in fact

been employed, subject only to certain exceptions. Then
brief remarks will be made on the normative implications of

the analysis--noting situations in which proportional lia-
bility may have appeal (chiefly, where the likelihood of
uncertainty over causation is substantial, as in the area of
many environmental and health related risks), and reflecting
on the relevance of normative criteria that are not considered

in the analysis (administrative costs, compensation of vic-
tims, fairness, costs of error) .                                       Following this will be an
appendix formally stating and proving the claims of the text.
                              5



I.   Uncertainty Over Causation: Party versus Natural Agent
     Suppose that if and only if a party engages in a risky
activity might he cause accidents, that a natural agent will
cause accidents with some (fixed) probability4 regardless of
whether the party engages in the activity, and that accidents
will never be caused by both the party and the natural

agent.5
     Additionally, assume that if the party engages in the
activity, accidents might be correctly identified as due to
him or as due to the natural agent; but they might also be
seen as of ambiguous origin, in which case the probability
that the party caused the accident will be determined. If
the party does not engage in the activity, assume that all
accidents will be correctly identified as due to the natural

agent.

     With regard to the legal system, assume that if an
accident is known to be due to the party, a liability rule
will be applied in the usual way; that if the accident is
known not to be due to the party, he shall of course not be

liable; that in ambiguous cases, either some (all-or-nothing)
criterion will be used to decide whether the liability rule
will apply, or else the liability rule will definitely apply
but with the measure of damages being computed in proportion
to the party's probability of causation.
     Further, suppose that the party acts to maximize his
expected position, namely, the value or benefit to him of
engaging in his activity (should he do so), less the cost of
care (should he take care), and less his expected liability.
                              6



     Finally, assume that social welfare is measured by the
value to the party of engaging in his activity, less any
cost of care, and less expected accident losses (comprised
of losses caused by the party and those caused by the natural
agent).

     Let us now proceed to the analysis, examining first a
"basic" model in which the party decides only whether to
engage in his activity, and then an "extended" model in
which he decides also whether to take care. The reason for
studying both models is that while the main points are most

easily seen from the basic model, important insights are
gained by examining the more realistic version of the model
in which care is a variable (in part, because only then can
the negligence rule be analyzed).


     A.   Basic model: party decides only whether to engage
in his activity.

     In this version of the model, socially desirable behavior

is easily described: the party ought to engage in the risky
activity if and only if his benefits would exceed the increment
he would cause in expected accident losses.

    Example 1. The loss due to an accident would be 1,000;
    the risk of accidents due to the natural agent is 10%;
    the additional risk were the party to engage in his
    activity would be 30%. As the expected accident losses
    due to the party's engaging in his activity would be
    300 (that is, 30% x 1000), it is socially desirable for
    him to engage in it if and only if his benefits would
    exceed 300. (Notice that the expected losses of 100
    (that is, 10% x 1000) caused by the natural agent do
    not affect the6desirability of the party's engaging in
    his activity.)
                              7



     Let us now examine how the party would actually behave

under the various approaches to treatment of uncertainty

over causation, assuming liability to be strict.7
     threshold probability criterion. Because the party
will be liable for losses in ambiguous cases under this
criterion when and only when his probability of causation
exceeds the threshold, the two problems stated in the introduc-
tion will clearly arise. Consider first the possibility
that the party's probability of causation in ambiguous cases
would exceed the threshold.7a In this event, the party's
expected liability would indeed involve an extra burden, for
it would include a component of accident losses due to the

natural agent. Hence, the party might undesirably decide
against engaging in his activity; and that would be so if
his benefit would not exceed the increment in losses he
would cause but by more than the extra burden.
     Example 2a. Suppose the situation to be as in the
     previous example and suppose further that were the
     party to engage in his activity, 2/3 of all accidents
     caused by him and 1/2 of all accidents caused by the
     natural agent would be seen as ambiguous. Then there
     would be a 25% chance (that is, 2/3 x 30% + 1/2 x 10%)
     of accidents of ambiguous origin; an 80% probability of
     causation by the party in such accidents (for 20% is
     the risk of an ambiguous accident truly caused by the
     party, 5% is the risk of an ambiguous accident truly
     caused by the natural agent, and 20%/(20% + 5%) = 80%);
     a 10% chance (that is, 1/3 x 30%) of an accident known
     to be due to the party; and a 5% chance (that is, 1/2 x
     10%) of an accident known to be due to the natural
     agent.

          Thus, under, say, the more-probable-than not
     criterion,8/ the party would be liable in ambiguous
     cases. His expected liability would therefore be 350
     (that is, (25% + 10%)xl000). As 350 exceeds the expected
     accident losses he causes of 300, his extra burden of
     liability is 50. Hence, he might undesirably be discouraged
     from engaging in the activity; and this would occur
     when his benefits are between 300 and 350, that is,
     greater than 300 but not by more than the extra burden.
                              8



Now consider the possibility that the party's probability of
causation in ambiguous cases would fall below the threshold.
Because the party would then bear a reduced burden of expected
liability were he to engage in his activity, he might do so
when it is socially undesirable.

     Example 2b. Suppose instead that only 1/5 of accidents
     caused by the party but 3/4 of accidents caused by the
     natural agent would be seen as ambiguous. Then there
     would be a 13.5% chance (that is, l/5x30% + 3/4x10%) of
     accidents of ambiguous origin; a 44.44% probability of
     causation by the party in such accidents (for 6%/l3.5%
     = 44.44%); a 24% chance of an accident known to be
     caused by the party; and a 2.5% chance of an accident
     known to be due to the natural agent. Hence, under the
     more—probable-than-not criterion, the party would not
     be liable in ambiguous cases and his expected liability
     would be only 240. As a result of this diminished
     burden, the party might undesirably be led to engage in
     his activity; and that would be so when his benefits
     are between 240 and 300.

It should be clear from the logic of Examples 2a and 2b that
both types of problem can arise for any level of the probabil-
ity threshold between 0% and 100%; there is nothing special
about the more-probable-than-not threshold of 50%.

     best all-or-nothing criterion. That this does not take
the form of a threshold probability criterion should be

clear on reflection. Given the probability of causation,
plainly it should matter what for instance are the party's
benefits, as this will determine whether the party would be
led to make an undesirable decision if he were or were
not held liable. Hence the best decision of the court must
depend on factors in addition to the probability of causation.

    Example 3. Suppose the situation to be as described in
    Example 2a, where, recall, the probability of causation
    was 80%; expected losses truly caused by the party's
    engaging in his activity were 300; and the party's
                              9



     expected liability would be 350 if he were held liable
     in ambiguous cases but would be only 100 otherwise. In
     this situation, an all-or-nothing determination about
     liability in ambiguous cases may be seen as a decision
     either to impose expected liability of 350 on the
     party--by holding him responsible in ambiguous cases--or
     as a decision to impose expected liability of only 100
     on him--by holding him responsible only in cases where
     he is known to have caused harm.
          What should the court do if it wishes to maximize
     social welfare? What, in other words, is the best
     all-or-nothing determination about liability? The
     answer depends on (among other factors)9/ the court's
     estimate of the benefits that parties like the one with
     whom it is presented derive from engaging in their
     activities. Suppose, for instance, that the estimate
     is that most such parties would derive benefits between
     300 and 350, and very few between 100 and 300. Then,
     most parties would be undesirably discouraged from
     engaging in their activities were there liability in
     ambiguous cases, whereas few would be undesirably
     encouraged to engage in their activities were there no
     liability in ambiguous cases. Hence, the best decision
     would be not to hold the given party liable in ambiguous
     cases.
          On the other hand, suppose the reverse to be the
     case, that the estimate is that most parties like the
     given one would enjoy benefits between 100 and 300, and
     few between 300 and 350. Then analogous reasoning
     leads to the conclusion that the best decision would be
     to hold the party liable in ambiguous cases.
We have therefore shown that the socially desirable decision
whether to hold the party liable in ambiguous cases may
indeed depend on factors distinct from the probability of
causation. But note that even given this best decision,
there will still be some possibility of undesirably encouraging

engagement in the activity or of undesirably discouraging
it.1° This is because it is in the nature of the all-or-
nothing approach that parties will either bear an extra
burden of liability or a diminished one; they will never
bear a burden that equals the increment in losses that they
cause.
                                   10



        proportional approach. If, however, liability in
ambiguous cases is made proportional to the party's probability
of causation, the fundamental difficulty of the all-or-nothing
approach that was just noted will be avoided. As is probably
clear on intuitive grounds, under the proportional approach
the party's expected liability will equal the increment in
expected losses that he causes. He will therefore choose to
engage in his activity precisely when his benefits are
1
—   'r r r 1- h Y      1,                  i,   S   r' 4   1 T 4 T£ £1'- HA

socially      desirable circumstances.

        Example 4. Consider again the situation described in
        Example 2a. Then, as the probability of causation
        would be 80% in ambiguous cases, the party's liability
        under the proportional approach would be 800 (that is,
        80%xl000) in such cases. His expected liability were
        he to engage in the activity would thus be equal to the
        sum of his expected liability from ambiguous cases, or
        25%x800, and his expected liability from cases known to
        be caused by him, or lO%xl000; the sum is evidently 200
        + 100 = 300, which is the expected accident losses that
        he would cause.
             Now suppose that the figures are altered as in
        Example 2b, where, recall, there was a 24% chance of
        accidents known to be caused by the party, a 13.5%
        chance of accidents of ambiguous origin, and in such
        cases a 44.44% probability of causation. Then, again,
        the party's expected liability under the proportional
        approach would equal 300 (that is, 13.5%x444.44 + 24%
        xl000 = 60 + 240) were he to engage in his activity.

This example illustrates that under the proportional approach

the party's expected liability will equal expected losses
due to his activity regardless of what would be the magnitude
of his probability of causation."
                              11



     B.   Extended model: party decides whether to engage
in his activity and, if so, whether to take care.
     Assume now that if the party engages in his activity,
he may reduce the likelihood of an accident by taking care,
which will involve a cost to him. The party's exercise of
care will be socially desirable if the reduction in expected
accident losses it would accomplish would exceed its cost.
Moreover, whether his exercise of care would be desirable
will influence the desirability of the party's engaging in
his activity in the first place. Specifically, if his
exercise of care would be desirable, then the party's engaging
in his activity will be desirable if his benefits would
exceed the cost of care plus the (reduced level of) expected

accident losses; but if his exercise of care would not be
desirable, then his engaging in his activity will be desirable
only if his benefits would exceed the (initial level of)
expected accident losses.

     Example 5. Modify Example 1 by assuming that if the
     party engages in his activity and takes care, the risk
     he causes will fall from 30% to 28%. Thus, care would
     result in a reduction of 20 (that is, 2%xl000) in
     expected accident losses, so that care ought to be
     taken if its cost is less than 20. Thus, if the cost
     of care is 10, it should be exercised if the party
     engages in his activity; and the party ought to engage
     in his activity in this case if his benefits would
     exceed 10 + 280 = 290. But if the cost of care is 25,
     it should not be exercised by the party; and therefore
     he ought to engage in his activity only if his benefits
     would exceed 300.

With this example in mind, let us reexamine the legal treat-
ment of uncertainty over causation, first under strict
                              12



liability and then under the negligence rule.   (Asid in doing

so, let us focus attention on the decision about the   exercise
of care given that the party chooses to engage in his activity,
for the latter choice generally may be understood from what
was said about it in the basic model.)
1.   situation under strict liability
     threshold probability criterion. Under this criterion,
the party's decision about care will be socially appropriate
if his probability of causation in ambiguous cases would
exceed the threshold whether or not he takes care. To see
why, notice that the party would then bear an extra burden
of liability whether or not he takes care; thus his savings
in expected liability from the exercise of care would equal

the reduction thereby accomplished in expected accident
losses; accordingly, and desirably, he will take care if and

only if its cost is less than the reduction in expected
accident losses.

     Example 6a. Consider again the previous example where
     care would reduce the risk of accidents from 30% to
     28%; and suppose as in Example 2a, that 2/3 of accidents
     caused by the party and 1/2 of accidents caused by the
     natural agent would be seen as ambiguous. Then the
     party's probability of causation in ambiguous cases
     would be 80% if he does not take care and it would be
     78.87% if he does.l2/ Hence, under the more probable-
     than-not criterion, he would be liable in ambiguous
     cases and bear an extra burden of liability of 50
     whether or not he takes care. In consequence, his
     expected liability will be 280 + 50 = 330 if he takes
     care, 300 + 50 = 350 if he does not, so that he will
     take care if and only if its cost is less than 20, the
     desirable result.
It should be clear, however, that the desirability of the
decision over care here illustrated would not hold if the
                                                13



party's probability of causation might not exceed the threshold.
In this regard, there are two possibilities. One is that
the party's probability of causation would not exceed the
threshold if he takes care--so he would bear only a diminished
burden of liability--but his probability of causation would
exceed the threshold if he fails to take care--so he would
bear an extra burden. In this event, the party's savings in
expected liability from taking care would be greater than
 t_• (_   1- i    1l CT   r f t• H t ,— 1a.   a. a.   a...   ,—   r r- 4 rR   f-   1 ,-   _

for the party's savings would equal not only the decline in
expected accident losses but also avoidance of the extra
burden and the "gain" of the diminished burden. Hence, the
party might take care when that would not be desirable.
          Example 6b. Suppose that by the exercise of care, the
          party would reduce the risk of accidents from 30% to
          6%. Then while if he does not take care, his probability
          of causation in ambiguous cases would be 80%, if he
          takes care it will be only 44.44%,13/ which is below
          the 50% threshold. As a consequence, although if he
          does not take care, the party's expected liability will
          be 350, if he takes care, it will be only 60 - 40 = 20.
          Hence, his liability savings from taking care would
          equal 350 - 20 = 330, whereas the savings in expected
          accident losses are only 300 - 60 = 240. (The party's
          liability savings exceed society's savings in accident
          losses by 330 - 240 = 90 because by taking care, he
          avoids the extra burden of 50 and also enjoys a reduced
          burden of 40 on account of escaping liability in the
          ambiguous cases truly caused by him.) It follows that
          the party might be undesirably led to take care; and
          this would happen when the cost of care exceeds 240 but
          is less than 330.

By contrast, the other possibility of interest leads to too
little incentive to take care. If the party's probability
of causation would be less than the threshold whether or not
he takes care, then he would escape liability in ambiguous
                              14



cases whether or not he takes care. He would therefore not
derive any savings in liability from a care-related decline

in ambiguous cases truly caused by him; his savings in
expected liability from taking care would be less than the

decline in expected accident losses. Thus, he might fail to
take care when he ought.

     Example 6c. Suppose that the situation is more or less
     the reverse of that in the preceding example; suppose
     now that the risk caused by the natural agent is 30%;
     that the risk caused by the party is 10%; that he can
     reduce the risk from 10% to 8% by the exercise of care;
     and that 1/2 of accidents caused by him and 2/3 of
     those caused by the natural agent would be seen as
     ambiguous. Then as the party's probability of causation
     in ambiguous cases would be below the 50% threshold
     whether or not he takes care--namely, 20% if he does
     not take care and 16.66% if he does--he would never be
     liable in such cases. Hence, if he does not take care,
     his expected liability would be 100 - 50 = 50, and if
     he does take care, it would be 80 - 40   40. His
     liability savings from taking care would thus be 50 -
     40   10, namely, only half the true reduction of 100 —
     80 = 20 in expected accident losses accomplished by
     taking care. In consequence, the party might not take
     care when he ought; and this will be the case whenever
     the cost of care is greater than 10 but less than 20.
This completes the analysis of the incentive to take care. 14
To recapitulate, the incentive to take care will be inadequate
if the probability of causation would be less than the
threshold regardless of the exercise of care; the incentive
will be excessive if the probability of causation would be
less than the threshold only if care were taken; but the
incentive will be appropriate if the probability of causation
would always exceed the threshold.

     best all-or-nothing criterion. Once again, this will
generally be different from a threshold probability criterion,
as should be apparent from the logic of the argument given
                              15



earlier. (Note, however, that the best all-or-nothing
criterion should be more complicated than earlier, as it now
will implicitly take into account the effect of liability on
the decision whether to take care as well as on whether to

engage in the activity.)

     proportional approach. Under the proportional approach,
the party will make the appropriate decisions about the
exercise of care and engagement in the risky activity. As

explained before, under this approach the party's expected
liability will equal the expected accident losses he causes;
hence the reduction in liability that he will derive from
the exercise of care will equal the reduction in accident
losses thereby accomplished; he will therefore take care
when that would be desirable, and so forth.
     Example 7. Consider again the situation of Example 6c,
     where the party might not have taken care when he ought
     under the more-probable-than-not criterion, and suppose
     that proportional liability is imposed in ambiguous
     cases. Then if the party engages in his activity and
     does not take care, his probability of causation in
     ambiguous cases will be 20% and his expected liability,
     100 (that is, 25%x200 + 5%xl000); and if the party does
     take care, his probability of causation will be 16.66%
     and his expected liability, 80 (that is, 24%x166.6 +
     4%xl000). Thus the party will take care if and only if
     its cost is less than the savings of 100 - 80 = 20 in
     expected liability costs; as this equals the savings in
     expected accident losses, his decision about care will
     indeed be socially desirable.

2.   situation under the negligence rule
     By definition of the negligence rule, the party will be
held liable for losses in an accident that he caused if he
failed to take "due care"; otherwise he will not be liable.
                              16



Assume here that due care is determined in a socially ideal
manner by the courts: There is a duty to take care if and
only if the cost of care is less than the savings in expected
accident losses in which care would result. Assume also
that care is accurately perceived by the courts, and thus
that there will be no possibility of legal mistake about
this element of a case.

     Before proceeding to the analysis, recall the fundamental
fact that under the negligence rule, the party's motive to

engage in his activity may be too great, quite apart from
any problems due to uncertainty over causation. The reason
that the party might engage in his activity when he ought
not is simply that if he takes due care, he will escape

liability for any accidents that he causes. This means that
he will see as the cost of engaging in his activity merely
the cost of exercising due care--rather than the higher and
true social cost equal to the cost of due care plus the
expected accident losses caused by his activity)5
    Example 8. Consider the situation where the risk of
    accident losses caused by the party would be 30% if he
    does not take care and 28% if he does; where the cost
    of care is 10; but where there is no possibility of
    uncertainty over causation. Then, as the exercise of
    care would be socially worthwhile, the party would have
    to take care to avoid being found negligent. And,
    clearly, if the party were to engage in his activity,
    he would decide to take care: if he did so, his only
    costs would be 10, the cost of care; but if he did not,
    his expected liability would equal 300. As a consequence,
    although the party would, desirably, be induced to take
    care if were to engage in his activity, he would decide
    to engage in it whenever his benefits would exceed 10.
    But it would be desirable that he engage in his activity
    only when his benefits would exceed 10 + 280 = 290.
                              17



     It turns out that this problem of socially excessive

incentives to engage in risky activity may be exacerbated by
the possibility of uncertainty over causation. Suppose that
the party inappropriately fails to take due care because he
will not be liable in ambiguously caused cases. Then, ipso
facto, his expected liability must be less than the cost of
care; and hence the problem of his having an excessive
incentive to engage in the activity must be worsened)-6
     Having now stated the (only) point of interest about
uncertainty over causation and the decision to engage in the
activity under the negligence rule, let us examine the
decision to take care.

     threshold probability criterion. Under this criterion,
the party will never have too great an incentive to take
care. Although he might be subject to liability "too often"--
because his probability of causation might always exceed the

threshold--he may avoid liability by taking due care; being
subject to liability for negligence too often does not mean
that the party pays too much in damages; it means only that
he has a specially strong motive to take due care.

     However, the party might have too little incentive to
take care. This possibility may arise when the party's
probability of causation in ambiguous cases would be below
the threshold, for then he would be subject to liability

for negligence too infrequently.
     Example 9.  Suppose that the risk due to the natural
     agent is 30%; that the risk caused by the party if he
     engages in his activity and does not take care is 3%;
     that the party can reduce the risk to 1% by taking
                                18



     care; that the cost of care is 18; and that 1/2 of all
     accidents caused by the party and 2/3 of those caused
     the natural agent would be seen as of ambiguous origin.
     Then the party's probability of causation would be
     below the threshold whether or not he takes care--it
     would be 6.98% if he does not take care and 2.44% if he
     does; and the risk of an accident for which he would be
     known to be the cause would be 1.5% (that is, 1/2 x 3%)
     if he does not take care. Hence, if he does not take
     care, his expected liability for negligence will be 15;
     if he takes care, although he will never be found
     liable, he will have borne a cost of 18 in so doing;
     accordingly, he will not take care. Thus, despite the
     social desirability of spending 18 on care to reduce
     expected accident losses by 20 = 30-10, the party will
     not do so. The difficulty is that the party is subject
     to liability only half as often as he ought to be.
This problem of failure to take care will arise only if the

probability of escaping liability for negligence is quite
high, that is, only if the likelihood of ambiguous cases is
high relative to the total risk created. This is because
the underlying incentive to take due care is strong under

the negligence rule; for by taking due care, one avoids

liability entirely (rather than--as under strict liability--
merely lowering its expected magnitude).17
     best all-or-nothing criterion. As stated before, this
criterion is superior to, different from, and more complicated
than any threshold probability criterion.

     proportional approach. Under this approach, as should
be clear from what was said before, a negligent party's

expected liability would equal the expected accident losses
he causes. Hence if the party engages in his activity, he
will be led to take due care.

     Example 10. Suppose in Example 9 that proportional
     liability is imposed for negligence in ambiguous cases.
     Then if the party does not take care, as his probability
     of causation will be 6.98%, his expected liability will
                              19



     be 30 (that is, 21.5%x69.8+1.5%xl000). And since he
     can avoid this liability by taking care at a cost of
     18, he will do so (in contrast to what he was led to do
     in Example 9).

The situation under the proportional scheme, evidently, is
therefore exactly that which would obtain were there no

possibility of uncertainty over causation; there will always
be an appropriate incentive to take due care (and there will
be an equivalent problem of excessive incentives to engage
in the activity).
                              20



II. Uncertainty Over Causation: Which of Several Parties
Was The Author of Harm
     Assume as in the previous part that each party may
decide to engage in a risky activity;18 that accidents are

always caused by some single party among those engaging in
risky activities; that this responsible party might be
identifiable to the courts; but, if not, that the accident
will be seen as of ambiguous origin, in which case the
probability of causation of each party will be determined.
     With regard to the legal system, make the same assumptions
as before, adding only that in cases of ambiguous causation
where more than one party is held liable, damages might be

apportioned in some way)9
     Also, continue to assume that the behavior of each
party is determined by maximization of his expected position,
and consider both the assumption that parties act independently
and that they act in concert. Under the first assumption,
we will determine a so-called equilibrium, a situation such
that no party has reason to alter his behavior, assuming
that other parties will continue to act as they have been.
And under the assumption that parties act in concert, we
will determine their jointly preferred position, that which
maximizes the sum of their expected positions.2°
     Finally, assume the measure of social welfare to be
much as before, namely, the sum (over all parties) of the
value of engaging in activities, less the sum of any costs
of care, and less expected accident losses.
                              21



     We consider first the basic model and then the version
of the model with care a decision variable. The numerical

examples illustrating the results will be limited to the
situation where there are just two parties involved, the
extension to the situation with more than two parties usually
being obvious.


     A.   Basic model: prties decide only whether to engage
in their activities.

     In this case, socially ideal behavior is of course for
a party to engage in his activity if and only if the benefits
he would derive exceed the increment he would cause in
accident losses over what others cause (rather than, as
before, over what was attributable to the natural agent).

     Example 11. Modify Example 1 by supposing that a party
     A would create a 30% risk of accidents and another
     party B (rather than a natural agent) would create a
     10% risk of accidents. Then A ought to engage in the
     activity if his benefits would exceed 300, and B if his
     benefits would exceed 100.
     Now let us examine the behavior of parties assuming
liability to be strict.

     threshold probability criterion. Suppose initially
that parties act independently. Then the two problems
identified in part I generally arise: First, certain parties
might undesirably fail to engage in their activities; for
were they to engage in their activities, they might find
themselves bearing an extra burden of liability due to their
liability for accident losses of ambiguous origin.   And
second, some parties might undesirably decide to engage in
                                                  22



their activities; for were they to do so, they might bear
only a reduced burden of liability due to their escaping

liability in cases of ambiguous origin.
         Example 12. Continuing with Example 11, and
    assuming the more-probable-than-not criterion, let us
    first show that a party might undesirably fail to
    engage in his activity. Specifically, let us show that
    A might fail to engage in his activity when he ought to
    engage in it because by doing so he would become liable
    in all ambiguous cases and thus bear liability for some
    accidents caused by B. Suppose that 2/3 of accidents
    caused by A and 1/2 of those caused by B would be seen
    as of ambiguous origin if both engaged in their activities;
       A  ..,..-. •-. __ £1 I . 1S____                                                 , A1. 1—.            ') ,J.
    LL.L AJ     'J.J            JL1 £ .1.- .4—
                                            L. .L.   £ JUI — .-. ,-. ,-. J- .- ,-. VY '.1
                                                .-. -—                                       .. '.4 £J'. .1 L.
    and B's, 125. Then both parties ought to engage in
    their activities, but only B would do so. To see why,
    let us consider three candidates for an equilibrium
    situation, namely, both A and B engaging in their
    activities, A alone engaging in his activity, and B
    alone doing so. If both engage in their activities,
    then A will be liable for all ambiguous cases--for A's
    probability of causation will be 80% and B's 20%; A's
    liability will thus be 350 and B's will be 50; A's net
    position will be 325—350=—25, and B's, 125-50=75; hence
    A would withdraw, meaning that the situation could not
    be an equilibrium. Similarly, if A alone engages in
    his activity, B will decide to engage in his activity
    as well, for as just observed, he would then enjoy net
    benefits of 75; hence this situation too could not be
    an equilibrium. However, B alone engaging in his
    activity is an equilibrium situation, for he would
    enjoy net benefits of 125-100=25; and A would not
    decide to engage in his activity, for as observed, he
    would lose 25 by doing so.
         Let us now show that a party might undesirably
    engage in his activity. If we alter the benefit figures
    from above, we will find that both A and B will engage
    in their activities when B ought not to; B will engage
    in his activity only because he will avoid liability
    for part of his accident losses by escaping liability
    in ambiguous cases; he will ride on the coattails of A.
    Specifically, let A's benefits be 400 and B's, 75.
    Then while A ought to engage in his activity, B ought
    not. Yet it is plain that each engaging in his activity
    is an equilibrium, for each will derive positive net
    benefits; A's will be 400-350=50, and B's will be
    75-50=25. B engages in his activity because his liability
    is 50 rather than the 100 in expected accident losses
    that he causes.
                                 23



The relative importance of the two problems just illustrated
obviously depends on the size of the threshold probability
and on the number of potential participants in activities
that could cause accidents of ambiguous origin. We would
expect, for instance, that the importance of the problem of

undesirably encouraging engagement in activities would
increase as the number of potential participants rises and
also as the threshold rises, for each would conduce to the

possibility that any given partys probability of causation
would lie below the threshold.
     How is what we have said about the threshold probability
criterion affected if we suppose that parties act in concert
rather than independently? Recall that when parties act in
concert, they will wish to maximize the sum of net benefits--
which here means that they will want a party to engage in
his activity if the benefits he would derive exceed any
increase in the sum of expected liabilities of the parties.
     Now assume the situation to be such that whenever an

ambiguous case arises, some party (or parties) would be held
liable--because his probability of causation would exceed
the threshold. (This assumption will be relaxed below.)
Then the outcome when parties act in concert would be socially
ideal. The reason is simply that under the assumption just
made, the sum of parties' liabilities would necessarily
equal the stun of accident losses; hence the increase in the

sum of expected liabilities due to a party's engaging in his
activity would equal the increase in expected accident
                              24



losses; in consequence, a party would be allowed by the

group acting in concert to engage in his activity precisely
when his benefits would exceed the increase in expected
accident losses he would cause.

          Example 13. Let us verify that in the previous
     example, an optimal outcome would result were A and B
     to act in concert. (In that example, it was true that
     either A or B would be liable for ambiguous cases, so
     the assumption of present interest is satisfied.) When
     A's and B's benefits were 325 and 125, respectively, it
     was socially desirable that each engage in his activity.
     And this is what they would now do. If each engages in
     his activity, their joint expected position will be
     (325—350) + (125—50)50; if A alone does so, their
     joint position will be only 325-300=25; and if B alone
     does so, it will also be 125-100=25; hence A and B will
     indeed be best off each engaging in his activity.2l/
          On the other hand, when A's and B's benefits were
     400 and 75, it was socially desirable that A alone
     engage in his activity, and this is what would occur
     when the two parties act in concert. If each engages
     in his activity, their joint position will be (400-350)
     + (75-50) = 75; if A alone engages in his activity, it
     will be 400-300 = 100; if B alone engages in his activity,
     it will be 75-l00=-25; hence A alone will engage in his
     activity. 22/
     If we now alter the assumption that some party will be
liable in each ambiguous case, then the outcome when parties
act in concert may not be socially desirable; there will be

a potential problem of parties' undesirably engaging in
their activities. The reason in essence is that by engaging

in their activities, parties might introduce enough uncertainty
about ambiguous cases to make the probability of causation
of each fall below the threshold, allowing them all to escape
liability in such cases.
     Example 14. A and B would each derive benefits of 75
     from engaging in his activity; each would create a 10%
     risk of accidents by so doing; were each to engage in
     his activity, 1/2 of accidents caused by each would be
     seen as of ambiguous origin--so that the probability of
     causation of each would be 50%.
                                 25



          In this situation, it would be best that neither A
     nor B engage in his activity, as each would cause ex-
     pected accident losses of 100. Yet by agreeing jointly
     to engage in their activities, A and B would avoid half
     their liability--each would bear expected liability of
     only 50--for under the more-probable-than-not criterion,
     neither would be held liable in ambiguous cases.
     Hence, A and B would each derive net benefits of
     75-50=25 and would, undesirably, engage in their
     activities.

Note, however, that the opposite problem--of too little
engagement in activities--cannot arise because the sum of
expected liability costs surely will not increase by more
than the true addition to expected accident losses when a

party engages in his activity.
     best all-or-nothing criterion. For now familiar reasons,
this criterion is different from and superior to a threshold

probability criterion. (It would, for example, take into
account whether parties acted in concert.)

     proportional approach. This approach would again lead
to socially ideal behavior, whether parties act independently
or in concert. If the parties act independently, each would
clearly be led to engage in his activity if and only if his
benefits would exceed the expected accident losses he would

cause, for under the proportional approach each party's
expected liability would equal the expected accident losses
he would cause. Similarly, if the parties act in concert,
each would be led to engage in his activity exactly when
that would be desirable; for the fact that each party's

expected liability would equal his expected accident losses
means that the increment in the sum of expected liabilities
due to a party's engaging in his activity would equal the
expected accident losses he would cause.
                                26



     B.   Extended model: parties decide whether to engage
in their activities and, if so, whether to take care.
     The points of interest here can be explained without

further numerical examples and largely by reference to
previous discussion. (In any event, the situations to be
considered will often involve so many elements that numerical

examples would become too complicated to be helpful.)
1.   situation under strict liability

     We will discuss here only the decision to take care, as
the conclusions from the basic model about engagement in the
activities will carry over to the extended model.

     threshold probability criterion. Suppose first that
parties act independently. Then the situation is as described
in part I. That is, a party might have an appropriate
incentive to take care; and this would be so if his probability
of causation would exceed the threshold whether or not he
takes care. On the other hand, a party might have an incorrect
incentive to take care: his incentive would be excessive if
his probability of causation would fall below the threshold
only if he takes care; and his incentive would be inadequate
if his probability of causation would fall below the threshold
whether or not he takes care.

     Now suppose that parties act in concert. Then the
conclusions depend on the two possibilities discussed in the
basic model. The first, recall, was that some party (or
parties) would be liable for losses in each ambiguous case.

In this case, joint expected liability would equal actual
                                27



joint expected accident losses; thus by logic similar to
that given in the basic model, parties' incentives to take
care would be socially ideal. The other possibility was

that parties' joint liability might be less than expected
accident losses since all might escape liability in ambiguous
cases. In this circumstance, parties' incentives to take
care would be inadequate, and some parties might fail to
take care when they ought to.
     best all-or-nothing criterion. Again, this is more
complicated than and superior to a threshold probability
criterion.

     proportional approach. Because this results in each
party's bearing the true expected accident losses he causes,
it leads to ideal incentives to take care as well as to

engage in risky activities, and regardless of whether parties
act independently or in concert.


2.   situation under the negligence rule
     We will again discuss only the decision to take care.

(Recall, however, that under the negligence rule there is an
underlying problem of too great an incentive to engage in

risky activities.)
     threshold probability criterion. If the parties act
independently, then their motive to take care will be as
described in part I.   Specifically, if a party's probability
of causation would exceed the threshold if he took care, his
motive to take care would be appropriate. But if his probabil-
ity of causation would be below the threshold if he took care,
                              28



his incentive to take care would be inadequate, as his

expected liability for negligence would be too low.
     Suppose, on the other hand, that parties act in concert.
Then if some party (or parties) would be liable for negli-

gence in each ambiguous case, parties would always be induced
to take due care: as explained above, the joint potential
expected liability for negligence would then equal the
expected accident losses truly caused. But if all parties
might escape liability for negligence in ambiguous cases,
then some parties might not be induced to take due care.
     best all-or-nothing criterion. This is again different
from and superior to a threshold probability rule.

     proportional approach. This results in the exercise of
due care in all circumstances, as expected liability for

negligence would equal expected accident losses caused.
                              29



 III. Concluding Comments

     In closing, let us consider briefly (a) the positive
implications of the theoretical analysis--the consistency of
the results obtained with the actual determination of liability

in the face of uncertainty over causation; and (b) the
normative implications of the analysis--the recommendations
that are suggested by the results.

     (a) On the issue of uncertainty over causation, the
general approach of the law has been to make a liable defendant

pay damages fully equal to any losses of which he was more-
probably-than-not the cause.23 For several reasons, this
fact--that the law employs an all-or-nothing approach to
liability based on a threshold probability--need not be seen
as inconsistent with the theoretical superiority in the

model of liability in proportion to the probability that the
defendant caused losses. Most obviously, one would hardly
expect as important an element of liability as its all-or-
nothing character to be abandoned in the face of this or
that aspect of a case, here in the face of uncertainty over

causation, unless there were strong reasons to do otherwise.
And no strong reasons to do otherwise appear to exist in
respect to the usual tort. In particular, one suspects that
the likelihood of real uncertainty over the cause of the
usual tort must be small,24 and thus so must be the chance

of any adverse behavioral consequences associated with the
all-or-nothing character of liability and use of a threshold
probability test.25 (Further, the fact that the negligence
                              30



rule is the major form of tort liability supplies other if
subtle reasons for thinking that adverse effects on behavior
are likely to be small.)26 Additionally, there are considera-
tions going outside the model that appear to favor the usual
approach over the alternative of proportional liability: as
discussed below, the usual approach may result in fewer
cases and lower administrative costs than the proportional
and, further, be perceived as fair rather than unfair.
     If, then, it seems understandable that liability has
retained its all-or—nothing character in the typical case
involving uncertainty over causation and that a threshold
probability criterion has been employed, what can be said
about the fact that the courts have occasionally chosen

explicitly to adjust the magnitude of the threshold from
50%?27 And what can be said about the view that this is
often done implicitly, according to the felt requirements of
policy and the nature of the case?27a The answer is that
altering the threshold probability may be interpreted as
reflecting the theoretical result that the best all-or-nothing
criterion cannot be expressed as a fixed threshold probability
criterion and that this best criterion generally depends on
many characteristics of the particular problem at hand.
     At the same time, it seems consistent with theory that
in certain restricted types of case, the threshold requirement
has in effect been dropped and, recently, that use of the
proportional approach has been seriously considered and even
adopted. For instance, when it was unclear which hunter
fired the harmful shot, the court did not insist that the
                                 31



probability threshold requirement be met; instead it simply
shifted the burden of proof about causation to defendants.28

And where it was not ascertainable which company manufactured
the generic drug that caused cancer, the court found companies
liable according to their market share, that is, approximately
in proportion to the probability that they caused harm.29,29a

Such cases are distinguishable in the theoretically anticipated
way: they raise in a vivid manner the possibility that
there would be problematic effects associated with use of
the usual approach to the determination of liability;29b for
under the usual approach defendants would be allowed to go
free even though the court knows with high probability that
some one of them caused the harm. Indeed, this concern is

sometimes expressed in opinions.30
     (b) The principal normative implications of the analysis
follow from what we have just said. They are two. First,
where little problem with adverse incentives would be expected
to result from use of the usual approach in determining
liability--that is, where the likelihood of uncertainty over
causation would be low--there will be no special reason for

change. Thus, surely, no change is recommended as a general
matter.

     But, second, where significant undesirable effects on
behavior could result from use of the usual approach --

where the chance of uncertainty over causation would be
substantial --   adoption   of some form of the proportional

approach may have appeal. Perhaps the area in which this
-——   — -- .—- —w--'•___ —   —   —.——— —n----——.-----p .—-—-- _———_n_
                              33



to be below the threshold, he will not be likely to initiate
legal action under the threshold criterion but may well

under the proportional approach.34 Second, the likelihood
that a suit would result in a trial would also seem to be

larger under the proportional approach. This is because use
of the proportional approach introduces as an additional
issue of possible dispute between the parties the actual
magnitude of the probability of causation. (Under the
threshold probability criterion, by contrast, the actual
magnitude of the probability will not be at issue except
with respect to the question whether the probability is
above or below the threshold. )35 And third, the cost of a
trial would as well seem greater under the proportional

approach. This appears so again because of the introduction
of the actual magnitude of the probability of causation

(beyond the threshold determination) as an additional issue
of potential dispute; because the jury too would now have to
decide about the actual magnitude of the probability of
causation; and because one would expect a greater number of
defendants to be involved in the typical dispute (the plaintiff

joining as defendants many of the parties who could conceivably
have done him harm). In sum, then, not just the volume of
disputes but also the probability that a dispute will result
in a trial and the cost per trial would seem greater under

the proportional approach.
     With regard to the issue of compensation, the main
observations to be made are that when the probability of
causation does not exceed 50%, the proportional approach
                              34



results in positive compensation and the usual approach
results in none; that when the probability of causation does
exceed 50%, the proportional approach results in less com-

pensation than the usual approach; and that the former

effect may be more important than the latter.35a (One may
wonder, though, about the relevance of interest in the

compensatory characteristics of the liability system given
the availability of private insurance and the possibility of

establishing social insurance programs.)
     Concerning fairness, the principle that comes immediately
to mind is that a party ought not be punished for a harm
unless he did it, and--by extension--he ought not be punished
for a harm unless we are reasonably sure he did it. This
principle of fairness is in perfect accord with use of a
threshold probability criterion in the determination of
liability; on the other hand, the principle would be violated
by use of proportional liability, as a party would suffer
some sanction even when it was unlikely that he caused a
harm. Yet in assessing the importance of this consideration

favoring the threshold probability criterion, the analyst
should take into account two limiting factors. First, the
appeal of the principle seems strongest in the criminal
context, where actual punishment is meted out; in the civil
context, where the sanction is monetary and frequently paid
by a liability insurer, the significance of adherence to the
principle would seem diminished. Second, where the defendant
parties are not individuals but (large) firms, the importance
of the principle would also seem reduced.
                              35



     Finally, and closely related to the principle of fair-
ness, is the goal of minimizing the costs of error.36f36a

As Professor Kaye has recently shown, this goal implies the
superiority of the more-probable-than-not rule over propor-
tional liability.36b Now while normally one cannot object to
study of a particular social goal on logical grounds, in the
case of error minimization, one can. The objection is that
whereas one presumes that a social goal ought to be based on
immediate determinants of individual welfare,36C the goal of
error minimization is not; the goal is instead chiefly a
proxy for the undesireable effects on individual welfare due
to the consequences flowing from errors. It is these conse-
quences that primarily matter to individual welfare, one
supposes, and not the errors themselves. (It is whether an

individual is affected by a carcinogen produced by firms and,
if so, whether he is compensated that matters to an individual
one would think, and not whether any firm has to pay damages
when it was not the cause.) In strict logic, the only
reason to include error as a direct ingredient of social
welfare is a belief that error matters to individuals inde-

pendent of the consequences due to error; and to the extent
that this is thought significant, error should be introduced
as a, not the, determinant of social welfare. The reader
may tend to regard this distinction as over subtle, and
admittedly in many contexts it will not be of any real
importance; but it is sometimes of significance, and it does

explain why the criterion of minimizing errors can lead to
anomalies (such as that none of the firms producing the
                             36



carcinogen should be liable since none is ever more-probably-
than-not the cause). 36d
                              37



                          Appendix


     As the general model has been discussed in the text, we
will describe it here as briefly as possible.

     (i) All outcomes are defined in terms of a single good
to be called "wealth".

     (ii) Social welfare equals the expected value of the
sum of parties' wealth. (Equivalently, it will be seen to
equal the value of engaging in activities less, possibly,
the cost of care, and less expected accident losses.)

     (iii) Parties are risk-neutral in wealth; they act so
as to maximize its expected value.

     (iv) Accidents--events involving a loss of wealth--
occur with a probability depending on whether parties engage
in risky activities and, possibly, on whether they take
      37
care.

     (v) Each accident is caused by precisely one entity (a
party or a natural agent), that is, there is one and only
one entity for which the following statement is true: "The
accident would not have occurred in the absence of the

entity."
     (vi) ,Then an accident occurs, there will be a chance
that the entity which caused it will not be known to the
court; such instances will be said to be of ambiguous origin;
but the conditional probability--the probability of
that the entity caused the accident will be determined by the
court.
                                  38



     (vii) Two    types   of legal treatment of cases of ambiguous
origin will be investigated. The first involves the use of
an all-or-nothing criterion, a function (of variables to be

specified) determining whether the applicable liability rule
(strict liability or negligence) shall be employed. The
specific all-or-nothing criterion to which most attention
will be paid is the threshold probability criterion, under

which the applicable liability rule shall be employed if the
probability of causation exceeds the threshold probability.
The second type of treatment of ambiguous cases is to adopt

use of proportional liability: always to employ the applicable
liability rule, but to set the damages to be paid in the
event of liability equal to the accident loss multiplied by
the probability of causation.

     We will now analyze versions of the general model
(those considered in the text), amplifying on or adding to
the assumptions just made as we proceed.


I.   Uncertainty Over Causation: Party vs. Natural Agent
     A.    Basic model: party decides only whether to engage
in his activity

     Define the following notation.
     v =   value to the party of engaging in his activity; v
             0;

     p =   probability    of accidents caused by the party's
           engaging in his activity;
                                     39



     n =     probability   of accidents caused by the natural
             agent; 0 < n   <   1; p + n   1;

     £ =     loss   if accident occurs; £ >     0.
As the events that an accident is caused by the party and by

the natural agent are mutually exclusive (assumption (v))1
it is socially desirable for the party to engage in his
            37a
activity if
     (1) v > p2.
     If the party does not engage in his activity, then all
accidents are assumed to be known to be due to the natural
agent.38 But if the party does engage in his activity,
cases of ambiguous origin will arise, and to describe this,
define
         =   conditional   probability that an accident caused by
             the party appears to be of ambiguous origin; 0 < c

               1;

         =   conditional   probability that an accident caused by
             the natural agent appears to be of ambiguous
             origin; 0 <        1.
Hence, the probability of an accident known to be caused by
the party will be

     (2) p(l —      a);
the probability of an accident caused by the party but seen
as of ambiguous origin will be

     (3) pa;
the probability of an accident knowii to be caused by the

natural agent will be
                                          40



        (4) n(l —
and the probability of an accident caused by the natural

agent but seen as of ambiguous origin will be
        (5)   '-'13.



Accordingly, the conditional probability that an accident of
ambiguous origin was caused by the party, that is, the
probability of causation, will be
        (6) c = pci/(pc      + n13).

We remark that c could equal any value in u,ij. 39
        Let us assume that the applicable liability rule is

strict liability, according to which a party would simply be
liable for losses in the absence of uncertainty over causation.4°
        Let us now examine the different ways of treating cases
of ambiguous origin. In doing this we assume that the court
knows (can "observe") the variables p, n, 2, ci, and 13, but
that it cannot observe v. However, we assume that the court
knows the probability distribution of v; let this be charac-
terized by
        f(•) =         probability     density of the value v of engaging
                       in the activity; f is positive over [0, ]
                       and zero elsewhere; V    > 2.
        Let us consider first the threshold probability criterion,
where
        t = threshold      probability; 0 <     t   <   1.
Under this criterion, in cases of ambiguous origin the party
will be liable and pay £ in damages when
                                            41



      (7) c >   t.
(If the party is known         to   have caused an accident, then of
course he also pays £ in damages.)41 Let us now prove
     Proposition 1. Use of the threshold probability criterion
may lead to a socially undesirable outcome; the party might
undesirably fail to engage in his activity or might undesirably
engage in it.

     Proof: If c >         t would hold in ambiguous cases, 42      the
party will be liable in all such cases. Thus, his expected
liability were he to engage in his activity would be43
     (8) p(l—)2 + pc2          +    n2          p2 +   fl2,
so that he will engage in his activity if
     (9) v > p2      + n132.

Comparing this to (1), we see that the party will not engage
in his activity when it would be socially desirable that he
did if p2 <   V < p2   +   n2..
     On the other hand, if c                t would hold in ambiguous
cases, then the party will never be liable in such cases, so
that his expected liability would be only44

     (10) p(l—c).Q      p2 — pa.Q..

Hence, he will engage in the activity if
     (11) v > p2 —     p2,
implying that he will engage in the activity when that would
be undesirable if p2 - pc2          <   v   <    p2.   Q.E.D.45
                                     42



         Next, let us consider the best all-or-nothing criterion

for determining liability in ambiguous cases. Under this
criterion, the court uses all the information at its dis-

posal--p, n, 2, c, f, and f(•)--and determines whether there
should be liability so as to maximize the expected value of
social welfare. Specifically, if the court would not hold
the party liable, then social welfare will be
           V
   I1)\/ CI_ysO\fIt,\,l't,.
    —.     .1 -' /    SVp
                        V

          p2-pc2
and if it would hold the party liable, then social welfare will be
           V
   (13)    f(v-p2)f(v)dv.
         p2+n2
Hence the court would hold the party liable when (13) exceeds (12),

or, equivalently, when

                p2+n2           p2
         (14) 5(v-p2)f(v)dv <   f(p2-v)f(v)dv.
                p2              p2-p2
Note that the interpretation of the left-hand term in (14)
is the "opportunity loss" that would be due to socially
undesirable discouragement from the activity were there
liability in ambiguous cases; and the interpretation of the
right-hand term is the loss that would be due to socially
undesirable engagement in the activity were there were not
liability in ambiguous cases. Under the threshold probability
criterion, by contrast, it is the size of c =    pc/(pc   +   n)
versus t that determines whether there is liability--and t
is presumed to be fixed, not to depend on 2, p, n, or other
variables.46 This suggests
                                 43



      Proposition 2. The best all-or-nothing criterion is
not equivalent to (and thus is superior to) a threshold
probability criterion.

     Note. The best all—or-nothing criterion may still lead
to both types of socially undesirable outcome as are possible
under a threshold probability criterion.

     Proof: Assume that the best all-or-nothing criterion
is equivalent to a threshold probability criterion for some

t, say t', and consider for example a p, n, ci, and       such that
c = pcx/(pci +   n) t'.
                   >       Then the party would be liable under the
threshold criterion, but he might not be liable under the best

all-or-nothing criterion; for, clearly, (14) might not hold
(suppose that most of the probability mass of v is concentrated
in the interval (p2,p2 +   n2)).      Thus the assumption that the
criteria are equivalent is contradicted.47
     Regarding the Note, it is obvious that both types of

problem are possible depending on p, n, 2, ci,    , and   f():
for if (14) holds, then the party might be undesirably
discouraged from engaging in the activity; and if (14) does
not hold, then the party might be undesirably encouraged to
engage in it.                         Q.E.D.
     Last, let us consider proportional liability. Recall
that under this approach, the party would pay c2 in all
cases of ambiguous origin. We have
     Proposition 3. Use of proportional liability leads to
a socially desirable outcome.
                                           44



     Proof: If the party engages in his activity, his
expected liability will be
     (15) p(l — a)2. + (pci + n)c2. =           p(l    —     +



              (py + n)[pci/(pci + n)}2 =              p2..


Hence, the party will engage in his activity when v > p2,
which is precisely the condition (1). Q.E.D.48


     B. Extended model: party decides whether to engage
in his activity and, if so, whether to take care.
     We will now consider the possibility that the party can
reduce the probability of an accident by taking care. To
this end, define
      g =   probability     of accidents caused by the party's
            activity if he takes care; 0 < q < p; and
      x =   cost   of taking care; 0 < x.

Hence, if the party engages in his activity, it will be
socially desirable for him to take care if
     (16) q2. + x < p2.

Further, if (16) holds, then it will be socially desirable
for the party to engage in his activity if
     (17) V >       + x;

but if (16) does not hold, (1) will as before determine the
social desirability of his engaging in his activity. We
will assume that the same conditional probabilities a and
of accidents appearing ambiguous apply whether or not care
is taken.49
                                      45



Hence, if the party engages in his activity and takes care,
the probability of an accident known to be caused by him
will be

     (18) q(l —
the probability of an accident caused by him but seen as of
ambiguous origin will be

     (19) q;
if the party does not take care, the analogous probabilities

wiii still be given by (2) and (3); and the analogous prob-
abilities of accidents caused by the natural agent will

still be given by (4) and (5). If the party takes care,
his probability of causation in cases of ambiguous origin
will be
     (20) c =    gu/(qc   +   nf3),
which, note, is lower than c will be if he does not take
care (as q <    p).   Let us now proceed with the analysis,

first assuming liability to be strict, and then to be based
on the negligence rule.
1.   situation under strict liability
     We have
     Proposition 4. Use of the threshold probability criterion
may lead to a socially undesirable outcome. Specifically,
     (a) the party might undesirably fail to engage in his

          activity or might undesirably engage in it;
     (b) if the party engages in his activity, he might
          undesirably fail to take care or he might undesirably
          take care.
                                                         46


        Note. Part (a) is true for essentially the reason that
Proposition 1 was true. With regard to (b), we will show
(i) that the party might undesirably fail to take care
precisely when c           t whether or not care is taken; (ii) that
the party might undesirably take care precisely when c                        t
only if care is taken; and (iii) that the party will take
care if and only if that is desirable precisely when c >                      t
regardless of whether care is taken.
        Proof:   (a) We omit the argument for this part, as it
is analogous to that given in Proposition 1.
        (b) Assume that the party is induced to engage in the
activity and consider in turn the three possibilities mentioned
in the Note.

(1) c      t regardless of whether care is taken. In this case,
expected liability is p2 - pci2 if care is not taken and q2 -
g2   if it is, so that care will be taken if

        (20) q2 —qc2 +x< p2 —pc2
or, equivalently, if

        (20') q2 + x   <       p2      —    (p   —
                                                         q)c2.
Comparing this to (16) and noting that (p - q)c2                    >   0, it is
evident that the party might undesirably fail to take care
(but would not undesirably take care).
(ii) c     t only if care is taken. In this case, expected
liability is p2 +      n2.          if care is not taken and it is q2 - qc2
if it is, so care will be taken when

     (21) q2 — qc2             +   x    <   p2       +       n2
or, if

     (21') q2 + x          <    p2      +   (qc          +   n)2.
                                                47



Comparing this to (16) and noting that (qc +                      n)2   >   0, it
is evident that the party might undesirably take care (but
would not undesirably fail to do so).
(iii) c >    t regardless of whether care is taken. In this
case, expected liability is p2 +                     n2   if care is not taken and
it is q2 +   n2     if care is taken. Hence care will be taken
if

        (22) q2 +   n2   + x       <   p2   +   n2,
or if

        (22') q2 + x     <       p2,
which is just (16), so that care will be taken if and only if
it is socially desirable. Q.E.D.


     Proposition 5. The best all-or-nothing criterion is
not equivalent to (and thus is superior to) a threshold
probability criterion.

     (The argument is analogous to that of Proposition 2 and
is therefore omitted.)

     Proposition 6. Use of proportional liability
leads to a socially desirable outcome.

     Proof. By the steps in (15), it is clear that if
the party engages in his activity and does not take care,
his expected liability will be p2.; and if he does take care,

it will be q2. Hence, if he engages in his activity, he will
take care if q2 + x          <   p2.    But this is just (16), so that
his decision about care will be socially desirable. Further,
if he would wish to take care, then he will choose to engage
                                     48



in his activity when v >           + x;   and if he would not wish to

take care, he will choose to engage in his activity when v >

p.   But these conditions are just (17) and (1), so that the
party's decision whether to engage in the activity will also

be socially desirable. Q.E.D.
2.   situation under the negligence rule
     We will assume that a party would be found negligent if
and only if he undesirably failed to take care, that is, if
and only if he failed to take care when (16) held; thus, we
assume that when (16) does not hold, the party will never be
found negligent.50 If the party is found negligent, then
under the negligence rule, he will be liable for the loss he
has caused.

     Let us review the properties of the negligence rule in
the absence of uncertainty over causation (so that we can
see what difference such uncertainty makes). Thus, let us
assume in this paragraph that an accident would be seen to

be caused by the party if and only if it truly was so caused.
Now suppose the party has decided to engage in the activity
and that the exercise of care is desirable. Then if the
party failed to take care, he would be liable for all accidents

he caused, implying that his expected liability would be p2;
but he would never be liable if he took care. Hence, he
will take care if x < p2.          But, using (16),
     (23) x < q2 +   x   <   p2,
so that the party will indeed take care. On the other hand,
if the exercise of care is not desirable, the party would
                                  49



never be found liable, so that he would not take care. We
have therefore shown that the party will be induced to take
care if and only if that would be desirable. However, the
party will be led to engage in the activity too often: If
taking care is desirable, then since he would be induced to
do so and would never be liable, the party would decide to
engage in the activity whenever
     (24) v >   x
rather than only when v > q2 +    x.   And if taking care is not
desirable, since he would never be liable and would not take
care, he would engage in the activity whenever
     (25) v > 0

rather than only when v >   p2.
     With these facts in mind, let us proceed.
     Proposition 7. Use of the threshold probability criterion
may lead to a socially undesirable outcome. Specifically,
     (a) the problem of an excessive incentive to engage in

the activity may be exacerbated; and
     (b) if the party engages in his activity, he might
undesirably fail to take care.

     Note. The problem in (b) can arise only where c       t if
care is not taken; and the problem in (a) can arise only
where the problem in (b) would arise.

     Proof. (a) Suppose that the exercise of care would be
desirable if the party were to engage in his activity. Then
if the party would be induced to take care were he to engage
in his activity, he would decide to engage in it when v >
which is just (24), so in this case the problem of excessive
                                       50



incentives to engage in the activity would not be worsened.
However, if the party would not be induced to take care were
he to engage in his activity, then (as will be explained in
the proof to (b)) he would engage in it whenever V > p2 -

ap2; but since p2 - cp2         <   x in this case, the problem of an
excessive incentive to engage in his activity would be
worsened.
         Now suppose that the exercise of care would be undesir-
able. Then the party would never be found negligent, so he
would engage in his activity if v > 0, which is (25), meaning
that the problem of an excessive incentive to engage in his

activity would not be altered.
         (b) Assume that the party is induced to engage in his
activity, that taking care is desirable, and consider the

following two possibilities.
(i) c       t if care is not taken. The party's expected liability
will be p2 - cp2 if he fails to take care and 0 if he takes
care. Hence he will take care if
         (26) x < p2 —   cp2.
Comparing this to (16), it is evident that he might undesir-
ably fail to take care. (This can occur whenever g2 < cp2:
In that event, p2 - cp2 <p2 - q2, so that p2 - ap2             <   x   <


p2   -   q2 is possible. But this means that (26) is not satis-
fied even though the exercise of care is desirable.)
(ii) c >      t if care is not taken. In this case, the party's
expected liability will be p2 +             n2   if he fails to take care

and 0 if he takes care. Hence he will take care if
                               51



      (27) x <   p   + n132,

but this is clearly true, since q2. + x z p2.. Thus the party
will take care. Q.E.D.

     Proposition 8. The best all-or-nothing criterion is
different from (and thus is superior to) a threshold proba-
bility criterion.

     (The argument is omitted, as explained before.)
     Proposition 9. Use of proportional liability results
in the same outcome that would be observed in the absence of
any uncertainty over causation.
     Note. In other words, the decision regarding the
exercise of care will be socially desirable, but there will
be exactly the problem with excessive incentives to engage
in the activity as was described at the beginning of this
subsection.

     Proof: From the steps in (15), it is clear that the
party's expected liability would be p2. if he failed to take
care and care was desirable. Thus, the party's situation is
precisely as initially described in this subsection, from
which the result follows. Q.E.D.


II. Uncertainty Over Causation: Which of Several Parties
Was The Author of Harm

     We will assume here that there are only two parties, A
and B, who might cause accidents (and no natural agent).51
The situation regarding the occurrence of accidents and
whether they are seen as of ambiguous origin will be analogous
                                     52



to that in part I. However, here the analysis of legal
rules will be complicated by the fact that the effects of a
legal rule on parties' behavior are interrelated; for one
party's behavior may influence the other party's behavior by
altering the likelihood of his liability for ambiguous
cases. Let us note also that we will consider two possibilities
regarding the parties' relationship to each other: A and B
may act independently; or they may act in concert. If they
act independently, we will assume the outcome to be a (Nash)
equilibrium, a situation such that neither party would wish
to alter its behavior assuming the other's to be fixed. If
they act in concert, we will assume the outcome to be that
which results in the highest sum of A's and B's expected
values.

      A.      Basic model: parties decide only whether to
engage in their activities.
      Let      be as before and define the following notation.

      VA, VB
                 =   value to A and B respectively of engaging in
                     their activities; VA, VB > 0;

      A' B = probability          of accidents caused respectively

                     by A's and B's activities; A' B > 0;      +

                          1. 52
Hence, it will be socially desirable for A to engage in his
activity if
       (28) VA >

and   for   B to do so if
                                      53



      (29) v3 > p32.
 If only one of the parties engages in his activity, all
accidents will be assumed to be known to be caused by him.
But if both A and B engage in their activities, cases of

ambiguous origin may arise; specifically, let
     a     =      probability   that an accident caused by A
                  appears to be of ambiguous origin; 0 < a         1;
           =
                  probability   that an accident caused by B
                  appears to be of ambiguous origin; 0 <       .   1.
Thus, if both A and B engage in their activities, the probabil-
ity of an accident known to be caused by A will be

     (30) pA(l_a);
the probability of an accident caused by A but seen as of
ambiguous origin will be

     (31) pAa;
and the analogous probabilities for B will be              and
      Thus, A's probability of causation in cases of ambiguous
origin would be

     (32) CA     PAa/(PAa +
and B's,

     (32) CB =          =              +
                  lCA       PB/(PAa
     Assuming liability to be strict, let us first examine
the threshold probability criterion. Under this criterion,
the only statement to add from before by way of definition

is that if both parties are liable in an ambiguous case--that
is, if CA > t and cB > t —-then A will be supposed to bear a

fraction A of the loss and B, a fraction 1-A.
                                54



     Let us now prove

     Proposition 10. Use of the threshold probability
criterion may lead to a socially undesirable outcome.

Specifically,
     (a) if the parties act independently, then a party
might undesirably fail to engage in his activity or might
undesirably engage in it;
     (b) if the parties act in concert and no party would be

liable for ambiguously caused accidents, then parties might
undesirably engage in their activities. However, if some
party (or parties) would be liable for all such accidents,
then parties will engage in their activities precisely when
that would be socially desirable.

     Proof: (a) Suppose that VB >         +          As B would
then choose to engage in his activity even were he liable
for all accidents, he will definitely choose to engage in
his activity. Suppose as well that if A also were to engage
in his activity, then cA >   t and CB    t. Thus A's expected
liability were he to engage in his activity would be            +

      he would thus do so only if VA >        +
                                                  B'      and

comparing this to (28), it is clear that he might undesirably
fail to engage in his activity. Now suppose that if A were
to engage in his activity, then CA      t and CB >   t.   Then A's
liability would be       -
                          A'    he would thus engage in his

activity if VA >     -
                         A'    and Comparing this to (28), it
is evident that he might undesirably engage in his activity.
                                 55



       (b) If the parties act in concert, they will consider
 four possible strategies--neither engages in his activity, A
 alone does so, B alone does so, or both do so--and they will

choose that strategy with the highest sum of values net of
expected liability costs. Now if neither party engages in
his activity, the sum is 0. If A alone does so, it is
VA -   A•    If B alone engages in his activity, the sum is
VB -         If both engage in their activities, the sum is
                                                              VA
+ VB -        + PBX) when one or both would be liable in
ambiguous cases, but the sum is only VA + VB -      +         -

     +        when neither would be liable in ambiguous

cases. (Neither being liable is possible if t     1/2; suppose,
for instance, that CA =    = 1/2 if both engage in their
                        CB
activities..) Note that this statement is true regardless of
the fraction A paid by A if both happen to be liable in
ambiguous cases, for the sum of A's and B's liability in
such cases will be £ independent of A.

       With this in mind, let us consider the parties' decision
assuming first that neither would be liable in ambiguous

cases. Then it is possible that both A and B would engage
in their activities when it is desirable for only one (or

neither) to engage in his activity. Suppose, for example,
that VA =
            2A   and VB =    -
                                 B•      On the other hand, it
is not possible that A or B would fail to engage in his
activity when that would be desirable. To show this, observe
that if it is desirable for A to engage in his activity, he
would certainly do so: for then if A alone engages in his
                                            56



activity, the sum VA -                will be positive; and the sum if
both A and B engage in their activities minus that if B
alone does so will be VA -                  + (pAcY +            which is also
positive; hence either A alone will engage in his activity
or both A and B will do so. Similarly, if it is desirable

for B to engage in his activity, he would do so.

           Now consider the possibility that one or both parties
would be liable in ambiguous cases. Then if it is socially
desirable for A alone to engage in his activity, this will
be the outcome: for if A alone engages in his activity, the
sum of parties' values net of liability costs will be VA -
       >       0; if B alone engages in his activity, the sum will be
VB -       B2     < 0; if both A and B do so, it will be VA + VB -
           +         =         -    + (vB -            < VA -
                         (VA                     pQ)            A2'   hence the
sum    will      be highest if A alone engages in his activity.
Similarly, if it is desirable for B alone to engage in his
activity, this will occur. And if it is desirable for both
A and B to engage in their activities, this will be the
outcome: for then (VA + vB) -                      + p) will exceed both
VA -             and VB -          Q.E.D.

           Proposition 11. The best all-or-nothing criterion is
different from (and thus is superior to) a threshold probability
criterion.

           (The argument is omitted, as explained before.)
       Proposition 12. Use of proportional liability leads to
a socially desirable outcome.
                                            57



     Proof: Using the steps in (15), we know that A's
liability will be              if he engages in his activity, regard-
less of whether B engages in his activity; and B's will

similarly be         if he engages in his activity, regardless
of whether A does so. Hence, if the parties act independently,
A will engage in his activity if and only if vA >                           and B
will do so if and only if VE >                            so that their decisions
                                             B2'
will be socially desirable. And if the parties act in
uLiueLL,   LHJ.b di11 wiii e cxue.                    in. is, L.ne sum OL Lrie

parties'   positions will be VA -                A2       if A alone engages in

his activity, vB -             if B alone does so, and VA +              VB -
     +        if   both do so. Hence, the argument given at the
end of the proof to Proposition 10 applies and shows that
the parties will always choose the socially desirable outcome.

Q.E.D.


     B.     Extended model: parties decide whether to engage
in their activities and, if so, whether to take care
     Define
              =    probability        of accidents caused respectively
                   by A's and by B's activity if care is taken;
                   0 <         < A'    0 <            <




              =    costs   of care for A and B respectively;
                   0 <         0 <
                         XA;          XB.
                                      58


The description of whether it is socially desirable for
parties to take care and to engage in their activities is
analogous to that given at the beginning of part lB of this

Appendix. We will assume that the conditional probabilities
     and     of accidents appearing ambiguous apply whenever both
parties engage in their activities and whether or not care is
taken. Hence, for example, A's probability of causation if
both he and B take care is CA = qcY/(qcY +      q);
                                                 his probabil-
ity of causation if he takes care and B does not is CA =
              +       and so forth.

           Let us now proceed. As the proofs of Propositions will
be obvious by analogy to previous arguments but will be
tedious to set forth, we will merely indicate what are the

applicable previous arguments.
1.         situation under strict liabiliy
       Proposition 13. Use of the threshold probability
criterion may lead to a socially undesirable outcome.

Specifically,
           (a) suppose that the parties act independently. Then
a party might undesirably fail to engage in his activity or
undesirably engage in it; and if both parties engage in
their activities, then a party might undesirably fail to
take care or undesirably take care.
           (b) Suppose instead that the parties act in concert.
Then if no party would be liable in ambiguous cases, parties
might undesirably engage in their activities and if so, they
                               59



might undesirably fail to take care.   If, however, some
party (or parties) would be liable in ambiguous cases, the
outcome will be socially ideal.

      Proof: (a) By analogy to the proofs to Propositions
4(a), (b) and 10(a).

      (b) By analogy to the proofs to Propositions 4(a) and
(b) and 10(b).

      Proposition 14. The best all-or--nothing criterion is
different from (and thus is superior to) a threshold proba-
bility criterion.

      Proposition 15. Use of proportional liability leads to
the socially desirable outcome.

      Proof: By analogy to the proofs to Propositions 6 and
12.



2.    situation under the negligence rule
      Proposition 16. Use of the threshold probability
criterion may lead to a socially undesirable outcome.

Speci fically,

      (a) suppose that the parties act independently. Then
a party might undesirably fail to take care, and the problem
of an excessive incentive to engage in the activity may be
exacerbated.

      (b) Suppose that the parties act in concert. Then if
no party would be liable in ambiguous cases, the problems in
(a) may arise.   If, however, some party (or parties) would be
liable in ambiguous cases, the outcome will be the same one
                              60



that would be observed in the absence of any uncertainty

over causation.

      Proof: (a) By analogy to the proofs to Propositions
7(a), (b), and 10(a).
      (b) By analogy to the proofs to Propositions 7(a), (b)
and 10(b).
      Proposition 17. The best all-or-nothing criterion is
different from (and thus is superior to) a threshold probability
criterion.

      Proposition 18. Use of proportional liability results
in the same outcome that would be observed in the absence of

uncertainty over causation.
      Proof: By analogy to the proofs to Propositions 9 and
12.
                            FOOTNOTES



*professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law School.   I wish

to thank Charles Nesson, David Rosenberg, Richard Stewart,
Arthur Von Mehren, and, especially, David Shapiro for comments
and the National Science Foundation (Grant no. SES-8014208)
for financial support. This article will provide the basis
for a chapter in the part on torts of a book entitled A
Theoretical Analysis of Law on which I am at work.


1.   "Accident" will refer to any instance in which harm is

     done and (as the title of this article indicates) in

     which the remedy sought by the injured party is money
     damages. However, the area of law to which the analysis
     will seem most naturally applicable is torts, for it is
     here that problems of uncertainty over causation seem
     most often to arise.



la. See generally the cases cited in William L. Prosser,
     The Law of Torts (1971) at 241.


2.   In regard to the restrictiveness of this measure of

     social welfare and to (what will be seen to be) the
     highly stylized nature of the model, the usual caution-
     ary remark applies--that for a model to be tractable,

     it must be highly stylized and the measure of social
     welfare must be restrictive. The reader should there-
                              2



     fore not take statements of results obtained in the
     model in anything like a direct way as recommendations

     for policy or as explanations for observed fact.

     Furthermore (see below), some attempt will be made
     after the analysis of the model to say what is the
     model's proper interpretation in view of the probable
     importance of considerations going outside it.


2a. The conventional statistical and decision theoretic

     meaning given to the word "expected" is probability-
     discounted. Thus, expected liability is probability—
     discounted liability; if, for instance, a party faces
     liability of $1,000 with a probability of 5%, then his

     expected liability is 5%x$1,000 or $50. See generally
     Howard Raiffa, Decision Analysis (1968).


3.   See Prosser, supra note la, at 241.


3a. See the discussion of Example 3, infra.


3b. However, in the concluding comments, it will be suggested
     that the appeal of the proportional approach may be

     significantly limited by (among other reasons) its
     being associated with higher administrative costs than
     is the threshold probability criterion. See also notes
     34 and 35, infra.
                             3



3c. Point (i) concerning the possibility of a diminished or
    of an extra burden of liability has been noted in much

    recent writing on our subject. See for example Laurence H.
    Tribe, Trial by Mathematics: Precision and Ritual in
    the Legal Process, 84 Harv. L. Rev. 1329 (1971) at
    1350; Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law
    (1977) at 430-433; David Kaye, the Limits of the Pre-
    ponderance of the Evidence Standard: Justifiably Naked
    Statistical Evidence and Multiple Causation, American
    Bar Foundation Research J. 487 (1982); William M.

    Landes and Richard A. Posner, Causation in Tort Law:

    An Economic Approach, University of Chicago Law School
    (1982) at 21-24; Steven Shavell, An Analysis of Causation
    and the Scope of Liability in the Law of Torts, 9

    Journal of Legal Studies 463 (1980) at 494; David M.
    Rosenberg, The Causal Connection in Mass Exposure
    Cases, Harvard Law School (in process); Charles Nesson,
    Foundations of Judicial Proof, Harvard Law School,

    (1982) at 68-75. Similarly, point (iii) on the desira-
    bility of the proportional approach has occasionally
    been noted. See for example Landes and Posner, Nesson,
    and, especially, Rosenberg; and see also the references
    mentioned in note 29 infra.

         Thus, the contribution of this article does not
    lie in any real novelty in respect to points (1) and

    (iii). (To my knowledge, however, point (ii) has not
    been previously stated.) Rather, it lies in the systematic
                              4



     development of the points, in the differences that are
     shown to exist in their significance depending on the
     situation under study, in the generality of the analysis,
     and in the proofs of the Appendix (see below).


4.   Suppose for instance that the loss of a barn could

     either be caused by a fire set by lightning (the natural
     agent) or else by one started by a party. What is of
     analytical importance about such examples is that
     liability does not affect the risk due to the natural

     agent, or, more generally, that liability does not
     affect the risk due to the cause alternative to the
     party. Thus we will be able to interpret the model of
     this part as applying not only when the alternative
     cause is a natural agent, but also when it is associated
     with human behavior that would not be (much) affected
     by liability. (Hence, as we suggested, the model would
     appear to apply to the situation involving the chemical
     plant's emissions vs. normal exposure to carcinogenic
     risks like medical x-radiation; for despite being the
     outcome of human behavior (a decision whether to have
     an x-ray at the dentist's), the magnitude of the latter
     risks would not seem to be much influenced by the

     particulars of liability law.)


5.   The assumption that a loss could not be caused by both

     the party and the natural agent (that the barn that
                              5



     burned due to the fire set by the party would not have
     burned a little later due to a fire set by lightning,
     or that the two fires would not have merged before
     reaching the barn) is made only for simplicity. Were
     the assumption relaxed, the results would remain essen-
     tially unchanged; see notes 6 and 11, infra.


6.   This example would have to be modified were we to relax
     the assumption that accidents always have a single
     cause. Suppose for instance that the risks due to the
     natural agent and to the party are statistically inde-
     pendent, so that were the party to engage in the activity,
     30%xlO% = 3% would be the risk of an accident due to

     both causes (either cause alone being sufficient to
     create the loss of 1,000). Then the increment in
     expected accident losses due to the party would be only
     27%; that is, it would be less than the 30% risk he
     might be said to cause, and by the 3% risk of accidents
     that would have occurred due to the natural agent in
     any event. Thus it would be socially desirable for the
     party to engage in his activity if his benefits would
     exceed 270.

          This general point applies not only when the loss
     caused by the party would have occurred simultaneously
     due to another agent, but also when the loss would have
     occurred sometime later due to another agent (e.g.,
     cancer due to a chemical contaminant might have occurred
                                6



     several years later due to medical x-radiation), or
     when the loss masked or accentuated a loss that occurred
     sometime earlier due to another agent (e.g., cancer due
     to the individual's smoking habit and to medical x-radia-
     tion is only diagnosed after, and is perhaps aggravated
     by, his exposure to a chemical carcinogen).


7.   This is the only form of liability that is studied in
     the present version of the model, as there is no decision
     about care and hence no meaningful interpretation of

     negligence.



7a. In the model considered in this article there is only
     one type of ambiguous case and hence only one possibile
     level of the probability of causation. This means that
     under the threshold probability criterion the party is
     either liable in every ambiguous case or in none. In a
     more general model with a multiplicity of types of
     ambiguous case, of course, the party's probability of
     causation might sometimes exceed the threshold and
     sometimes not--so that he might be liable in some
     ambiguous cases and not in others.


8.   We will use this 50% threshold probability criterion in

     succeeding examples as well, but the appendix considers
     all possible thresholds.
                              7



9.   See (14) and Proposition 2 of the Appendix.


10. Suppose in Example 3 that the   best   decision is, say, to

     find liability. Then those (presumably few) parties
     with benefits between 300 and 350 would be undesirably

     discouraged from engaging in the activity.


11. If we relax the assumption that accidents have a single
     cause, the proportional approach will continue to
     result in the level of expected liability that will
     lead the party to decide in a socially desirable way

     whether to engage in his activity. Suppose, for instance,
     that there is a 3% risk of accidents due to both the
     party and to the natural agent, as described in note 6,
     supra; that 1% is the risk of such cases appearing
     ambiguous; that 18% is the risk of accidents due to the

     party alone appearing ambiguous (leaving a 9% risk of
     accidents due to the party alone being correctly iden-
     tified); and that 4% is the risk of accidents due to

     the natural agent alone appearing ambiguous. Then, as
     the party's probability of causation would be derived
     by dividing the likelihood that he alone caused an
     ambiguous case by the total likelihood of ambiguous
     cases, it would be 18%/(l% + 18% + 4%) = 78.26%.

     Hence, the party's expected liability were he to engage
     in the activity would be 23%x782.6 + 9%xl000 = 270.
     But this was explained in note 6 to be the increment in
                              8



     expected accident losses that would be created by the

     party's engaging in his activity. Thus the party will
     indeed be induced correctly to choose whether to engage
     in his activity.

          We shall not bother to make further comments in

     notes showing our points to be unaffected by the possi-
     bility that accidents are due to more than one cause.


12. Specifically, if the party takes care, then the probabil-
     ity of causation equals 2/3X28%/(2/3x28% + 5%) = 18.66%/
     23.66%   78.87%.



13. That is, 2/3X6%/(2/3x6% + 5%) = 44.44%.


14. Of course, and as mentioned, the incentive whether to
     engage in the activity may be appropriate.



15. This argument was originally elaborated in Steven
     Shavell, Strict Liability vs. Negligence, 9 Journal of
     Legal Studies 1 (1980). See also, William M. Landes
    and Richard A. Posner, The Positive Economic Theory of
    Tort Law, 15 Georgia Law Review 851 (1981) at 904-916.


16. On the other hand, there can be no possibility of the

    party's being undesirably discouraged from engaging in
    the activity due to uncertainty over causation, for he

    can always escape liability by taking due care. (However,
                              9



     this would not be true if the party could not be sure

     of escaping liability by taking due care--because, say,
     of the possibility of error in assessing whether he
     took due care.)



17. This argument is developed in Steven Shavell, The Judg-
    ment-Proof Problem, Harvard University (1983). Its
    point can be easily appreciated by reconsidering the
     situation where the cost of care is 10 and the exercise
    of care would reduce the risk created by the party from
    30% to 28%. If the party takes care, then under the
    negligence rule his only costs would be 10, whereas if
    he does not take care, his expected liability would be
    300, which is a much larger quantity. Thus the party

    would have to escape liability with very high probabil-
    ity to make it worth his while to act negligently.

     (For instance, even if he escaped liability 95/100 of
    the time, his expected liability would be 15 were he
    not to take care; since 15 is greater than 10, he would
    still choose to take care.)
         Under strict liability, by contrast, even a moderate
    likelihood of escaping liablity would be enough to lead
    the party not to take care. (If he escaped liability,

    say, 2/3 of the time, his expected liability would fall
    from 100 to 93.33 if he were to take care, so he would
    not wish to do so).
                              10



18. The activities of the parties might be imagined to be
     of a similar type (e.g., each party might be a manufac-
     turer of the same drug or of the same explosive), or
     the activities of the parties might be thought to be
     different (e.g., the doctor practicing surgery, the
    nurse assisting him, the firm producing the medical
     instrument). It will make no difference to the analysis
    which of the two interpretations is made.



19. Of course, the very meaning of the proportional approach

     is to apportion damages among parties in proportion to
    their individual probabilities of causation.
         Under the threshold probability criterion, the

    possibility of apportionment also may arise. Suppose,
     for instance, that the form of liability is the negli-

     gence rule and that several negligent parties probabil-
     ities of causation exceed the threshold. Then we might
    have to contemplate the possibility of apportionment
     among them. However, in the examples of this part of
     the article, we will not have to do so; we will be able
     to establish our results about the threshold criterion
     (that it has various defects) without inquiring into
     the effects of apportionment.

          It should also be mentioned that under the more-

    probable-than-not criterion, the issue of apportionment
     can never arise, for it is impossible that more than
     one party's probability of causation exceeds 50%; the
     individual probabilities of causation must sum to 100%.
20. This is the conventional characterization of the goal
     pursued by parties who act in concert. The interpreta-
     tion of the characterization is easily explained.
     Suppose that the sum of parties' positions were not
    maximized. Then it would be possible to make all
    parties better off by choosing a strategy that increased
     the sum and by making appropriate "side payments".
     Suppose, for instance, that under one strategy, party
    A's position is 5 and B's is 10, whereas under a second
     strategy A's position is 3 and B's is 17. Then the
    second strategy involves a higher sum (20 rather than
    15) and, indeed, pursuing it allows both parties to be
    made better off. For example, let B make a side payment
    to A of 5--leaving B with 12, which exceeds 10, and
    giving A 8, which exceeds 5. Such mutually beneficial
    side payments are always possible when the sum of

    parties' positions is increased.


21. Recall that in Example 12, A did not engage in his
    activity because he would have borne an extra burden of
    liability of 50. But here that does not matter because
    the parties are envisioned to make side payments as if
    to compensate for disadvantages suffered or advantages
    gained. For instance, if B were to pay A 30 to engage
    in his activity, A would be induced to do so, and B
    would prefer this to engaging alone in his activity.
    Specifically, A's position would be (325—350) + 30 = 5,
                             12



    so he would be made better off, and B's net position

    would become (125-50) - 30 = 45, so he too would be
    made better off.



22. While in Example 12, B also engaged in his activity
    because he in effect fobbed off 50 of his expected
     accident losses on A, here A would pay B not to engage

     in his activity. If A paid B, say, 30 not to engage in
    his activity, they would each be better off than if
     each engaged in his activity: A's position would be
     400—300—30 = 70 rather than 400 — 350 = 50; B's posi-

     tion would be 30 rather than 75-50 = 25.



23. See Prosser, note la, supra at 241.


24. That is, given the occurrence of an accident, the
     probability that there will be significant doubt about

     its cause will usually be small. Given that my neigh-
     bor's house burns down, the probability that there will
     be substantial uncertainty whether the cause was the

     fire I set to barbecue meat or one started by lightning
     will be slight. Given that a pedestrian is run over,
     the probability that there will be substantial uncer-
     tainty whether the cause was my firm's truck or another's

     will be negligible.
                              13



25. If I believe that there will be no uncertainty over
     causation and thus that I will face liability in the
     great majority of instances in which I cause harm, I
     will behave much as I would in the absence of the
     possibility of uncertainty over causation, which is to

     say that (other things equal) I will behave appropri-
     ately. This intuitively obvious point should be clear
     from our examples and discussion, and in any event,
     will be immediately evident from our formal analysis.
     (For example, as the probabilities a and     that an
     accident caused by the party and by the natural agent
    would be seen as ambiguous tend to 0, so will the
     likelihood of socially undesirable behavior; see the

    Appendix.)


26. Under the negligence rule, we showed that parties whose
     anticipated probability of causation in ambiguous cases
    would exceed the threshold will not take excessive
    care; it is only that they will have a specially strong
    motive to take due care. And we observed that although
    parties whose probability of causation would be less
    than the threshold might in theory fail to take due
    care, this is not likely (refer to the discussion

    following Example 9 and to note 17, supra).


27. See John Kaplan, Decision Theory and the Fact Finding
    Process, 20 Stanford Law Review 1065 (1968) at 1072.
                               14



27a. This view is perhaps best expressed and its validity
    most convincingly demonstrated in Wex Malone, Rumina-
     tions on Cause-in-Fact, 9 Stanford Law Review 60 (1956).
     See in particular Malone's discussion at 72-88 of
     rescue of seamen, of escape from fire, of competing
    causes and accidental shootings, and of medical mal-

    practice.


28. Summers v. Tice, 33 Cal. 2d 80, 119 P.2d 1 (1948). See
    more generally Prosser, note la supra, at 243 and at
    319; and see the discussion and citations in the articles
    mentioned in note 29, infra.


29. We refer here to litigation over cancer caused by the
    drug DES. (Millions of women used this drug during
    their pregnancies; this has created the risk of an
    often fatal cervical cancer in the women's prenatally

    exposed daughters; and the women have typically found
    it difficult or impossible to identify the producer
     (out of several hundred firms) of the DES that they
    purchased.) In an influential decision in the DES
    litigation, Sindell V.   Abbott   Laboratories 163 Cal.

    Rptr. 132, 607 P. 2d 924 (1980), the California Supreme
    Court held that each defendant producer of the drug
    should be liable according to its share of the market,
    and thus ostensibly according to the probability that
    it sold the drug that caused the plaintiff's injury.
                              15



          This decision has stimulated much interest not

     only because of the importance of the DES litigation
     itself, but also because of the larger issues involved.

     See for example Comment, DES and a Proposed Theory of
     Enterprise Liability, 46 Fordham L. Rev. 963 (1978);
     Note, Market Share Liability: An Answer to the DES
     Causation Problem, 94 Harv. L. Rev. 668 (1981); Glen 0.

     Robinson, Multiple Causation in Tort Law: Reflections
     on the DES Cases, 68 Va. L. Rev. 713 (1982); Richard
     Delgado, Beyond Sindell: Relaxation of Cause-In-Fact
     Rules for Indeterminate Plaintiffs, 70 Calif. L. Rev.

     881 (1982); and David M. Rosenberg, note 3a, supra.


29a. For liability according to market share to be equal to
     liability in proportion to the probability of causa-
     tion, all firms' shares of the market must be taken
     into account. Suppose that firms A, B, and C dominate
     the market, each holding a 30% share, and that a "fringe"
    of small firms sells to the remaining 10% of the market.
    Then A, B, and C ought each to pay 30% of damages; it
    would obviously be incorrect for each to have to pay
    33.33% of damages; the fact that some in the fringe of
    small firms may be judgment proof or defunct by the
    time suit is brought ought not to alter the calculation
    of A, B, and C's market shares.
                                 16



          Additionally, for use of market shares to result
     in liability in proportion to the probability of causa-
     tion, the possibility that different firms' products
     might present different risks must be considered. If
     firm X and firm Y divide the market but firm Y's pro-
     duct is twice as risky as firm X's, then the likelihood

     that a loss of ambiguous origin was caused by firm Y is
     clearly more than its 50% share of the market; the
     likelihood is in fact 66.66% that Y caused the acci-
     dent (for Y causes two accidents for every one which X
     causes). More generally, suppose that n firms i1, .
     n produce a total output of N units; that the maker of
     any particular unit cannot be identified; that s. is
     the share of the market of firm 1; and that p. is the
     probability of "failure" of a unit of firm i's. Then
     if a unit fails, the likelihood that, say, firm j was
                             n                 n
     its maker equals p.sN/( p1s1N)      p.57(1
                                          J J   p1s1).
                             1=1               1=1

                                                      n
     (This may also be expressed as (p./p1)s/[s1 +    I     (p1/p1)s1J,
                                                      1=2

     that is, one may use "weighted" market shares, where the

     weights correspond to relative product risks.)


29b. In a case like Summers, however, the problematic effects
     are only apparent; in point of fact, the adverse effects
     on behavior of hunters of using the usual approach
     would probably be negligible, for the likelihood of
     several hunters' bullets simultaneously hitting another
    must be small.
                                       17



30. For instance, in Summers the court said that the injured
     party "has been placed . .              . in    the .     .   . position        of
     pointing to which . .         . defendant         .   .   . caused the harm.
     If one [defendant] can escape, the other may also and
     plaintiff is remediless." And in Sindell, the court
     said "In our contemporary           .   .   . society,            advances in
     science and technology create               .   . . goods which may
     harm consumers and which cannot be traced to any speci-
     fic producer .       .   . [We] acknowledge that some adaptation
     of the rules of causation and liability may be appro-

     priate in these recurring circumstances                       .   .   .   .   The
     manufacturer is in the best position to discover and
     guard against defects in its products . .                         . thus      hold-
     ing it liable . .        . will   provide an incentive to product
     safety."



31. The processes through which health-related and environ-
     mental harms come about are often complex, imperfectly

     understood, and of long duration. Thus, it indeed
     seems plausible that firms creating the risk of such
     harms may believe there is a substantial likelihood

     that the injuries they cause could not easily be attri-
    buted to them.



32. It is instructive to contrast the situation of a manu-
    facturer of DES with respect to two types of risk:
    that of a cancer such as the one actually caused by
                             18



    DES; and that of a company-owned truck running down a
    pedestrian. As to the first type of risk, we have
    suggested that a manufacturer might have thought the
    likelihood of substantial uncertainty over causation to
    be high; and thus we have suggested that the adverse
    effect on the manufacturer's behavior of use of the
    usual approach rather than the proportional might be
    significant. But as to the second type of risk, the
    likelihood of substantial uncertainty over causation is
    undoubtedly small (as remarked in note 24, supra); and
    thus there would be little reason to recommend replace-

    ment of the usual approach.


32a. If the first type of error in use of market shares men-
    tioned in note 29a supra, is made, it is clear that
    dominant firms (A, B, and C of note 29a) will bear ex-
    cessive liability, meaning that they might be led to

    take excessive care or to decide against engaging in

    their activity (production of the good). Conversely,
    the fringe firms would bear too little liability, re-

    sulting in the opposite problems.


          If the second type of error in use of market
     shares is made--that is, if market shares are not

     adjusted in consideration of differences in product
     risks--then a peculiar dilution of incentives to take
     care will result. This is due to the fact that if a
                         19



firm reduced its product risks and thereby expected

accident losses by some amount, its liability would
fall by only its market share times this amount. To

illustrate, suppose that liability is strict (a similar
(but more complex) argument can be made if liability is
based on the negligence rule); that firm F and firm G
each command half the market; that each causes $50,000
of losses, which cannot be directly attributed to it;

and that by taking care, F can reduce the losses it
causes to $25,000. Then if F takes care, its liability
would fall from 50%x$l00,000 = $50,000 to 50%x$75,000 =

$37,500; thus F's liability falls by only $12,500, its
50% market share times $25,000. As a consequence, F's
incentive to take care is too small; F would decide to
take care only when the cost of care was less than
$12,500 rather than (as would be socially desirable)

whenever it was less than $25,000. By contrast, if the
market share calculation were adjusted (as described in
note 29a) to reflect alteration in product risk, F's

liability would fall to $25,000 if he took care; for as
he would then cause only 1/3 of the losses, his liability
would be 33.33%x$75,000 = $25,000; thus F's incentive

to take care would be appropriate.

     To demonstrate this more generally, use the notation
from note 29a, and suppose that a firm's liability is
determined by its market share s and that liability is

strict (and that firms act independently of one another).
                                20



    Then if firm j can at a cost x reduce its product risk
    from p3 to pa', its expected liability would fall from

    s( P5±N) to s.(( p1s1N) + P'S3N);                thus its
                   1J
    liability     would fall by s(s(P_P')N). Hence firm j
    would take care only when x was less than this amount.
    But since s(-y)N is the actual decline in expected
    losses associated with firm j's exercise of care, it
    would be desirable that it take care whenever
                     Hence, any firm j will take care too infre-
    quently (given the behavior of other firms). On the
    other hand, if liability is determined by use of the
    adjusted market shares, the incentive to take care will

    be correct. In strict logic, we already know this to be
    true, for use of the adjusted market shares results in
     liability in proportion to the probability of causation
     (and we knew that this creates appropriate incentives).

    Nevertheless, let us directly verify the point. If the
     firm takes care, its expected liability falls from
           n          n                                  n
     (p.s./              psN) = p.s.N
                                 J J
                                      to (p.'s./((l
                                           3 J
                                                    p1s) +
           i=l        i=l                        ij
             n
    p.'s.))(l
     3  3
              p1sN +      p.'sN)
                           3  3
                                     =   p.'s.N.
                                          :i  3
                                                   Thus, its expected
     liability falls by s(P_P')N and it will therefore
     choose to take care if and only if that would be socially
     desirable.



33. See generally Richard A. Posner, Chapter 2]. note 3a,

     supra; John Gould, The Economics of Legal Conflicts, 2
                             21



    Journal of Legal Studies 279 (1973); and Steven Shavell,

    Suit, Settlement, and Trial: A Theoretical Analysis
    Under Alternative Methods for the Allocation of Legal

    Costs, 11 Journal of Legal Studies, 55 (1982).


34. There is however, a competing consideration: if the
    plaintiff party believes the probability of causation
    to be above the threshold, although he would often find
    it worthwhile to initiate legal action under the threshold
    criterion, he might not under the proportional approach--
    because his damages would be less than full damages.

    This consideration seems less important than the one
    mentioned in the text, for it is precisely when the
    probability of causation exceeds the threshold that the
    proportional approach does not reduce damages much
    below the full amount.

         A formal comparison of the incentive to bring suit

    under the two approaches may be clarifying in this
    regard. Let t be the threshold probability;       be the
                                                  c
    plaintiff's estimate of the probability of causation; 2
    be the dollar amount of his loss; and k be the cost to
    the plaintiff of bringing suit. Then (i) if c>t, the
    following is true: under the threshold criterion, the
    plaintiff would receive a judgment (or settlement) of
    2, so will bring suit if £>k; under the proportional

    approach, he would receive c2 so he will bring suit
    if cQ>k; hence the plaintiff will bring suit under the
    threshold criterion but not under the proportional
                               22



      approach if .>k>c2. (ii) On the other hand if
                                                          ct,
      then the situation is simply that the plaintiff will
      never bring suit under the threshold criterion but will
      do so under the proportional approach if
                                                  ct>k.
      Thus, (iii) the claim that suit is more likely under

      the proportional approach amounts to a claim that it is
      more likely that c1t and c2>k than it is that c>t
      and yet £>k>c £.


35.   To make this argument precise, let us assume that the
      plaintiff has brought suit and that he and the defendant
      will go to trial if and only if there does not exist a
      settlement amount which each would find preferable to

      going to trial. Equivalently, they will go to trial
      when the plaintiff's opinion of the judgment amount
      exceeds the defendant's by more than the sum of the
      trial costs that they would bear. Thus, to compare the
      propensity to go to trial under the two approaches, we
      must compare the difference between plaintiff's and the

      defendant's opinions of the judgment amounts under the
      two approaches.

           To this end, let t, £, and       be as in note 34,
                                        c
      supra; let Cd be the defendant's estimate of the proba-

      bility of causation; and let k and kd be respectively
      the plaintiff's and the defendant's costs of going on
      to trial. Now let us consider three possible relation-
      ships that may exist between                (i) both c
                                     c and Cd:
                             23



and Cd exceed t. In this case, under the threshold
probability Criterion, there will always be a settlement,
for both parties will believe the judgment to be the

same; divergence of opinion about c and Cd will not
matter since both are above t. However, under the
proportional approach, there might be a trial: if the
plaintiff's estimate of the probability of causation
exceeds the defendant's by enough, this will be true;
if c 2 - c £>k + k , there will be a trial.
    p     d p      d                         (ii) c
                                                   p
exceeds t but Cd does not. Here, under the threshold
probability criterion, there might well be a trial, for
the plaintiff will expect to win 2 but the defendant
will expect to pay nothing; in particular, there will
be a trial if 2> k +          Under the proportional
                       kd.
approach, there might also be a trial; this would be so
when c2 - cd2>k+ kd. But since 2>c2 - Cc2l there
would be a trial more often under the threshold cr1-
tenon. (iii) c does not exceed t. In this case,
under the threshold probability criterion, there will
never be a trial, for the plaintiff would not expect

any judgment. But under the proportional approach,
there might be a trial; and this will again be true if
C2 - Cd2>k+
              kd.
     The implication of the preceding is this. In
cases (i) and (iii)-- whenever the plaintiff's and the
defendant's estimates of the probability of causation
exceed the threshold or whenever the plaintiff's falls
                             24



    below it--there will be a settlement under the threshold
    probability criterion but there might be a trial under

     the proportional approach. Only in case (ii)--only
    when it happens that the plaintiff's estimate of the
    probability lies above the threshold and the defendant's
     lies below the threshold is it true that there is a
     greater likelihood of a trial under the threshold
    probability criterion than under the proportional
     approach. On balance, then, the suspicion is that the
     chance of litigation conditional on suit having been

     brought is greater under the proportional approach than
     under the threshold probability criterion.


35a. Equivalently, parties may generally desire to raise the

     likelihood of positive compensation by giving up full
     compensation in some circumstances. Arid this is an
     implication of the economic theory of risk aversion and
     insurance. See generally Kenneth J. Arrow, Essays in

     the Theory of Risk-Bearing (1971).


36. For recent discussions of minimization of error and the
     more-probable-than-not rule, see David Kaye, note 3a,

     supra, and James Brook, Inevitable Errors: The Pre-
     ponderance of the Evidence Standard in Civil Litigation,

     18 Tulsa Law Journal 79 (1982).
                                  25


36a. The goal of error minimization seems closely related to

     principle of fairness just discussed because a high
     cost of error in punishing an innocent party implies
     that one would not wish to impose punishment unless the
     likelihood of guilt was great.



36b. Specifically, assuming the goal to be the minimization
     of error Costs measured in dollar terms--that is, the

    number of dollars erroneously awarded plus the number
    of dollars erroneously not awarded-—Kaye, note 3a, supra,
    showed the superiority of the more-probable-than-not

    rule over all possible alternative rules, and thus
    in particular over proportional liability.       (Kaplan,
    note 27, supra, had earlier proved (under the same

    assumption) the superiority of the more-probable-than-not

    rule over only other probability thresholds.) The idea
    behind Kaye's argument (which he makes formally) showing
    the superiority of the more-probable-than-not rule over

    proportional liability is simple. It is that if we
    know that a defendant is more-likely-than-not the cause

    of harm, then on average we will do best to make him

    pay; to make him pay only in proportion to his probabi-
    lity of causation would be to fail to insist that he
    pay some dollars which we know on average it is best to
    have him pay. And conversely, if we know that a defendant
    1S   more-likely-than_not   innocent of having done harm,
   then on average we will do best to let him go; to make
                           26



him pay at all, or in proportion to his probability of
causation, is to insist that he pay dollars that on

average will have been paid by innocent parties.
Suppose for instance that there are 100 cases, in each
of which the defendant is believed to have been the
cause with probability 60%; that in 60 of these cases,
defendants truly caused harm; that in 40 of these, they
did not; and that the amount of harm in each instance
is $1,000. Then under the more-probable-than-not
criterion, each defendant would pay $1,000; thus in 60
cases, no errors will have been made; in 40 cases,

$1,000 will have been erroneously paid; hence the total
error in dollars will be $40,000. By contrast, under
the proportional approach, each defendant would pay
$600; thus in 60 cases S400 will erroneously fail to be

paid; in 40 cases, $600 will erroneously be paid; hence
the total error in dollars will be $48,000--a higher
error than under the more-probable-than-not criterion.

     In point of fact, Kaye's result can be strengthened.
It turns out that whatever are the weights attaching to

the two types of error--the dollars erroneously paid,
and the dollars erroneously not paid--some threshold

probability criterion (generally different from 50%)
will be superior to proportional liability.     (In

Kaye's   case, the weights attaching to the two types of
error were equal.)

     To demonstrate this, let w1 be the weight multi-
plying errors of the first type; let w2 be the weight
                                 27



     multiplying errors of the second; let p be the party's
     probability of causation; and let 2. be the loss suffered.

     Then if the party pays 2. in damages, the expected error

     cost in (l-p)w12., and if he does not pay anything in

     damages, the expected error cost is pw22. Hence, the
     expected error minimizing all-or—nothing rule is to
     make a party pay £ whenever (l-p)w12. <
                                                    pw2., or equiva-
     lently, whenever p > w1/(w1 + w2), which is a probability
     threshold criterion. (Note that this formula implies
     that when the weights are equal, the threshold is 50%,
     that when w1, the weight of the first type of error

     (innocents' paying damages) is larger than w2, the
     threshold exceeds 50%, etc.) Under proportional lia-
     bility, expected error costs are higher. Since under

     this approach the party pays p2 whatever is p, expected
     error costs are (l-p)w1p2 +                     These expected
                                      pw2(2.-p2).
     error costs exceed the error costs under the optimal
     threshold criterion. To see this, observe that

     (l—p)w1p2 + pw2(Q—p2) = p[(l—p)w12.] + (1—p)[pw22.]

     ?.min[(l-p)w12,pw22] =   error   costs with a probability
     threshold of w1/(w1 +
                              w2), and note that the inequality
     is strict so long as p is positive, unequal to the
    threshold, and less than 1.


36c. More precisely, and in the language of welfare economics,

    the ranking of social states ought to be a function of
     individuals' rankings (equivalently, the social welfare
                              28



     function ought to have as its arguments individuals'

     utilities). See for example Paul A. Samuelson, Founda-
     tions of Economic Analysis (1947), and Kenneth J.
     Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (1963).


36d. To repeat what has been said in slightly different

     terms, this anomaly arises because the cost of error
     criterion does not recognize the particular nature of
     the consequences due to allowing firms to go free (a
     high level of carcinogens, no compensation of victims).
     But any measure of social welfare which is defined in
     terms of the consequences must obviously recognize them.


37. The decisions whether to engage in activities and over
     care will be discrete. However the qualitative nature
     of our results would not be altered were we to have
     studied a model with the levels of activities and/or

     the levels of care continuously variable; see notes 45
     and 48, infra.



37a. If (1) holds with equality, society will, of course, be
     indifferent about whether the party engages in his

     activity; for ease of exposition we will not comment
    hereafter in the Appendix on possibilities of indiffer-
    ence.



38. This assumption will be maintained in the other ver-
    sions of the model.
                                29



39. This is obvious. Suppose, for instance, that p=n.
     Then c reduces to a/(a +   ), which   can clearly range
     over (0,1).


40. As remarked in note 7 supra, the negligence rule cannot
     be studied in the basic model because there is no

     variable interpretable as care. Moreover, as the court
     cannot observe v (see following paragraph of the text),
     it cannot, for instance, determine if v<p and if so
     call a party "negligent" for having engaged in his
     activity.



41. This can be regarded as an implication of the criterion,
     for then c = 1   >   t.

42. This is possible since we noted that c could range over
     (0,1). (Hereafter, we will not bother to observe that
     various inequalities are possible, as this will be
     obvious.)


43. Note that n2 is what we earlier called his extra
    burden of liability.



44. Note that pa2 is what we called the reduction in his
    burden.
                                       30



45. If the level of activity were continuously variable,
     Proposition 1 would still hold. We sketch the situa-
     tion in this event. Let z be the level of activity,
     v(z) be its value (where v'(z) > 0, v''(z) <                  0),   and
     zp be the associated level of expected accident losses.
     Then social welfare is given by v(z) -                zp    and the

     socially desirable level of activity, say z*, is deter-

     mined by v'(z)        p2. Now the probability of causation c
     is given by C      = c(z)   =   zpc/(zpci + np), which is increas-
     ing in z. Let          be the z such that c(z) =             t; thus c(z)    <
     t   for z <   z.   and c(z) >    t   for z >
                                                    z.     (If   C > t for all
     z > 0, define z. = 0; if c <            t   for all z > 0, define z. =

     Hence, the party's choice of z will be determined by
     max (max zp2 - zpa2, max zp2 + np).                   From these facts
            zzt            z>zt
     the following may easily be established: If z* <
     then the chosen z will be in between z and zt;
     particular, z will be higher than is desirable. If
     z* >
            z,     then there are two possibilities. One is that
     the chosen z z, in which case z =                   z*;   but the other
     is that the chosen z            z., in which case z =         z.    and is

     thus below the socially desirable level. Hence Propo-
     sition 1 is indeed true.


46. Were the threshold allowed to vary with p, n, 2, a, f,
     and f(•), then, trivially, the court could alter the
     threshold so as to achieve exactly the result under the
     best all-or-nothing criterion. (The court would merely
                                     31


      choose any t < c when (14) holds, and it would choose

      any t     c when (14) does not hold.) But it does not
      seem natural to interpret such a variable probability
      threshold--one which is in effect the more complicated
      criterion of (14)--as a threshold probability criterion.


47. A similar contradiction could be established were ct'.


48.   In the continuous case, proportional liability also
      results in a socially desirable outcome (as it will in
      the continuous case of subsequent versions of the

      model). Referring to the description of the continuous
      case in note 45, supra, we see from the steps used in

      (15) that the party's expected liability will equal
      zp, so that he will maximize v(z) -          zp.   and thus
                *
      select   z ,   the   socially desirable z.


49. This seems the most natural assumption, but others are

      plausible. (For instance, taking care might alter the
      nature of accidents in such a way as to make them less
      easily confused with those caused by the natural agent;
      thus a and might fall if care were taken.) It will
      be clear that our analysis could easily be modified to
      take into account such possibilities and that this

      could change some of our results (in the main, it could
      alter the nature of the departure from the socially
      desirable outcome under the threshold probability
      criterion), but we shall not discuss this matter.
                                32



50. We assume that there are no errors in observing x or in
     determining whether (16) holds.


51. It will be obvious how to extend the arguments to the
     case with three or more parties and/or with a natural
     agent, but it would be cumbersome to do so.



52. Analogous to the situation in part I, the event that A
    causes an accident and the event that B causes an
     accident will be assumed mutually exclusive, etc.



53. In this case, it is desirable for A alone to engage in
    his activity, yet if both engage in their activities,
    the sum of their positions will be          +       -          -

         +     -
                   (PAa
                          +   )) =     +
                                           pAc, which   is posi-
    tive, greater than what would be received if A alone were

    to engage in his activity (namely A' and greater than
    what would be received if B alone were to engage in his

    activity (namely,            Thus both A and B will engage
    in their activities.
