NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF HEALTH ON HEALTH
INSURANCE STATUS IN FRAGILE FAMILIES
Hope Corman
Anne Carroll
Kelly Noonan
Nancy E. Reichman
Working Paper 12197
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12197
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

This research was supported by Grants #R01-HD-45630 and #R01-HD-35301 from the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development. We are grateful for helpful comments from Bisakha Sen, Steven
Nock, and Alan Monheit and for assistance from Maria Fontana, Magdalena Ostatkiewicz, and Ofira
Schwarz-Soicher. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Hope Corman, Anne Carroll, Kelly Noonan and Nancy E. Reichman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Health on Health Insurance Status in Fragile Families
Hope Corman, Anne Carroll, Kelly Noonan and Nancy E. Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 12197
April 2006
JEL No. I1, I3
ABSTRACT
We use data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing study to estimate the effects of poor
infant health, pre-pregnancy health conditions of the mother, and the father's health status on health
insurance status of urban, mostly unmarried, mothers and their one-year-old children. Virtually all
births were covered by health insurance, but one year later about one third of mothers and over 10
percent of children were uninsured. We separately examine births that were covered by public
insurance and those that were covered by private insurance. The child's health status had no effect,
for the most part, on whether the mother or child became uninsured. For publicly insured births, a
maternal physical health condition made it less likely that both the mother and child became
uninsured, while maternal mental illness made it more likely that both the mother and child lost
insurance coverage. For privately insured births, the father's suboptimal physical health made it more
likely that the mother, but not the child, became uninsured.
Hope Corman
Department of Economics
Rider University
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648-3099
and NBER
corman@rider.edu

Kelly Noonan
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
knoonan@rider.edu

Anne Carroll
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
carroll@rider.edu

Nancy E. Reichman
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey
97 Paterson Street, Room 435
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
reichmne@umdnj.edu

Introduction
Most women in the U.S. have health insurance when they give birth. In the recent Fragile
Families and Child Wellbeing birth cohort survey of urban (mostly unmarried) parents, only 1
percent of births were not covered by public or private health insurance. One year later, however,
about 12 percent of the focal children and approximately 29 percent of the mothers were
uninsured.
A large literature indicates that people with health insurance have better access to care,
are more likely to get needed care, and have better health outcomes than those without insurance
(e.g. Hadley 2002; Kasper et al. 2002; Ayanian et al. 2000; Newacheck et al. 1998; Currie and
Gruber 1996; Busch and Duchovny 2005; Olson, Tang and Newacheck 2005; Aiken et al. 2004;
Levy and Meltzer 2001). Within families, individuals’ health insurance status and utilization of
health care are often interdependent. For example, expanded Medicaid coverage for mothers
increases the likelihood that their children are enrolled in Medicaid (Dubay and Kenney 2003;
Aizer & Grogger 2003) and there is evidence that a mother’s utilization of health care affects
utilization of pediatric care, regardless of insurance status (Hanson 1998).
Conversely, health can affect insurance status, though the direction is ambiguous and the
mechanism depends on whether the insurance is obtained from private or public sources. For
private insurance, most individuals face at least some portion of the costs of coverage directly,
either because they pay for the coverage themselves in the individual insurance market or
because they experience a wage reduction when coverage is obtained through an employer. The
extent of cost-sharing by the employer will determine whether an individual considers having the
insurance a net benefit and whether he or she decides to purchase the insurance (when given the
option). Individuals in poor health (or who have family members in poor health) may be more

3

likely than those in good health (or with healthy families) to purchase insurance to offset their
expected health care expenses. However, if premiums are correlated with individuals’ (or
families’) health risk, individuals (or families) in poor health may be less inclined to obtain
insurance or to maintain insured status since their premiums will be high relative to their income.
On the other hand, if premiums are community rated, individuals (or families) in poor health
may be more likely than those in good health to obtain insurance because premiums will be low
relative to their risk and income (Bundorf, Herring, and Pauly 2005). Further complicating the
situation is that health can affect employment status or even the choice of employer.
The expected direction of the effect of poor health of family members on mothers’ and
children’s public health insurance status is also ambiguous. A severe health problem of the
mother may result in disability, which may make her eligible for Medicaid. Poor health of a
family member may cause a parent to lose employment or confront large medical expenses,
perhaps pushing household income low enough for a mother and her children to qualify for
public health insurance, or it may motivate low-income parents to seek or maintain public
insurance for that individual or other family members. Alternatively, poor health of any family
member may make it logistically difficult for a low-income mother to apply for or maintain
public health insurance for herself or her children.1
For individuals (or families) in poor health, the expected benefits of having insurance—
public or private—may also depend on the specific types of health problems involved. For
example, conditions that require ongoing treatment may provide more of an incentive to being

1

In previous research using the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing data, we found that having an unhealthy infant
increased the probability that the parents were not living together (Reichman, Corman, and Noonan 2004),
decreased the probability that both the mother (Corman, Noonan, and Reichman 2005) and father (Noonan,
Reichman, and Corman 2005) were employed, and increased the probability that the mother received welfare
(Reichman, Corman, and Noonan forthcoming) 12-18 months after the birth. For reasons discussed above, these
consequences could translate into positive or negative effects on health insurance of the mothers and children.

4

insured than those that are not managed as closely. Also, conditions that are more likely to be
covered (or covered more fully) by insurance (e.g., asthma, cardiac problems) may provide more
of an incentive to being insured than those for which health insurance benefits tend to be less
generous (e.g., mental illness).
In this study, we use longitudinal data from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing
study to estimate the effects of poor infant health, pre-pregnancy health conditions of the mother,
and the father’s health status on health insurance status of urban, mostly unmarried, mothers and
their one-year-old children. We examine why a good share of mothers and children in this
vulnerable population become uninsured so soon after an insured birth, focusing on the effects of
child, maternal, and paternal health. We separately examine mothers who had public insurance
and those who had private insurance at the time of the birth. The results provide important
information about how health affects health insurance—an important family resource,
particularly for those with little financial buffer.

Background
Sociodemographic correlates of health insurance status
Much previous research has identified sociodemographic correlates of health insurance
status. Some studies have considered any type of insurance, while others have focused on public
or private insurance. We review this literature below, first focusing on studies of health insurance
generally and then focusing on studies of public or private insurance status. The review is by no
means exhaustive. Rather, we highlight recent studies that are particularly relevant to our study.

5

Any health insurance
Schoen and DesRoches (2000), in a review of results from three different surveys about
adult insurance coverage2, found that low income increases the likelihood of being uninsured and
that the uninsured are disproportionately African American, Hispanic, and unmarried. Holahan,
Dubay, and Kenney (2003) examined insurance coverage of children using the 2000 Current
Population Survey. Like Schoen and DesRoches, they found that children in low-income
households are more likely than those in higher-income households to lack insurance coverage
and that Hispanic children are much less likely than non-Hispanic children to have coverage.
They also found that children whose parents are not employed or are non-native non-citizens are
disproportionately uninsured.
The above studies are valuable because they provide snapshots of typically uninsured
adults and children. However, to better understand the mechanisms underlying insurance status it
is useful to examine changes in individuals’ health insurance status over time. Moreover,
because public insurance coverage is linked primarily to eligibility while private insurance
coverage is linked primarily to employment status, we expect that the factors affecting insurance
loss among mothers and their young children differ by whether the mother had public or private
insurance at the time of her child’s birth. For example, increased income could lead to loss of
eligibility for public health insurance and increase the likelihood of becoming uninsured. On the
other hand, increased income may result from a shift from part-time to full-time employment and
decrease the likelihood of being uninsured. Studies that pool together individuals with both types
of coverage at an initial period may lose important information concerning what causes

2

RWJ Foundation 1996-1997 Community Tracking Survey, 1995-1997 Kaiser Commonwealth State Low Income
Surveys, and the Kaiser Commonwealth 1997 National Survey of Health Insurance.

6

insurance loss. Below we review studies that examine changes in insurance status among
individuals with public or private insurance.
Public Insurance
A handful of studies, all using cross-sectional data, have identified correlates of insurance
loss for individuals who at one point in time received public health insurance. Sommers (2005),
using data from the 2001-2004 Current Population Surveys, found that publicly insured children
who are older, are Latino, and do not have other family members enrolled in public insurance are
more likely than their counterparts without these characteristics to become uninsured. Aiken,
Freed, and Davis (2004), using 1999 National Survey of America’s Families (NSAF) data, found
that children with a guardian (usually the mother) who is not married are more likely than those
with married parents to lose public insurance coverage and also that children who are Hispanic
are much more likely than non-Hispanic children to lose public health insurance. Haley and
Kenney (2003), using NSAF data from 1997 and 1999, examined health insurance loss among
Medicaid-eligible children and found that those who are Hispanic or have parents with low levels
of education are more likely than children who are non-Hispanic or have more educated parents
to experience a spell of being uninsured.
Spillman (2000), using data from the 1997 NSAF, found that adults who are very poor
(have household incomes below the poverty line) and unmarried parents are more likely to have
gaps in insurance coverage than higher-income adults and married parents. Additionally, she
found that adults living in households with no full-time workers are more likely than adults
living in households with employed adults to have gaps in insurance. These associations were
not examined in a multivariate context.

7

Private Insurance
Kasper et al. (2000), using 1995-1997 data from the Kaiser Survey of Family Health
Experiences, found that among individuals with private health insurance, those who have low
incomes are disproportionately represented among those who lose insurance coverage. Baker et
al. (2002), examining data from late-middle age respondents to the Health and Retirement
Survey (1992-1994), found that individuals who lose private coverage are more likely to be
female, nonwhite, unmarried, poor, and less educated than those who maintain coverage.
Overview
Studies have found that ethnicity, race, immigration status, education, income, and family
structure are all strongly related to health insurance status. Hispanics are less likely than nonHispanics to have both public and private insurance, possibly due to immigration status or
language barriers. The associations for blacks, however, are much less consistent across studies.
Not surprisingly, one of the strongest negative predictors of public insurance coverage is
immigrant status. Low education is associated with a reduced likelihood of having or
maintaining either type of insurance. Unmarried women are less likely to have private health
insurance and more likely to have public insurance than married women.
Effects of Health Status on Health Insurance Status
Children
Sommers (2005) found that children in good health are more likely than those with poor
health to drop out of Medicaid or the State Children’s Health Insurance program (SCHIP) and to
become uninsured. Similarly, Haley and Kenney (2003) found that Medicaid-eligible children
with functional limitations are less likely than those without limitations to experience a gap in
insurance coverage. However, they found that the parent’s self-report of the child’s overall

8

health status was not associated with the child’s insurance loss. Shenkman et al. (2002) using
data for all children enrolled in Florida’s Healthy Kids program during a one-month period,
found that children with at least one special health care need and those with a mental health
diagnosis were less likely than physically and mentally healthy children to disenroll from the
state’s SCHIP program. The results from these three studies are consistent in that they find that
low-income children in poor health are more likely than those in good health to maintain insured
status. In contrast, however, Miller et al. (2005) found that children who disenrolled from the
SCHIP program in New Jersey and became uninsured were more likely than those who remained
enrolled to be in fair or poor health.
Studies that have focused on populations of children, rather than insured children, have
found positive associations between poor child health and insurance gaps or lack of insurance.
Olson et al. (2005), using data from the National Health Interview Survey (2000- 2001),
compared children that spent part of a year uninsured to those who were continuously insured
(either public or private) and found that children with insurance gaps were more likely to be in
fair or poor health. Aiken et al. (2004) found that continuously uninsured children were more
likely than those with at least sporadic health insurance coverage to be in fair or poor health.
Finally, Satchell and Pati (2005), who examined a sample of vulnerable children (with chronic
health conditions, racial/ethnic minorities, or living in poverty), found no significant differences
in the proportions of healthy and unhealthy children that experienced health insurance gaps.
Adults
Fewer studies have examined the effects of adult’s health on health insurance status.
Most have focused on private insurance. One exception is a study by Spillman (2000), discussed
earlier, which found that adults in fair or poor health are more likely than those in good health to

9

have gaps in public health insurance. This result, in conjunction with the studies of children
discussed above, suggests that the effects of poor health on insurance loss among those with
public insurance may be different for children and adults.
Bundorf, Herring, and Pauly (2005) found a positive relationship between health risk and
coverage for those in the private insurance market in their analysis of 1996-2002 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey data. Blumberg and Nichols (2001), using the 1997 National Health
Interview Survey to analyze the characteristics of workers who decline employers’ offers of
health insurance to become uninsured, and found that these workers were in poorer mental health
than those who took up employer coverage. Their results for physical health measures were
mixed—those who declined coverage had worse self-reported health and were more likely to
report having asthma or migraines, but were less likely to report diabetes. Kasper, et al. (2000),
who examined both children and adults, found that individuals with health conditions requiring
frequent medical care are disproportionately represented among those who lose coverage.
Schoen and DesRoches (2000) found that individuals who lose coverage for a relatively brief
period are just as likely as those who were continuously insured to be in fair or poor health.
Likewise, Baker et al. (2002) found no differences in self-reported health status between adults
that maintained private health insurance coverage and those who lost private health insurance.
These results suggest that the effect of health status on loss of private coverage may vary by type
of health condition.
Overview
Previous research on the effects of health on health insurance status suggests that there
are different effects for individuals with private and public insurance and that there may be
different effects for adults and children. With the exception of Satchel and Pati (2005) and

10

Shenkman et al. (2002), all the above studies used self-reported measures of health. There is
evidence that individuals tend to under-report their health conditions (e.g. Goldman et al. 2003;
Zhu et al. 1999), including cancer history (Desai et al. 2001). If the degree of underreporting is
consistent across different conditions, it may not be that problematic. However, studies have
found that the extent of underreporting varies by condition,3 which introduces measurement error
that makes it difficult to compare results across studies. Finally, none of the studies included
health measures for family members other than the focal person. Such an omission ignores the
interdependency of family members, which is particularly important for children since adults
make decisions on their behalf. For example, the ability of a mother to obtain and maintain
health coverage for her child may be a function of her own physical and mental health. The
child’s health may also affect the mother’s insurance status—particularly when public insurance
is involved, as there may be economies of scale in the enrollment process.
Our contribution
In this study, we estimate the probability of health insurance loss among a populationbased sample of mothers and their one-year-old children. We examine the effects of the child’s
health endowment, the mother’s health status, and the father’s health status on the probability of
insurance loss for both the mother and the child. We conduct separate analyses for mothers who
were covered by public and private insurance at the time of the birth. The health status measures
are drawn primarily from medical records, reducing the potential for measurement error that may
accompany self-reported measures. Loss of insurance is modeled as a function of the child’s
health at birth, the mother’s pre-pregnancy physical and mental health, the father’s physical and
3

For example, Goldman et al. found that the underreporting of hypertension is considerable (nearly half of those
that have the condition do not report it), while the underreporting of diabetes is less substantial, and Zhu et al. found
varying degrees of discrepancies when comparing self-reported data to medical records for men who were asked
about different conditions related to the urogenital tract.

11

mental health at the time of the birth, socioeconomic characteristics of the mother and the father,
the relationship status and living arrangement of the parents, and neighborhood-level poverty.
We also include state fixed effects to control for insurance markets, labor markets, and policy
environments.
As indicated earlier, health problems could either increase or decrease the likelihood of
loss of insurance for mothers and their children. If they decrease the probability of health
insurance loss, it would provide evidence that the public safety net system is working. If they
increase the probability of insurance loss, it would point to needed public policy changes, as
coverage disruptions can result in the loss or delay of necessary care that in turn could lead to
unnecessary illness, hospitalization, or even death. The costs associated with these adverse
events may exacerbate financial hardship, trapping families in poverty and reducing their
chances of upward mobility.

Data
We use data from a recent national birth cohort survey that have been linked to medical
records of mother respondents and their babies. The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing
(FFCWB) survey follows a cohort of parents and their newborn children in 20 large U.S. cities
(in 15 states). The study was designed to provide information about the conditions and
capabilities of new (mostly unwed) parents; the nature, determinants, and trajectories of their
relationships; and the long-term consequences for parents and children of welfare reform and
other policies. The survey data are rich in sociodemographic characteristics of both mothers and
fathers, and include information on parents’ relationships and living arrangements.

12

The FFCWB study randomly sampled births in 75 hospitals between 1998 and 2000. By
design, approximately three quarters of the interviewed mothers were unmarried. Face-to-face
interviews were conducted with 4898 mothers while they were still in the hospital after giving
birth. The infants’ fathers were also interviewed, shortly thereafter in the hospital or at another
location. Baseline response rates were 86 percent among eligible mothers and 78 percent among
eligible fathers (fathers were eligible if the infant’s mother completed an interview). Additional
data have been collected from the hospital medical records (from the birth) for a sub-sample of
2994 births in 17 cities (in 13 states).4 Measures of census tract-level poverty were linked to the
data using the mothers’ baseline addresses. Follow-up interviews were conducted over the
telephone with mothers when the child was one year old; 89 percent of the mothers who
completed baseline interviews were re-interviewed when their children were between 12 and 18
months old.
The enhanced Fragile Families data are well suited for analyzing the effects of child,
maternal, and paternal health on insurance loss of mothers and children because they represent a
population that is vulnerable to experiencing lapses in health insurance (about two-thirds of the
births were covered by public insurance), were collected as part of a longitudinal birth cohort
study, and include: (1) detailed data on the child’s health from birth; (2) detailed data on the
mother’s pre-pregnancy physical and mental health; (3) data on the father’s physical and mental
health; (4) information about insurance status at the time of the birth and at the time of the one
year follow-up interview; (5) measures of socioeconomic status (e.g., education, neighborhood
poverty) of both mothers and fathers; (6) data on the fathers regardless of whether they lived

4

The medical record data collection is ongoing. The chronological order of the data collection reflects
administrative procedures for obtaining approval at the different hospitals rather than decisions on the part of
individual respondents to have their records reviewed.

13

with their children; and (7) detailed information on the parents’ relationship status, living
arrangements, and other children (together and with other partners) at the time of the birth.

Descriptive Analysis
Below we describe the measures we use in our analyses, present summary statistics, and
point out many salient characteristics of the sample. Unless indicated otherwise, all covariates
are measured at baseline. In general, we use mother reports for information about the mother and
father reports for information about the father. However, in cases where father data are missing,
we use mother reports about the father if these are available. We restrict the sample to 2,400 nonmultiple births that were covered by health insurance for which there were no missing data on
any of the main analysis variables from the mother’s baseline and one year follow-up surveys,
medical records, and address files.
Health insurance
Health insurance status and type of insurance, of the mother as well as the child, were
reported by the mother at both the baseline and follow-up interviews. A small number of mothers
(39) were excluded from the analyses because they did not have health insurance at baseline. The
handful of births that were reportedly covered by both public and private health insurance (8) are
included in both the analyses of publicly insured births and the analyses of privately insured
births.
Table 1 shows a strong association between the insurance coverage of mothers and that of
their children. Of the 705 mothers who lost insurance, 260 (37%) of their children also lost
coverage. Of the 1,695 mothers who had insurance both at birth and one year later, 1,658 (98%)
of their children had coverage at both of these time points.

14

Characteristics of the sample by mothers’ baseline health insurance type (public or
private) are presented in Table 2.5 Over one third (37%) of mothers who were covered by public
insurance at baseline were uninsured at the time of the follow-up interview, as were 15 percent
of their children. In contrast, 14 percent of the mothers with private insurance at the time of the
birth and 9 percent of their infants had no insurance coverage 12 - 18 months later.
Measures of health
In most studies, child and maternal health are ascertained through survey questions to
mothers. We construct three different measures of poor child health that draw on information
from the medical records and surveys and we assess the robustness of our results to the choice of
measure. For the mothers, we rely primarily on information from the medical records, but use
baseline self-reported health status in certain analyses. For the fathers, we rely exclusively on
survey data.
Child’s health
The first measure of poor child health (severe infant health condition), coded from the
medical records and one-year maternal reports of child disability, is whether the infant had a
severe abnormal condition at birth and/or was very low birth weight (<1500 grams). Very low
birth weight is associated with a number of serious child health problems (Reichman 2005). The
coding of the abnormal conditions was conducted by an outside pediatric consultant who was
directed to code a case as having poor child health if the child had a condition that is severe,
chronic, unlikely caused by maternal prenatal behavior, and in the case of one-year maternal
reports, likely present at birth. Our goal was to capture conditions that are for the most part

5

Sample characteristics are presented in Table 2 for the 1,602 mothers who had public insurance at birth and no
missing data and for the 806 mothers who had private insurance at birth and no missing data. Multivariate analyses
of child insurance loss include 1603 publicly insured cases and 807 privately insured cases for which there were no
missing data.

15

random (e.g., Down Syndrome, congenital heart malformations), given that the pregnancy
resulted in a live birth. Four percent of the publicly insured children and 3 percent of the
privately insured children in our sample had a severe infant health condition as we have defined
it (Table 2).
The second measure of poor child health is low birth weight (< 2500 grams). Birth weight
was obtained from the medical records. Of mothers with public insurance at baseline, 12 percent
had low birth weight infants. In contrast, only 6 percent of infants born to mothers with private
insurance were low birth weight. This measure is readily obtained from maternal reports or
medical records,6 but is not very specific because few moderately low birth weight children (the
majority of low birth weight children), those weighing between 1500 and 2500 grams, have
severe health problems (Reichman 2005). The advantage of this measure is that it conforms to
the standard definition of low birth weight and is comparable across studies.
Our third measure is a direct, but broader, measure of infant health—whether the infant
had a severe or moderately severe abnormal condition. These include conditions that may or may
not have poor long-term prognoses and for which the links to maternal prenatal behavior are
weak.7 We call this measure any infant health condition. Again, the coding was conducted by an
outside pediatric consultant who systematically reviewed the medical record data on infant
conditions, as well as data from the one-year interviews on physical disabilities of the child. One
fifth of the children in the sample were coded as having any infant health condition (20% of the
publicly insured group, 19% of the privately insured group).
Finally, in supplemental analyses, we use the mother’s report of the child’s health at the
one-year follow-up survey (good, fair, or poor, compared to excellent or very good). Among

6
7

The correlation of birth weights from the two sources in our data is .98.
Examples of conditions considered moderately severe are hydrocephaly and cleft palate.

16

children with public insurance, 15 percent were reported as having less than very good health,
compared to 9 percent of children with private insurance.
It is noteworthy that for the two measures of poor child health that were constructed with
the goal of capturing random “shocks”—severe abnormal infant condition and any infant health
condition—the rates by type of insurance at baseline are virtually identical. In contrast, for both
low birth weight and maternal reports of child health status, there are large disparities by baseline
health insurance status, which likely reflect—at least in part—differences in socioeconomic
status and health behaviors between the two groups.
Mother’s health
From information in the mothers’ medical records, we constructed measures of physical
and mental health status prior to the pregnancy. The mother is coded as having a pre-existing
physical health condition if she had one or more of the following health conditions indicated in
her medical history--lung disease, cardiac disease, chronic diabetes, hypertension, or liver
disease. The mother was coded as having a pre-existing mental illness if there was any
documentation of a diagnosed DSM-IV mental disorder (e.g., depression, anxiety, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, anorexia, suicidality, and mental retardation) in her chart.8 In a
supplemental analysis, we instead use mothers’ self-reported health status (good, fair, or poor,
compared to excellent or very good) from the baseline survey.
Mothers with public insurance at baseline were much more likely than mothers with
private insurance to have health conditions that pre-dated the birth (Table 2). The difference is
most striking for mental illness, with twice as many mothers with public insurance having a

8

Substance abuse disorders were not included in this measure.

17

history of diagnosed mental illness (12%) as mothers whose births were covered by private
insurance (6%).
Father’s health
We include the father’s self-reported health (good, fair, or poor, compared to excellent or
very good) from the baseline survey, as well as his score from the Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), which was included in the fathers’ baseline interview. The
CES-D scale ranges from 0 (low risk for depression) to 7 (high risk for depression). These are
the only analysis variables for which we relied solely on father reports. To avoid sample loss due
to missing data, we included a dummy variable indicating that the father did not complete a
baseline interview. The prevalence of self-reported suboptimal health status and mean depression
scores were higher for fathers having children with mothers on public insurance than for those
having children with mothers whose births were covered by private insurance.
Covariates
We include several covariates that may be related to both health and health insurance
status. These include whether the focal child is male and whether the father had insurance from
his last employer (41% for the publicly insured mothers, versus 70% for the privately insured
mothers). We also include whether the parents were married, cohabiting, or not living together at
baseline. Among mothers with public insurance at baseline, 89 percent of the parents were
unmarried and almost half (47%) of the unmarried mothers lived with the child’s father. Among
mothers with private insurance at baseline, half (52%) were unmarried and 58 percent of the
unmarried mothers lived with the child’s father.
We include whether the mother and father had any other children together, whether the
mother had any children with another partner at the time of the baseline interview, and whether

18

the father had at least one child with another partner at the time of the mother’s one year followup interview.9 Overall, multiple partner fertility is much higher in the public insurance group
than in the private insurance group. We also include whether the father visited the mother or
baby in the hospital (78% for the publicly insured group, compared to 92% for the privately
insured group) and whether the mother knew the father at least 12 months prior to conception of
the focal child (81% versus 92%).
We include the mother’s age, race/ethnicity, education, and whether she worked within
the two-year period preceding the child’s birth, as well as her number of previous pregnancies
(whether they resulted in live births or not, and including both spontaneous and induced
abortions), which was obtained from the mother’s medical record. Mothers with public insurance
at baseline were younger, less educated, and more likely to be black or Hispanic than mothers
with privately insured births.
We include detailed information on the father, whether or not he lived in the household at
the time of the birth. We include the father’s age (expressed as the number of years the father’s
age exceeded the mother’s age), whether the father was a different race/ethnicity than the
mother, whether the father had fewer years of education than the mother, whether the father had
ever served in the military, and whether the father was employed at the time of the birth. The
fathers in the public insurance group were less likely to have served in the military and to have
been employed than those in the private insurance group.
As a proxy for household income, we include the percentage of households in the
mother’s census tract with income under the poverty line (21% for the publicly insured group,

9

Data limitations make it impossible to ascertain whether the father had any children with another partner at the
time of the baseline.

19

compared to 13% for the privately insured group).10 Because of the strong associations found in
past studies between nativity and health insurance status, we include two measures of parents’
immigrant status—(1) whether the mother, but not the father, is an immigrant; and (2) whether
both parents are immigrants (both compared to the father only or neither parent is an immigrant).
There are no differences across groups in nativity status. Finally, for reasons stated earlier, all
models include state fixed effects.
Other measures
In supplemental analyses, we included whether the mother had a previous low birth
weight, small for gestational age, or preterm birth (from the medical records) or whether the
mother received first prenatal trimester care (from the medical records). Mothers with publicly
insured births were much more likely to have had a previous adverse birth outcome (10%,
compared to 6%) and much less likely to have received first trimester prenatal care (51%,
compared to 70%).

Modeling Strategy
We are interested in estimating the effects of the child’s, mother’s, and father’s health
status on insurance loss of both the mother and child. We use probit models to estimate the
following equation, separately for mothers and children:
Insurance Loss = f (child’s health, mother’s health, father’s health, other child characteristics,
parent relationship status, other mother and father characteristics, state fixed effects, µ)
The estimation of this model is straightforward, assuming that health is truly random
(exogenous). It is possible, however, that there are non-random components of health (reflected
10

In this sample, there is an average of 1.65 births per census tract, with 65 percent of the 1453 tracts containing
only one birth.

20

in µ) that are correlated with unobserved determinants of insurance loss. If that is the case, health
would be endogenous and the estimated effects of child, mother, and father health on insurance
loss would be biased. In theory, one could use instrumental variables estimation to obtain
unbiased estimates. However, in this case, the probability of finding valid identifiers for health
status (i.e., measures that are strongly related to health status but affect health insurance only
through health) is extremely low. We address the potential endogeneity issue by: (1) using
longitudinal data, which helps in establishing the temporal ordering of events (our measures of
health status and most covariates precede the change in insurance status); (2) attempting to
measure child health conditions that are exogenous; and (3) using rich data and including
numerous covariates that are associated with both health and health insurance, as well as state
fixed effects. We assess the robustness of our results to a number of different model
specifications and explore competing explanations.

Multivariate Results
The results from probit models of insurance loss are presented in Table 3 (for children)
and Table 4 (for mothers). In each cell of results, the probit coefficient appears on top, the
marginal effect is in brackets, and the standard error, which is corrected for state clustering of
observations using the Huber-White method, is in parentheses.
Children’s Insurance Loss
Regardless which measure of poor child health is used, there is no significant association
between child health and loss of insurance among children whose mothers had public insurance
at the time of the birth.11 In contrast, previous studies have found that for children enrolled in

11

Sample sizes precluded using severe infant health condition as the measure of poor child health when estimating
insurance loss among children whose births were covered by private insurance.

21

public insurance, poor child health decreases the likelihood of insurance gaps (Sommers 2005,
Haley and Kenney 2003, Schenkman et al. 2002). The inconsistency may reflect the ages of
children studied, the measures of health used, or the policy context. All three previous studies
used samples of children ages 0 to 18. Sommers and Haley & Kenney used maternal reports of
children’s health. Schenkman et al. used documented child health conditions of children in one
state—Florida. For privately insured births, the only measure of child health that is significantly
associated with insurance loss is our broadest—any infant health condition.
There are strong associations between parental health and children’s insurance loss. For
publicly insured births, a maternal physical health condition reduces the likelihood of insurance
loss for the child by 6 percentage points, while a pre-existing diagnosed maternal mental illness
increases the probability that the child will become uninsured by 9 percentage points. The latter
finding is consistent with past research indicating that women who report a mental health
problem are more likely than those who report having no mental health problems to perceive
barriers to enrolling in Medicaid (Stuber and Bradley 2005). For publicly insured births, children
of fathers with higher depression scores have lower rates of insurance loss, all else equal. Finally,
for privately insured births, the only significant effect of parental health is for father-reported
suboptimal health at baseline—poor self-reported health increases the likelihood that the child
becomes uninsured by 5 to 6 percentage points. There is no association between the father’s selfreported health status and the child’s loss of insurance for births that were publicly insured.
The covariate estimates are very robust to the measure of poor child health that is used.
The effects, generally, are more pronounced for those with private insurance at baseline than for
those who had public insurance. The father having had health insurance through his last
employer reduces the probability that a privately insured child will lose insurance, as do the

22

parents having other children together and the mother having attended college. For publicly
insured births, the father having served in the military decreases the risk that the child will lose
insurance coverage. If the father has a low level of education relative to the mother, the risk of
the child’s insurance loss increases by 4-5 percentage points. Regardless of the type of insurance
at birth, both parents being immigrants is a strong and consistent positive predictor of the child
being uninsured at age 1.
Mothers’ Insurance Loss
Many of the patterns for mother’s insurance loss are similar to those for child’s insurance
loss. However, there are some notable differences and, overall, there are more significant
associations.
As was the case for children’s public insurance loss, we find that the health of the child is
not significantly associated with a loss of health insurance for the mother. However, among those
who had public insurance for the birth, the mother’s own health has strong effects. Publicly
insured mothers with a physical health problem are 7 percentage points less likely to lose
insurance coverage than those without physical health problems, all else equal, and mothers with
a history of mental illness are 8-9 percentage points more likely than those without a history of
mental illness to lose insurance coverage. For privately insured births, if the father reported
suboptimal health at baseline, the mother was significantly more likely to lose health insurance
coverage, and neither the mother’s nor the child’s health status is associated with the mother’s
health insurance status at age 1. These results are very similar to what we found for children’s
health insurance loss. However, the father’s depression score, which significantly decreased the
likelihood of insurance loss among children whose births were covered by public insurance, and

23

any infant health condition, which significantly decreased the risk of insurance loss among
privately insured children, are not associated with insurance loss among mothers.
The father having had insurance through his last employer reduces the likelihood that
privately insured mothers lose coverage, as does the parents having been married at baseline
(versus cohabiting). Multiple partner fertility (the mother having had children with other fathers
or the father having had children with other mothers) is negatively associated with insurance loss
among mothers who were publicly insured for the birth. Publicly insured mothers who are high
school graduates are less likely to lose insurance than those with less than a high school
education, and regardless of insurance status at the time of the birth, being a college graduate
reduces the risk of becoming uninsured. Among publicly insured mothers, the father being older
than the mother and the father being less educated than the mother are risk factors for insurance
loss, and the poorer her census tract, the less likely that the mother loses insurance. Finally,
consistent with prior findings, publicly insured mothers who are immigrants (Angel, Frias, and
Hill 2005) and who are Hispanic (Holahan, Dubay, and Kenney 2003, Schoen and DesRoches
2000) are at increased risk of becoming uninsured. The risk is particularly high when the father
is also an immigrant—both parents being immigrants increases the likelihood that the mother
loses public insurance by 23 percentage points.
Auxiliary Analyses
We estimated a number of supplemental models to assess the robustness of our results to
alternative sources of reports and explore competing explanations.12
Measures based on alternative sources of reports
We estimated models that include the mother’s report of the child’s health (good, fair, or
poor compared to excellent or very good) from the one-year follow-up survey instead of the
12

The results from supplementary analyses are not shown, but are available upon request.

24

other child health measures, and her self-report of her own general health status at baseline
(good, fair, or poor compared to excellent or very good). We found that maternal reports of child
health are not associated with insurance loss of mothers but that they are associated with a
decreased likelihood of insurance loss among children who were initially on public insurance (8
percentage points). The result for children is consistent with findings from previous studies that
used maternal reports of children’s health status (Sommers 2005, Haley and Kenney 2003),
suggesting that perceptions of poor child health, rather than actual child health conditions, lead to
publicly insured children’s continued coverage. Self-reported maternal health is not significantly
associated with insurance loss of children or mothers regardless of baseline insurance status.
Competing explanations
A limitation of our data is that we have little information on the health of the mother’s
other children, which could confound the effects of the focal child’s, mother’s, or father’s health
on the mother’s or children’s health insurance status. We address this limitation by estimating
models that control for whether the mother had a previous adverse birth outcome (low birth
weight, small for gestational age or preterm delivery). The estimated effects of child’s, mother’s
and father’s health status on the mother’s and child’s health insurance were insensitive to the
inclusion of this measure. In addition, we found that for publicly insured births, the mother
having had a previous adverse birth outcome reduced the likelihood that the mother or child
became uninsured (mothers were 6-7 percentage points less likely and children were 4-5
percentage points less likely to lose coverage). There were no significant effects for those
covered by private insurance.
It is possible that insurance status prior to the pregnancy or during the prenatal period
affects both health (mother or child) and subsequent insurance status. To address this possibility,

25

we estimated a set of models that included whether the mother received first trimester prenatal
care. We found that including first trimester care in the models did not change any of the
estimated effects of health on the mother’s or child’s loss of insurance. Additionally, first
trimester care was negatively associated with insurance loss— by about 6 percentage points
among privately insured children and mothers and by about 4 percentage points among publicly
insured children. There was no association for publicly insured mothers.

Conclusion
We found that in the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing birth cohort study of urban,
mostly unmarried parents and their children, virtually all births were covered by health
insurance, but that a substantial number of the mothers and children did not have any health
insurance one year later. We examined why this was the case, even after the SCHIP legislation of
1997 dramatically reduced the number and rates of uninsured children in the U.S. We focused on
the potential roles of the child’s, the mother’s, and the father’s health status. We found that there
are complicated interdependencies between health and insurance status within the mother-fatherchild triad.
We found that child health is, for the most part, not associated with insurance loss of
mothers or their children. Although previous research cited earlier has shown that poor child
health decreases the labor supply of both mothers and fathers and that it increases the likelihood
that the parents do not live together, we found that these effects do not translate into an increased
probability that mothers, even among those with private insurance, lose health insurance or that
publicly insured children become uninsured. That is, the family turbulence caused by the shock
of poor child health does not result in the family becoming uninsured.

26

In contrast, there are strong associations between parents’ health and children’s insurance
loss. Among publicly insured children, those whose mothers have physical health conditions are
less likely to become uninsured than those whose mothers are healthy. Their mothers are also
less likely to lose health insurance. However, maternal mental illness increases the likelihood
that both the mother and the child become uninsured by age 1. These results indicate that while
mothers in poor physical health are able to maintain the coverage they need and to keep their
children insured, there is a gap in the public safety net for mothers with mental illness and their
children.
The results for maternal mental illness have dire implications. Mothers with mental
illness who lack coverage are less likely than those with health insurance to get appropriate
mental health services (MacAlpine and Mechanic 2000). Mental health disorders are a leading
cause of disability worldwide, accounting for one-third of total years lived with disability (World
Health Organization 2003). To reduce the disability burden and enable mothers to lead
productive lives, access to mental health services is essential. Furthermore, mental health of
mothers can affect their children’s health and development. Past research has found that mothers
with depression have a difficult time managing their young children’s medical care (Minkovitz et
al. 2005) and that mothers experiencing post-partum depression are less likely to breastfeed, play
with their children, read to them, and follow daily routines than mothers without post-partum
depression (McLearn et al. 2006). Similar issues with managing child health care and parenting
practices may arise with mothers with other mental illnesses. These unfavorable parenting
practices may lead to cognitive, social and emotional problems among children (Coiro 1997).
Since information on mothers’ mental health status is often available in mothers’ medical
records, the hospital of delivery would be a convenient checkpoint for educating mothers with

27

diagnosed mental illnesses about the availability and importance of postnatal health insurance
coverage for both themselves and their children, and for establishing a follow-up plan to insure
that they and their children do not get lost in the system.
Fathers’ health also affects their children’s health insurance coverage. Privately insured
children whose fathers are in poor physical health are more likely than those whose fathers are in
good health to become uninsured by age 1, as are the mothers. This result suggests the need for
subsidies that enable men in poor health to afford health insurance for themselves and their
dependents.
The covariate estimates underscore that health insurance status is very much a family
affair. For example, insurance loss among publicly insured mothers is strongly related to both
parents’ low levels of human capital and both parents being immigrants (but not only the mother
being an immigrant) is a risk factor for the child being uninsured at age 1, regardless of health
insurance type at the time of the birth.
We conclude with two caveats. Despite our rich longitudinal data and strategies for
minimizing endogeneity, it is possible that the associations we uncovered do not represent causal
effects. It is also possible that we have not correctly characterized the temporal ordering of
events. Regardless of these limitations, however, this study has produced include important
policy-relevant facts about the determinants of health insurance status in the post-PRWORA
post-SCHIP era and the strong interdependencies of family members’ health and insurance
status.

28

References
Aiken, Kimberly D., Freed, Gary L., and Matthew M. Davis. 2004. “When Insurance Status Is
Not Static: Insurance Transitions of Low-Income Children and Implications for Health
and Health Care.” Ambulatory Pediatrics 4(3): 237-243.
Aizer, Anna and Jeffrey Grogger. 2003. “Parental Medicaid Expansions and Health Insurance
Coverage.” NBER Working Paper 9907, http://www.nber.org/papers/w9907.
Angel, Ronald J., Frias, Sonia M., Terrence D. Hill. 2005. “Determinants of Household
Insurance Coverage Among Low-Income Families from Boston, Chicago and San
Antonio: Evidence from the Three-City Study.” Social Science Quarterly 86(5): 13381353.
Ayanian, John Z., Weissman, Joel S., Schneider, Eric C., Ginsburg, Jack A., and Alan M.
Zaslavsky. 2000. “Unmet Health Needs of Uninsured Adults in the United States.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 284(16): 2061-2069.
Baker, David W., Sudano, Joseph J., Albert, Jeffrey M., Borawski, Elaine A., and Avi Dor. 2002.
“Loss of Health Insurance and the Risk for a Decline in Self-Reported Health and
Physical Functioning.” Medical Care 40(11): 1126-1131.
Blumberg, Linda J. and Len M. Nichols. 2001. “The Health Status of Workers Who Decline
Employer-Sponsored Coverage.” Health Affairs 20(6): 180-187.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Bradley Herring and Mark Pauly. 2005. “Health Risk, Income, and the
Purchase of Private Health Insurance.” NBER Working Paper 11677,
http://www.nber.org/papers/w11677.
Busch, Susan H. and Noelia Duchovny. 2005. “Family coverage expansions, Impact on
Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents.” Journal of Health
Economics 24(5): 876-890.
Coiro, Mary Jo. 1997. “Maternal Depressive Symptoms as a Risk Factor for the Development of
Children in Poverty”, in Moore, K.A. Factors in the Development of Children in Welfare
Families: An Ecological Perspective. Symposium presented at the meetings of the
Society for Research in Child Development, Washington DC.
Corman, Hope, Noonan, Kelly, and Nancy E. Reichman. 2005. Mothers’ Labor Supply in Fragile
Families: The Role of Child Health. Eastern Economic Journal 31(4): Forthcoming.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431-466.

29

Desai, Mayur M., Bruce, Martha Livingston, Desai, Rani A., and Benjamin G. Druss. 2001.
“Validity of Self-reported Cancer History: A Comparison of Health Interview Data and
Cancer Registry Records.” American Journal of Epidemiology 153(3): 299-306.
Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. 2003. “Expanding Public Health Insurance to Parents:
Effects on Children’s Coverage under Medicaid.” Health Services Research 38(5): 12831301.
Goldman, Noreen, Lin, I-Fen, Weinstein, Maxine, and Yu-Hsuan Lin. 2003. “Evaluating the
Quality of Self-Reports of Hypertension and Diabetes.” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
56(2): 148-154.
Hadley, Jack. 2002. “Sicker and Poorer: The Consequences of Being Uninsured.” Medical Care
Research Review 60(2): 3S-75S.
Haley, Jennifer and Genevieve Kenney. 2003. “Coverage Gaps for Medicaid-Eligible Children in
the Wake of Federal Reform.” Inquiry 40(2): 158-168.
Hanson, Karla L. 1998. “Is Insurance Enough? The Link Between Parents’ and Children’s
Health Care Use Revisited.” Inquiry 35(3): 294-302.
Holahan, John, Dubay, Lisa, and Genevieve Kenney. 2003. “Which Children Are Still Uninsured
and Why?” The Future of Children 13(1): 55-79.
Kasper, Judith D., Giovanni, Terence A., and Catherine Hoffman. 2002. “Gaining and Losing
Health Insurance: Strengthening the Evidence on Access to Care and Health Outcomes.”
Medical Care Research and Review 57(3): 298-318.
Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. 2001. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health
Insurance Affects Health? Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured.” ERIU
Working Paper 6, www.umich/~eriu.wp6.pdf.
MacAlpine, Donna D. and David Mechanic. 2000. “Utilization of Specialty Mental Health Care
Among Persons with Severe Mental Illness: The Roles of Demographics, Need,
Insurance and Risk.” Health Services Research 35(1), Part II: 277-292.
McLearn, Kathryn Taaffe, Minkovitz, Cynthia S, Strobino, Donna M., Marks, Elisabeth and
William Hou. 2006. “Maternal Depressive Symptoms at 2 to 4 Months Post Partum and
Early Parenting Practices.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 160: 279-284
.
Miller, Jane E., Gaboda, Dorothy, Cantor, Joel C. and Thomas Trail. 2005. “New Evidence on
SCHIP Retention and Subsequent Insurance Status: The Roles of Child Health and
Parental Eligibility.” Presented at the Academy Health Conference, Boston.

30

Minkovitz, Cynthia S., Strobino, Donna, Scharfstein, Dan, Hou, William,Miller, Tess, Mistry,
Kamila and Karen Swartz. 2005. “Maternal Depressive Symptoms and Children’s
Receipt of Health Care in the First 3 Years of Life.” Pediatrics 115(2):306-314.
Newacheck, Paul W., Stoddard, Jeffrey J., Hughes, Dana C., and Michelle Pearl. 1998. “Health
Insurance and Access to Primary Care for Children.” New England Journal of Medicine
338(8): 513-19.
Noonan, Kelly, Reichman, Nancy E., and Hope Corman. 2005. “New Fathers’ Labor Supply:
Does Child Health Matter?” Social Science Quarterly 86(5): 1399-1417(19).
Olson, Lynn M, Tang, Suk-fong S., and Paul Newacheck. 2005. “Children in the United States
with Discontinuous Health Insurance Coverage.” The New England Journal of Medicine
353(4): 382-391.
Reichman, Nancy E. 2005. “Low Birth Weight and School Readiness.” The Future of
Children 15(1): 91-116.
Reichman, Nancy E., Corman, Hope, and Kelly Noonan. 2004. “Effects of Child Health on
Parents’ Relationship Status.” Demography 41(3): 569-584.
Reichman, Nancy E., Corman, Hope, and Kelly Noonan. 2006. “Effects of Child Health on
Sources of Public Support.” Southern Economic Journal Forthcoming.
Satchell, Marlon and Susmita Pati. 2005. “Insurance Gaps Among Vulnerable Children in the
United States, 1999-2001.” Pediatrics 116(5): 1155-1161.
Schoen, Cathy and Catherine DesRoches. 2000. “Uninsured and Unstably Insured: the
Importance of Continuous Insurance Coverage.” Health Services Research 35 (1 Pt 2):
187-206.
Shenkman, Elizabeth, Vogel, Bruce, Boyett, James, and Rose Naff. 2002. “Disenrollment and
Re-enrollment Patterns in a SCHIP.” Health Care Financing Review 23(3): 47-63.
Sommers, Benjamin D. 2005. “The Impact of Program Structure on Children’s Disenrollment
from Medicaid and SCHIP.” Health Affairs 24(6): 1611-1618.
Spillman, Brenda C. 2000. “Adults Without Health Insurance: Do State Policies Matter?” Health
Affairs 19(4): 178-187.
Stuber, Jennifer and Elizabeth Bradley. 2005. “Barriers to Medicaid Enrollment: Who is at
Risk?” American Journal of Public Health 95(2): 292-298.
Swartz, Katherine, Marcotte, John and Timothy D. McBride. 1993. “Personal Characteristics and
Spells Without Health Insurance.” Inquiry 30: 64-76.

31

World Health Organization (WHO). 2003. Investing in Mental Health.
www.who.int/mental_health/media/investing_mnh.pdf.
Zhu, Khangmin, McKnight, Barbara, Stergachis, Andy, Daling, Janet R., and Robert S. Levine.
1999. “Comparison of self-report data and medical records data: results from a casecontrol study on prostate cancer.” International Journal of Epidemiology 28(3): 409-417.

32

Table 1: Loss of Health Insurance Between Baseline and One Year Follow-up
Child
Mother
No
Yes
Total
1,658
37
1,695
No
Yes

445

260

705

Total

2,103

297

2,400

33

Table 2: Sample Characteristics (proportions, unless indicated otherwise)
Public Insurance at Baseline

Private Insurance at Baseline

Lost Health Insurance
Mother
Child

.37
.15

.14
.09

Child Characteristics
Severe Infant Health Condition
Low Birth Weight
Any Infant Health Condition
Male Child
Suboptimal Health (mother report at 1 year)

.04
.12
.20
.51
.15

.03
.06
.19
.54
.09

Mother’s Health
Maternal Physical Health Problem
Disposed Mental Illness
Self-Reported Suboptimal Health

.20
.12
.39

.15
.06
.26

.26
1.31
(1.22)
.41

.20
1.11
(1.12)
.70

.11
.42
.47
.81
.29
.42
.38
.78

.48
.30
.22
.92
.36
.23
.26
.92

Father’s Health & Health Insurance
Self-Reported Suboptimal Health
Depression score (CES-D), mean
Had Health Insurance from Last Employer
Family Structure
Married at Baseline*
Cohabiting (not married)
Not Cohabiting
Knew Father at Least 12 Months
Parents Have Other Children Together
Mother has Children with Other Partner
Father has Children with Other Partner
Father Visited in Hospital
Mother’s Other Characteristics
Age, mean
Age Squared
Less Than High School*
High School Graduate
Some College But Not Graduate
College Graduate
Worked in Past 2 years
Non-Hispanic White*
Non-Hispanic Black

23.53
(5.33)
582.24
(285.92)
.45
.33
.20
.02
.78
.14
.53

27.37
(6.30)
788.63
(359.48)
.15
.27
.33
.25
.87
.33
.38
Continued on next page

34

Table 2 (cont’d)
Public Insurance at Baseline

Private Insurance at Baseline

Mother’s Other Characteristics (cont’d)
Hispanic
Other Race/Ethnicity
Number of Previous Pregnancies, mean
Previous Adverse Birth Outcome
First Trimester Prenatal Care

.30
.03
.76
.10
.51

.24
.05
.73
.06
.70

Father’s Other Characteristics
Age Difference in Years (Father Minus
Mother), mean
Different Race/Ethnicity Than Mother
Less Educated Than Mother
Served in the Military
Employed at Baseline
Did Not Complete Baseline Interview

2.77
(5.24)
.14
.24
.07
.72
.20

2.19
(4.66)
.16
.33
.12
.86
.11

.21
(.13)
.05
.10
.85

.13
(.11)
.05
.10
.85

1602

806

Other Characteristics
% Below Poverty in Mother’s Census Tract,
mean
Mother (but not father) is an Immigrant
Both Parents are Immigrants
Only Father or Neither Parent is an
Immigrant*
N
Notes: Standard Deviations in parentheses.
*Reference category in regression analyses.

35

Table 3: Child’s Loss of Insurance
Child Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]
Severe Infant Health
Condition

-.00
(.23)
[-.00]

Low Birth Weight

Child Had Private Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

--

.19
(.14)
[.04]

Any Infant Health Condition

-.48
(.34)
[-.04]
.02
(.09)
[.00]

-.49***
(.17)
[-.04]

Male Child

-.16**
(.08)
[-.03]

-.16**
(.08)
[-.03]

-.16**
(.08)
[-.03]

.11
(.16)
[.01]

.12
(.15)
[.01]

.14
(.16)
[.01]

Maternal Physical Health
Problem

-.30*
(.17)
[-.06]

-.30*
(.17)
[-.06]

-.30*
(.17)
[-.06]

-.08
(.20)
[-.01]

-.08
(.22)
[-.01]

-.09
(.20)
[-.01]

Maternal History of Mental
Illness

.37***
(.08)
[.09]

.36***
(.09)
[.09]

.37***
(.09)
[.09]

-.01
(.17)
[-.00]

.02
(.19)
[.00]

-.01
(.20)
[-.00]

Father’s Self-Reported
Suboptimal Health

-.13
(.10)
[-.03]

-.13
(.10)
[-.03]

-.13
(.10)
[-.03]

.42***
(.15)
[.06]

.40***
(.14)
[.05]

.40***
(.15)
[.05]

Father’s Depression score
(CES-D)

-.05**
(.02)
[-.01]

-.05**
(.02)
[-.01]

-.05**
(.02)
[-.01]

-.02
(.04)
[-.00]

-.01
(.04)
[-.00]

-.01
(.05)
[-.00]

Father had Health Insurance
from Last Employer

-.09
(.09)
[-.02]

-.09
(.09)
[-.02]

-.09
(.09)
[-.02]

-.48**
(.21)
[-.06]

-.44**
(.21)
[-.06]

-.45**
(.21)
[-.06]

Cohabiting at Baseline

-.01
(.11)
[-.00]

-.01
(.11)
[-.00]

-.01
(.11)
[-.00]

.25
(.19)
[.03]

.24
.26
(.19)
(.18)
[.03]
[.03]
Continued on next page

36

Table 3 (cont’d)
Child Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Child Had Private Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Not Cohabiting

-.06
(.11)
[-.01]

-.06
(.12)
[-.01]

-.06
(.12)
[-.01]

.02
(.31)
[.00]

.00
(.32)
[.00]

.05
(.32)
[.01]

Mother Knew Father at Least
12 Months

-.05
(.08)
[-.01]

-.04
(.08)
[-.01]

-.05
(.08)
[-.01]

-.27
(.18)
[-.04]

-.28
(.18)
[-.04]

-.25
(.18)
[-.03]

Parents Have Other Children
Together

-.07
(.10)
[-.01]

-.07
(.10)
[-.01]

-.07
(.10)
[-.01]

-.25*
(.14)
[-.03]

-.23*
(.13)
[-.02]

-.24*
(.14)
[-.02]

Mother has Children with
Other Partner

.03
(.14)
[.01]

.03
(.14)
[.01]

.03
(.14)
[.01]

-.24
(.20)
[-.02]

-.21
(.20)
[-.02]

-.23
(.18)
[-.02]

Father has Children with
Other Partner

-.13
(.08)
[-.03]

-.13
(.08)
[-.03]

-.13
(.08)
[-.03]

.08
(.18)
[.01]

.10
(.18)
[.01]

.07
(.19)
[.01]

Father Visited in Hospital

.01
(.15)
[.00]

.01
(.15)
[.00]

.02
(.15)
[.00]

.01
(.32)
[-.00]

.04
(.31)
[.00]

.06
(.31)
[.01]

Mother’s Age

-.04
(.06)
[-.01]

-.04
(.06)
[-.01]

-.04
(.06)
[-.01]

.01
(.18)
[.00]

.00
(.13)
[.00]

.00
(.13)
[.00]

Mother’s Age Squared

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

Mother is High School
Graduate

-.09
(.10)
[-.02]

-.08
(.10)
[-.02]

-.09
(.10)
[-.02]

-.11
(.29)
[-.01]

-.10
(.29)
[-.01]

-.15
(.28)
[-.02]

Mother has Some College But
Not Graduate

-.02
(.15)
[-.00]

-.02
(.16)
[-.00]

-.03
(.15)
[-.01]

-.52*
(.28)
[-.05]

-.52*
-.54*
(.28)
(.27)
[-.05]
[-.05]
Continued on next page

37

Table 3 (cont’d)
Child Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Child Had Private Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Mother is College Graduate

.12
(.26)
[.03]

.13
(.26)
[.03]

.12
(.26)
[.03]

-.69**
(.35)
[-.06]

-.70**
(.35)
[-.06]

-.73**
(.35)
[-.06]

Mother Worked in Past 2
Years

-.02
(.12)
[-.00]

-.02
(.12)
[-.00]

-.02
(.12)
[-.00]

-.08
(.19)
[-.01]

-.05
(.20)
[-.01]

-.04
(.20)
[-.00]

Mother Non-Hispanic Black

.02
(.10)
[.00]

.02
(.10)
[.00]

.02
(.10)
[.00]

-.14
(.23)
[-.02]

-.15
(.22)
[-.02]

-.15
(.22)
[-.02]

Mother Hispanic

.07
(.11)
[.02]

.08
(.10)
[.02]

.07
(.10)
[.02]

-.16
(.21)
[-.02]

-.14
(.21)
[-.02]

-.14
(.21)
[-.01]

Mother Other Race/Ethnicity

-.20
(.37)
[-.04]

-.19
(.38)
[-.03]

-.19
(.37)
[-.04]

.09
(.25)
[.01]

.10
(.22)
[.01]

.15
(.24)
[.02]

Number of Previous
Pregnancies

-.08
(.12)
[-.02]

-.08
(.12)
[-.02]

-.08
(.12)
[-.02]

-.22
(.20)
[-.03]

-.23
(.19)
[-.03]

-.21
(.20)
[-.02]

Age Difference in Years
(Father Minus Mother)

.00
(.01)
[.00]

.00
(.01)
[.00]

.00
(.01)
[.00]

-.02
(.01)
[-.00]

-.02
(.02)
[-.00]

-.02
(.02)
[-.00]

Father Different
Race/Ethnicity Than Mother

.12
(.10)
[.02]

.12
(.10)
[.03]

.11
(.10)
[.02]

.22
(.23)
[.03]

.19
(.24)
[.02]

.21
(.24)
[.03]

Father Less Educated Than
Mother

.21*
(.12)
[.05]

.20
(.12)
[.04]

.21*
(.12)
[.05]

.25
(.20)
[.03]

.26
(.20)
[.03]

.25
(.21)
[.03]

Father Served in Military

-.29*
(.17)
[-.05]

-.29*
(.17)
[-.05]

-.29*
(.17)
[-.05]

-.35
(.24)
[-.03]

-.37
-.37
(.24)
(.24)
[-.03]
[-.03]
Continued on next page

38

Table 3 (cont’d)
Child Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Child Had Private Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Father Employed at Baseline

-.02
(.09)
[-.00]

-.03
(.09)
[-.01]

-.02
(.09)
[-.00]

.04
(.24)
[.00]

.01
(.22)
[.00]

.02
(.22)
[.00]

Father Did Not Complete
Baseline Interview

-.15
(.11)
[-.03]

-.15
(.11)
[-.03]

-.15
(.11)
[-.03]

-.13
(.27)
[-.01]

-.10
(.29)
[-.01]

-.15
(.28)
[-.01]

% Below Poverty in Mother’s
Census Tract

-.40
(.29)
[-.08]

-.41
(.30)
[-.09]

-.40
(.30)
[-.08]

.19
(.81)
[.02]

.10
(.82)
[.01]

.16
(.81)
[.02]

Mother (but not father) is
Immigrant

.16
(.17)
[.04]

.17
(.18)
[.04]

.16
(.18)
[.04]

.15
(.48)
[.02]

.19
(.50)
[.02]

.17
(.50)
[.02]

Both Parents are Immigrants

.22**
(.09)
[.05]

.23**
(.09)
[.05]

.22**
(.10)
[.05]

.32
(.20)
[.05]

.35*
(.19)
[.05]

.34*
(.20)
[.05]

N

1593

1593

1593

775

798

798

.08

.08

.08

.15

.15

.16

Pseudo R2

Notes:
Ten observations were lost due to collinearity.
Sample sizes precluded using severe infant health condition as the measure of poor child health when estimating
insurance loss among children whose births were covered by private insurance.
*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level

39

Table 4: Mother’s Loss of Insurance
Mother Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]
Severe Infant Health
Condition

-.01
(.18)
[-.00]

Low Birth Weight

Mother Had Private Insurance
at Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]
-.44
(.36)
[-.06]

.12
(.09)
[.05]

Any Infant Health Condition

-.15
(.21)
[-.02]
.05
(.09)
[.02]

-.13
(.11)
[-.02]

Male Child

-.09
(.07)
[-.03]

-.09
(.07)
[-.03]

-.10
(.07)
[-.04]

.18*
(.10)
[.03]

.18*
(.10)
[.03]

.18*
(.10)
[.03]

Maternal Physical Health
Problem

-.18*
(.11)
[-.07]

-.19*
(.11)
[-.07]

-.19*
(.11)
[-.07]

.11
(.14)
[.02]

.10
(.14)
[.02]

.09
(.15)
[.02]

Maternal History of Mental
Illness

.23**
(.10)
[.09]

.22**
(.10)
[.08]

.23**
(.10)
[.09]

-.18
(.32)
[-.03]

-.17
(.31)
[-.03]

-.18
(.32)
[-.03]

Father’s Self-Reported
Suboptimal Health

.01
(.09)
[.00]

.01
(.09)
[.00]

.01
(.09)
[.00]

.29***
(.11)
[.06]

.28***
(.10)
[.06]

.28***
(.10)
[.06]

Father’s Depression score
(CES-D)

-.01
(.01)
[-.00]

-.01
(.01)
[-.00]

-.01
(.01)
[-.00]

-.01
(.05)
[-.00]

-.01
(.05)
[-.00]

-.01
(.05)
[-.00]

Father had Health Insurance
from Last Employer

-.10*
(.06)
[-.04]

-.10*
(.06)
[-.04]

-.11*
(.06)
[-.04]

-.40***
(.14)
[-.08]

-.39***
(.14)
[-.08]

-.40***
(.14)
[-.08]

Cohabiting at Baseline

.12
(.14)
[.04]

.12
(.14)
[.04]

.12
(.14)
[.04]

.43**
(.20)
[.09]

.43**
.43**
(.20)
(.20)
[.09]
[.09]
Continued on next page

40

Table 4 (cont’d)
Mother Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Mother Had Private Insurance
at Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Not Cohabiting

.03
(.16)
[.01]

.02
(.16)
[.01]

.02
(.16)
[.01]

.11
(.29)
[.02]

.11
(.30)
[.02]

.12
(.29)
[.02]

Mother Knew Father at Least
12 Months

-.02
(.08)
[-.01]

-.02
(.08)
[-.01]

-.02
(.08)
[-.01]

.20
(.20)
[.03]

.19
(.19)
[.03]

.20
(.19)
[.03]

Parents Have Other Children
Together

-.05
(.08)
[-.02]

-.05
(.08)
[-.02]

-.05
(.08)
[-.02]

-.16
(.20)
[-.03]

-.16
(.20)
[-.03]

-.16
(.20)
[-.03]

Mother has Children with
Other Partner

-.16*
(.08)
[-.06]

-.16*
(.09)
[-.06]

-.16*
(.09)
[-.06]

-.15
(.27)
[-.03]

-.15
(.27)
[-.03]

-.15
(.27)
[-.03]

Father has Children with
Other Partner

-.13*
(.07)
[-.05]

-.14*
(.07)
[-.05]

-.13*
(.08)
[-.05]

-.08
(.16)
[-.01]

-.07
(.16)
[-.01]

-.08
(.16)
[-.01]

Father Visited in Hospital

.12
(.10)
[.04]

.11
(.10)
[.04]

.12
(.10)
[.04]

.06
(.24)
[.01]

.07
(.24)
[.01]

.07
(.24)
[.01]

Mother’s Age

.04
(.05)
[.01]

.04
(.05)
[.02]

.04
(.05)
[.01]

-.04
(.14)
[-.01]

-.05
(.14)
[-.01]

-.04
(.14)
[-.01]

Mother’s Age Squared

-.00
(.00)
[-.00]

-.00
(.00)
[-.00]

-.00
(.00)
[-.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

.00
(.00)
[.00]

Mother is High School
Graduate

-.17**
(.08)
[-.06]

-.17**
(.08)
[-.06]

-.17**
(.08)
[-.06]

-.02
(.22)
[-.00]

-.02
(.23)
[-.00]

-.03
(.22)
[-.01]

Mother has Some College But
Not Graduate

-.07
(.13)
[-.03]

-.07
(.13)
[-.02]

-.07
(.13)
[-.03]

-.37
(.26)
[-.06]

-.36
-.37
(.25)
(.25)
[-.06]
[-.06]
Continued on next page

41

Table 4 (cont’d)
Mother Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]
Mother is College Graduate

Mother Had Private Insurance
at Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

-.79***
(.28)
[-.23]

-.79***
(.28)
[-.23]

-.80***
(.28)
[-.24]

-.63**
(.25)
[-.09]

-.62**
(.26)
[-.09]

-.63**
(.25)
[-.09]

Mother Worked in Past 2
years

.07
(.10)
[.03]

.08
(.10)
[.03]

.08
(.10)
[.03]

-.13
(.17)
[-.02]

-.12
(.18)
[-.02]

-.12
(.18)
[-.02]

Mother Non-Hispanic Black

-.10
(.10)
[-.04]

-.10
(.10)
[-.04]

-.10
(.10)
[-.04]

-.16
(.15)
[-.03]

-.17
(.15)
[-.03]

-.17
(.15)
[-.03]

Mother Hispanic

.28**
(.12)
[.11]

.29**
(.13)
[.11]

.28**
(.13)
[.11]

.28
(.19)
[.06]

.28
(.19)
[.05]

.28
(.20)
[.06]

Mother Other Race/Ethnicity

-.25
(.20)
[-.09]

-.24
(.20)
[-.09]

-.24
(.20)
[-.09]

-.35
(.32)
[-.05]

-.35
(.30)
[-.05]

-.33
(.30)
[-.05]

Number of Previous
Pregnancies

-.07
(.08)
[-.03]

-.07
(.09)
[-.02]

-.07
(.09)
[-.02]

.11
(.17)
[.02]

.11
(.17)
[.02]

.11
(.17)
[.02]

Age Difference in Years
(Father Minus Mother)

.01*
(.01)
[.00]

.01*
(.01)
[.00]

.01*
(.01)
[.00]

-.01
(.01)
[-.00]

-.02
(.01)
[-.00]

-.02
(.01)
[-.00]

Father Different
Race/Ethnicity Than Mother

-.00
(.07)
[-.00]

.00
(.07)
[.00]

-.00
(.07)
[-.00]

.09
(.18)
[.02]

.08
(.19)
[.01]

.08
(.19)
[.02]

Father Less Educated Than
Mother

.18**
(.08)
[.07]

.17**
(.08)
[.07]

.18**
(.08)
[.07]

.28
(.21)
[.05]

.28
(.21)
[.05]

.28
(.21)
[.05]

Father Served in Military

-.08
(.17)
[-.03]

-.08
(.16)
[-.03]

-.08
(.16)
[-.03]

.09
(.15)
[.02]

.09
.09
(.15)
(.16)
[.02]
[.02]
Continued on next page

42

Table 4 (cont’d)
Mother Had Public Insurance at
Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect]

Mother Had Private Insurance
at Baseline
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
[Marginal Effect

Father Employed at Baseline

.02
(.07)
[.01]

.02
(.07)
[.01]

.02
(.07)
[.01]

-.17
(.16)
[-.03]

-.18
(.16)
[-.04]

-.17
(.16)
[-.03]

Father Did Not Complete
Baseline Interview

-.09
(.12)
[-.03]

-.08
(.12)
[-.03]

-.09
(.12)
[-.03]

-.08
(.22)
[-.01]

-.08
(.22)
[-.01]

-.10
(.22)
[-.02]

% Below Poverty in Mother’s
Census Tract

-.53**
(.25)
[-.20]

-.53**
(.24)
[-.20]

-.53**
(.25)
[-.20]

.86*
(.48)
[.15]

.84*
(.47)
[.15]

.84*
(.47)
[.15]

Mother (but not father) is
Immigrant

.40**
(.19)
[.15]

.40**
(.19)
[.16]

.40**
(.18)
[.16]

.29
(.36)
[.06]

.32
(.35)
[.07]

.30
(.35)
[.06]

Both Parents are Immigrants

.59**
(.24)
[.23]

.59**
(.24)
[.23]

.58**
(.24)
[.23]

.25
(.23)
[.05]

.26
(.23)
[.05]

.26
(.23)
[.05]

N

1602

1602

1602

801

801

801

.12

.12

.12

.16

.16

.16

Pseudo R2

*** significant at 1% level; ** significant at 5% level; * significant at 10% level

43

