NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY, INFORMATION AND THE
DECENTRALIZATION OF THE FIRM
Daron Acemoglu
Philippe Aghion
Claire Lelarge
John Van Reenen
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Working Paper 12206
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12206
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006

We thank participants at seminars in CREST, CEPR (Paris), CIAR, Harvard-MIT, and Toronto for helpful
comments. Van Reenen would like to thank the ESRC for help with financing this research at the Centre for
Economic Performance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm
Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge, John Van Reenen and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 12206
April 2006
JEL No. O31, O32, O33, F23
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a framework to analyze the relationship between the diffusion of new
technologies and the decentralization decisions of firms. Centralized control relies on the
information of the principal, which we equate with publicly available information. However, the
manager can use her informational advantage to make choices that are not in the best interest of the
principal. As the available public information about the specific technology increases, the trade-off
shifts in favor of centralization. We show that firms closer to the technological frontier, firms in
more heterogeneous environments and younger firms are more likely to choose decentralization.
Using three datasets of French and British firms in the 1990s we report robust correlations consistent
with these predictions.
Daron Acemoglu
MIT Department of Economics
E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Claire Lelarge
National Institute of Statistics and Economic
Studies
Direction des Études et Synthèses
Économiques
15 Boulevard Gabriel Peri
92244 Malakoff Cedex,
FRANCE

John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE 10691Stockholm
SWEDEN

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed increasing interest in the determinants of firms’ organizational
choices. This interest is partly motivated by the belief that recent technological developments
are favoring more decentralized firms. Summarizing the conventional wisdom, Business Week
wrote: “Globalization and the arrival of the information economy have rapidly demolished all
the old precepts. The management of global companies, which must innovate simultaneously
and speed information through horizontal globe-spanning networks, has become a daunting
challenge. Old, rigid hierarchies are out ....”.1 Despite this interest, there is limited work on
the determinants of the decentralization decisions of firms.
This paper undertakes a theoretical and empirical investigation of how the allocation of
authority within firms changes as the information structure in an industry evolves. We develop a simple model where firms make choices under incomplete information regarding the
(correct, most productive) implementation of new technologies. Different organizational forms
are distinguished by the amount of information they use in these decisions. As in Aghion and
Tirole (1997), centralized control relies more on the information of the principal, which we
equate with publicly available information, especially concerning past implementations of the
same or similar technologies. Decentralized control delegates authority to a specialized agent
(manager), who potentially possesses more information than available in the public history.
However, because the interests of the principal and the manager are not perfectly aligned, the
agent can also use her informational advantage to make choices that are not in the best interest
of the principal. This trade-off determines the optimal degree of decentralization. The main
focus of our analysis is how learning from the experiences of other firms changes this tradeoff. In particular, as the available public information about the specific technology increases,
the trade-off shifts in favor of centralization. In contrast, when dealing with new technologies
decentralization may be preferable.
Using this basic framework we derive three sets of empirical predictions:
1. Firms closer to the technological frontier are more likely to choose decentralization, because they are dealing with new technologies about which there is only limited information in the public history.
1

Business Week The 21st Century Corporation, cover story August 21-28, 2000.

1

2. Firms in more heterogeneous environments are more likely to be decentralized, because
learning from the experience of others is more difficult.
3. Young firms, that have had a limited history to learn about their own specific needs, are
also more likely to be decentralized than older firms.
The bulk of the paper investigates these predictions using two large datasets of French firms
and establishments and one smaller set of British establishments in the 1990s. We document
a number of conditional correlations that are consistent with the predictions of the theory.
Specifically, we find that firms closer to the technology frontier of their industry and younger
firms are more likely to choose decentralize.
We also document that there is a significant relationship between heterogeneity and decentralization, which is a distinctive prediction of our approach. Our main measure of heterogeneity is the variation in firm-level productivity growth within a four-digit sector. We
also consider alternative measures such as the IT weighted “distance” between the product
mix of a firm and those by other firms in the sample. The results suggest that firms in more
heterogeneous environments are more likely to choose decentralization.
In addition, since our theoretical approach emphasizes the importance of learning about the
implementation of new technologies, we also look at high-tech industries separately. Consistent
with our theoretical approach, we find that the relationship between heterogeneity or distance
to frontier and decentralization is stronger in high-tech than in low-tech industries.
While most of the empirical results in the paper should be interpreted as correlations,
the predictions of our theoretical approach concern the causal effect of heterogeneity and
distance to frontier on decentralization. To remove some of the most obvious sources of omitted
variable biases and reverse causality, we present instrumental variable estimates on the French
data using matched industry information from the UK over the same time period. These
instrumental variable estimates largely support the baseline results that treat heterogeneity
and distance to the frontier as exogenous.
Our main measure of decentralization is whether different units of the firm are organized
into “profit centers” (see below for further discussion). We show that our results on heterogeneity and distance to frontier are robust to using alternative measures of decentralization,
including measures of delayering and managerial autonomy in investment decisions (the age
results are somewhat weaker with some of these alternative measures).
Finally, we further substantiate the results using a smaller dataset of British firms, with
similar questions on decentralization. The estimates from the British dataset also show similar
2

patterns.
On the theoretical side, our paper is most closely related to the literature on the costs and
benefits of delegation or decentralization in firms. A first strand in that literature, for example
Baron and Besanko (1992) and Melumad, Mookherjee and Reichelstein (1995), investigated
the conditions for delegated contracting to replicate the constrained efficient contracting. As
emphasized by Mookherjee (2005), however, the presence of complete contracts in these models
implies that delegation can at best replicate the constrained efficient allocation, which is also
achievable by centralized contracting. A second strand emphasizes information processing and
communication costs as determinants of centralization or decentralization in firms. Key papers
in this strand include Sah and Stiglitz (1986), Geanakoplos and Milgrom (1991), Radner (1992,
1993), Radner and Van Zandt (1992), Bolton and Dewatripont (1994), and Garicano (2000).
Although we also emphasize the importance of information and learning, our approach is
different, since it focuses on the effect of information on the relationship between the principal
and the agent, and how much autonomy the principal would like to grant to the agent. Closer to
the model in our paper are the recent papers emphasizing the trade-off between loss of control
and better information under decentralization—in particular, Aghion and Tirole (1997), Baker,
Gibbons and Murphy (1999), Rajan and Zingales (2001), Dessein (2002), and Hart and Moore
(2005).2 The main differences between these papers and ours are twofold: first, because there
are no incentive effects of the form of the organization, our framework is significantly simpler
and allows us to focus on the basic trade-off between information and loss of control; second;
we allow the principal to learn from other firms’ or from their own past experience, which is
the source of all the comparative static results we investigate in the empirical work.3
The main contribution of our paper is the empirical evidence we provide on the determinants
of decentralization. The existing empirical literature on the subject focuses on the general move
towards “flatter” organizations.4 Rajan and Wulf (2005) provide the most systematic statistical
2

Aghion and Tirole (1997) emphasize the trade-off between loss of control and the agent’s ex ante incentives
to acquire information under decentralization. Hart and Moore (2005) show how the trade-off between loss of
control and information can explain why in many hierarchies generalists command specialists. Dessein (2002)
develops a model in which decentralization to the agent entails a loss of control for the principal, but at the
same time reduces the agent’s incentive to miscommunicate her information to the principal.
3
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1999) present a different model where endogenous accumulation of information
affects the internal organization of firms. In their model, a larger number of firms in the economy enables better
relative performance of evaluation and creates a shift from direct to indirect monitoring. The number of firms
in the economy is, in turn, determined endogenously as a function of the stage of development and the level of
the capital stock.
4
This phenomenon is described by different terms in different contexts, including decentralization, delayering
and delegation. In the theory, consistent with the principal-agent literature, we use the term “delegation”, while
in the empirical analysis, we adopt the terms used in the datasets, namely “decentralization” in the first dataset
and “delayering” in the second.

3

description of recent organizational trends, showing a strong movement towards flatter corporations in the United States between 1986 and 1999. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002)
and Caroli and Van Reenen (2001) report a positive association between various measures of
decentralization and organizational change on the one hand and information technology (and
human capital) on the other. Baker and Hubbard (2003, 2004) document the effect of new
technologies (on-board computers) on ownership patterns in the US trucking industry. In addition, Colombo and Delmastro (2004) present empirical models of decentralization in Italian
manufacturing plants, Lerner and Merges (1998) examine the allocation of control rights in
biotechnology alliances, and Black and Lynch (2001), Ichinowski et al (1997) and Janod and
Saint-Martin (2004) examine the impact of human resource practices and firm reorganization
on productivity. None of these papers investigate the relationship between decentralization (or
more generally organizational change) and distance to frontier or heterogeneity.
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some preliminary
data description to motivate the basic theoretical framework, which is presented in Section 3.
Section 4 describes our main econometric specifications and data. Section 5 presents the
empirical results. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains the proofs from Section 3, while
Appendices B and C contain additional data description and robustness checks.

2

Basic Patterns

To motivate our focus in the paper and the theory, we first present some salient patterns from a
database of several thousand French manufacturing firms, the “Changements Organisationnels
et Informatisation” (COI). This dataset, as well as another French dataset (Enquête Reponse)
covering manufacturing and non-manufacturing establishments and a similar British dataset
(the Workplace Employee Relations Survey), will be described below. For now, it suffices to
note that our key indicator for decentralization from the COI is whether a firm is organized
primarily into profit centers or whether it is more centrally controlled with divisions organized
as a cost or production centers. A manager of a profit center is concerned with all aspects
of the business that contribute to profitability. Managers in charge of production centers
focus on output targets and managers of costs centers target costs. When a firm organizes its
divisions into profit centers, it has delegated substantially more authority to its managers (see
the discussion in Section 4).
Figures 1-3 show the proportion of over 3,570 firms that are decentralized into profit centers
broken down by various firm characteristics. Figure 1 divides firms into deciles depending on
the “heterogeneity” of the firm’s environment. Heterogeneity is measured as the dispersion in
4

firm productivity growth rates in each four-digit industry. Productivity growth is measured as
the growth in value added per hour and the dispersion measure is the inter-decile range (i.e.,
the difference between log productivity growth at the 90th and that at the 10th percentiles,
see equation (11) below). This variable and its construction are discussed in greater detail in
Section 4.
Figure 1 shows a general increase in the probability of decentralization as we move from
the firms in the least heterogeneous industries (in the second decile 22% of the firms are decentralized) to the most heterogeneous industries (in the tenth decile 41% of the firms are
decentralized). The first decile is somewhat anomalous, but closer investigation shows a disproportionately large number of less productive and older firms in these sectors, aspects which
we now turn to.
Figure 2 plots the fraction of firms decentralized into profit centers against the “proximity
to the frontier” (measured as the ratio of the firm’s value added per hour to the value added
per hour of the firm at the 99th percentile of the distribution in the same four-digit industry).
27% of the firms in the bottom quintile of the proximity distribution (i.e., those who are most
distant from the frontier) are decentralized, while 38% of the firms in the top quintile are
decentralized (i.e., those who are closest to the frontier).
Finally, Figure 3 depicts the relationship between decentralization and firm age and shows
that younger firms are, on average, more decentralized than older firms: about 45% of the
firms under the age of five years are decentralized compared to a rate of 30% for the older
firms.
These correlations therefore suggest that firms that operate in more heterogeneous environments, that are closer to the technological frontier, and that are younger are more likely
to be decentralized. While these patterns may be consistent with a variety of different approaches, they are also indicative of a relationship between information and decentralization.
We expect firms in more heterogeneous environments, those closer to the technology frontier
and younger firms to face greater uncertainty regarding the optimal implementation of new
technologies than firms that are in more homogeneous environments, farther from the frontier and more experienced. This motivates our simple theoretical approach emphasizing the
relationship between learning and decentralization, which is presented in the next section.

3

Theory

In this section, we describe the theory and derive some testable implications.

5

3.1

Environment

The economy is populated by a set F of firms. Time is discrete. New technologies k = 1, 2, ...
become available sequentially and randomly to firms. As a new opportunity of technology
adoption materializes, firms must choose the form of its implementation. In each period, one
(and only one) new technology becomes available to the firm i ∈ F with positive probability
pi ∈ (0, 1]. The speed at which new opportunities become available can differ across firms,
and pi measures the speed at which firm i climbs the technology ladder. The realizations of
technological opportunities are independent across firms and over time.
Each technology can be implemented successfully or unsuccessfully. The successful implementation of a technology increases the firm’s productivity by a factor γ > 1, while unsuccessful
implementation leaves the productivity of the firm unchanged. So the law of motion of firm
i’s productivity is given by
yi,t = γ Si (t) yi,t−1 ,

(1)

where yi,t is the productivity (and revenue) of the firm at time t and Si (t) is an indicator
function taking the value 1 if a technological opportunity arises for firm i at time t and is
successfully implemented, and zero otherwise. Whether the technology is successful or not
depends on an action taken by the firm, which we denote by xi,k,t ∈ {L, R, ∅}, with xi,k,t = ∅
standing for not attempting the technology, and L and R denoting two alternative ways of
implementing the new technology, or two “actions”. We will see below that the firm will never
choose xi,k,t = ∅, so the relevant choice is between L and R. One of these two actions, denoted
by x∗i,k ∈ {L, R}, leads to successful implementation, while the other leads to an unsuccessful
outcome. We will refer to the action leading to successful implementation as the correct action.
We model the correct action as follows: for each technology k there exists a reference action
x∗k ∈ {L, R}, and the right action for firm i is given by
½
x∗k
with probability 1 − ε
∗
xi,k =
,
∼ x∗k
with probability ε

(2)

where x∗i,k denotes the correct action for firm i in implementing technology k and ∼ x∗k denotes
“not x∗k ” (i.e., if x∗k = L, then ∼ x∗k = R) and ε < 1/2. We further assume that conditional
on x∗ , x∗ and x∗i0 ,k for any i 6= i0 are independent, or stated alternatively, the sequence
n ko i,k
x∗i,k
is exchangeable in the sense that any permutation of this sequence is equally likely
i∈F
n
o
(see Billingsley, 1995). This implies that x∗i,k
is a Bernoulli sequence with a parameter of
i∈F

1 − ε or ε (depending on whether x∗k = L or R). We also assume that
1
Pr (x∗k = L) = q0 = .
2
6

This specification implies that there is a generally correct way of implementing each technology, given by the reference action, but idiosyncratic differences between firms’s needs and
competencies may imply that some firms need to take a different action in order to be successful with this technology. Equation (2) makes it clear that ε is a measure of the heterogeneity
among firms. When ε is close to zero, the reference action is the correct action for almost all
firms, while when ε is close to 1/2, the correct action differs substantially across firms.
Finally, each firm is owned by a principal, who maximizes the present discounted value
(PDV) of profits, with discount factor β ∈ (0, 1), conditional on information, ht , and their
initial productivity, yi,t−1 < ∞. For now, we ignore any costs on the side of firms, so profits
are equal to revenue (productivity), and therefore the objective function of firm i is given by


∞
X
¡
¢
V yi,t−1 , ht = E 
β j yi,t+j | ht  .
(3)
j=0

¡
¢
We assume that β < γ −1 so that the firm’s value V yi,t−1 , ht always remains finite.
The above specification makes it clear that it is always advantageous for the firm to implement a technology whenever it becomes available, so we can restrict attention to xi,k,t ∈
{L, R}.5 Consequently, a firm’s productivity and value will depend on how many technologies have become available in the past to this firm and how successful the firm has been in
implementing them.
Success in the implementation of technologies depends on the organization of the firm. The
two alternative organizational forms available to each firm are: centralization and delegation.
In the first, the principal (owner) manages the firm and chooses the action xi,k , while in the
second, the action choice is delegated to a manager.
The principal has no special skills in identifying the right action, so she bases her decision on
the publicly available information ht . Without loss of any generality, for the decision regarding
technology k, we can restrict attention to the history that is payoff relevant to technology k.
Moreover, throughout we will focus on a (representative) firm i that has access to technology
k at time t. In this case, with a slight abuse of terminology, we will refer to the payoff-relevant
history for the implementation of technology k as a history hik . As shown more formally
in subsection 3.3 below, under centralization the principal will choose xi,t,k = L when the
posterior that x∗k = L given history hik ,
¡ ¢
¡
¢
q hik = Pr x∗k = L | hik
5

By delaying the implementation of technology k available at date t, the firm may obtain more information
about this technology, but by assumption, it will never have an opportunity to adopt this technology again.
Instead, at t + 1, technology k + 1 would become available to firm i with probability pi .

7

is greater than 1/2. We discuss the derivation of this posterior further below.
In contrast to the principal, we assume that the manager observes x∗i,k , so that he knows
exactly which action will lead to successful implementation. However, the manager of firm i
may have interests that are not aligned with those of the owner. Following Aghion and Tirole
(1997), we model this in a reduced form way, and assume that the most preferred action for
technology k of the manager is given by
½
x∗i,k
with probability δ
∗
zi,k =
∼ x∗i,k with probability 1 − δ

(4)

∗ ,
where δ measures the congruence between the firm’s and the manager’s objectives. If xi,k = zi,k

the manager obtains a private benefit Byi,t−1 . Notice that equation (4) implies that the
manager is informed about the right action for this particular firm, not (or not simply) the
right reference action.
We introduce a number of simplifying assumptions, which enable us to focus on the main
effects we would like to highlight. First, we assume that the relationship between the firm
and each manager is short-term (for example, because the manager has special skills which are
useful with a specific vintage of technology). Second, managers have zero outside option, are
credit-constrained and cannot compensate principals for the private benefit they receive from
choosing their preferred action. This assumption also implies that whether the firm delegates
control when there is no new technology to be implemented is of no consequence. Finally, we
assume that B is sufficiently large that it is not profitable for the principal to use an incentive
contract to induce the manager to take the right action, and given this large private benefit,
the principal also need not make any additional payments to the manager (this assumption is
relaxed in Appendix A). Consequently, delegation implies that the action most preferred by
∗ .6
the manager will be chosen, i.e., if there is delegation, then xi,k = zi,k

Finally, we impose:
Assumption 1
δ ∈ (1/2, 1 − ε) .
The first part of the assumption, δ > 1/2, means that the manager’s interests are more
likely to be aligned with that of the principal than otherwise, so that delegation improves the
6

Put differently, in this model the choice between centralization and delegation simply corresponds to whether
the “advice” or information of the manager is followed or not. In particular, all the results would be identical if we
imagined a different game form in which the manager reports his recommendation and then the principal decides
which action to take. In this different game form, the equilibrium would be identical to the one we consider
here, and “delegation” would correspond to the principal following the recommendation of the manager.

8

firm’s decision-making relative to the principal deciding without any information. The second
part, δ < 1 − ε, implies that the conflict of interest between the principal and the manager is
sufficiently severe that a principal who knows the reference action is more likely to make the
correct choice herself than the manager. This assumption generates an interesting trade-off
between the two organizational forms.

3.2

Organizational Choice

We denote by di,k ∈ {0, 1} the organization of firm i facing an opportunity to implement
technology k. Throughout, we suppress time dependence whenever this causes no confusion.
Here di,k = 0 stands for centralization and di,k = 1 for delegation. Both choices (organization
and action) depend on the available stock of public information that is relevant for the firm to
infer the reference action for technology k.
We assume that all actions by other firms in the past are publicly observable. This implies
that history hik includes all previous attempts with technology k, which actions were chosen and
whether they led to successful implementation. Since conditional on x∗k the success or failure
of different firms in the past are independent, all payoff relevant information is summarized by
two integers: the number of firms that have attempted to implement this technology before
firm i denoted by nik , and the number of firms for whom L turned out the profitable action,
denoted by ñik ≤ nik .7
The first important point to note is that nik is a direct measure of distance to the technology
frontier.8 If nik is high, it means that by the time firm i is considering the implementation
of technology k that many other firms have already implemented it.9 Therefore, comparative
statics with respect to nik will give us predictions regarding the effect of the distance to the
technology frontier.
The second important point is that since ñik is the number of successes out of nik in a
Bernoulli trial, the payoff-relevant public information for firm i implementing technology k is
©
ª
simply hik = nik , ñik . Since the choice of organization depends on the public information, we
¡ ¢
denote the optimal organization choice as di,k = d hik .
7

Note that ñik is the sum of the number of firms that have adopted technology k before i and chose xi0 ,k = L
and were successful plus the number of firms that chose xi0 ,k = R and were unsuccessful. The public information
set also includes the organizational form chosen by firms that have previously adopted technology k, but equation
(4) implies that ñik is a sufficient statistic for this information.
8
In the theory section, we state the results in terms of “distance to the technology frontier,” while in the
empirical work it will be more convenient to use an inverse measure, “proximity to the frontier”.
9
This, in turn, is more likely when the probability pi that firm i will have access to the next previouslyunavailable technology is relatively small. It is thus straightforward to see that E(nik,t | pi ) is a decreasing
function of pi for given t.

9

With this specification, an optimal strategy for each firm is straightforward to specify.
Given an opportunity to implement technology k, the firm will decide an organization di,k ∈
{0, 1} and an action xi,k ∈ {L, R} as functions of history hik so as to maximize (3), with the
understanding that if di,k = 1, the action will be chosen by the manager. More formally, let
Hkt be the set of all possible histories at time t regarding technology k. Then a strategy for the
© ª
firm is s = stk t,k where stk : Hkt → {0, 1} × {L, R}, i.e., for every possible history at time t
for any technology k that could be available to the firm, an optimal strategy specifies whether
the principal will delegate control to a manager, and if she does not do so, what action she will
take. Let the set of all such strategies be denoted by S. An optimal strategy is s∗ ∈ S that
maximizes (3).

3.3

Analysis

¡
¢
Let π di,k ; hik denote the posterior probability that the firm chooses the correct action conditional on the history hik and the organizational form di,k . We start our analysis by comparing
¡
¢
π di,k ; hik under the two organizational forms, delegation and centralization (Lemmas 1 and
2). Next we show that profit-maxizing firms always choose the organization form that maxi¡
¢
mizes π di,k ; hik (Lemma 3). Finally, we turn to the main testable implications of the theory,
linking distance to frontier (nik ) and heterogeneity (ε) to the probability that firms choose
either delegation or centralization (Propositions 1 and 2).
When the principal delegates the implementation of a new technology to an informed
manager, the probability of success is constant and equal to δ, i.e.,
¢
¡
π 1; hik = δ.

(5)

If, on the other hand, the principal retains authority, the probability of success is a stochastic
variable that depends on hik , thus both on the firm’s distance to the frontier, nik , and on the
experiences of firms further ahead, captured by the number of firms ñik out of nik for whom L
¢
¡
was the right action. The following lemma provides the expression for π 0; hik .
Lemma 1 Given a history hik , the probability of success for a principal who retains authority
is

where



¡
¢
π 0; hik =

¡ ¢
q hik =

¡ ¢
ε + q hik (1 − 2ε)

¡ ¢
if q hik ≥ 1/2

¡
¡ ¢¢
ε + 1 − q hik (1 − 2ε)

¡ ¢
if q hik < 1/2.

i

i

i

(1 − ε)ñk εnk −ñk
ñik

(1 − ε) ε

nik −ñik

nik −ñik

+ (1 − ε)
10

ñik

ε

=
1+

1
¡ 1−ε ¢nik −2ñik
ε

(6)

(7)

is the posterior probability that the right choice is L.

The proofs of this and the following lemmas are provided in Appendix A. To understand the
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
expression of π 0; hik , note that the principal chooses L if q hik ≥ 1/2 and R if q hik ≤ 1/2.
¡ ¢
The first row of (6) gives then the probability that, when q hik ≥ 1/2, the firm correctly infers
that the reference action is L and the reference action coincides with the correct action. The
¡ ¢
second row gives the probability that, when q hik < 1/2, the firm incorrectly infers that the
reference action is R and the reference action does not coincide with the correct action (hence,
due to a double mistake, the firms makes the successful adoption).
¡ ¢
The expression of q hik in (7) follows from the Bayes’ rule, given the Bernoulli assumption
¡ ¢
and q0 = 1/2.10 q hik is a random variable that depends on the realization of the stochastic
vector hik . Since hik consists of a deterministic component, nik , and a stochastic one, ñik , we
¡ ¢
¡
¢
can determine the first moment of q hik conditional on the sample size nik , E qki |nik , where
expectation is taken over possible realizations of ñik .
The following lemma establishes how this conditional expectation changes with nik and the
¡ ¢
limiting behavior of q hik . In the rest of the analysis, without loss of any generality, we assume
that x∗k = L.
¡
¢
¡ ¢
Lemma 2 Let E qki |nik denote the expectation of q hik conditional on sample size nik and
¡
¢
suppose that x∗k = L. Then E qki |nik is an increasing function of nik . Moreover,
¡
©
ª¢
p limni −→∞ q hik = nik , ñik = 1.
k

Lemma 2 establishes the intuitive result that, as the history relevant to technology k expands, the principal learns the reference action x∗k with increasing precision.
Next, we establish that profit-maximizing firms always choose the organization form which
¡
¢
maximizes π di,k ; hik . Although firms have a dynamic objective function, given by (3), the
maximization program is equivalent to a sequence of static problems. Intuitively, the current
organization choice only affects the PDV of the firm via its effect on current productivity, yi,t ,
so the optimal strategy simply maximizes the probability of successful implementation of new
technologies in each period.
Lemma 3 A firm i maximizing (3) chooses, for all technologies k,
¡ ¢
¡
¢
d∗i,k hik ∈ {0, 1} = arg max π di,k ; hik .
di,k

10



Note that, since ε ∈ (0, 1/2), q hik > 1/2 whenever ñik > nik /2, and q hik < 1/2 whenever ñik < nik /2.

11

¡ ¢
¡
¢
In particular, given history hik , firm i will choose d∗i,k hik = 1 (delegation) if π 0; hik < δ,
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
and d∗i,k hik = 0 (centralization) if π 0; hik > δ, where π 0; hik is given by (6).
Lemmas 1, 2 and 3 enable us to characterize how the organizational form changes with
distance to frontier, nik , and heterogeneity, ε. Consider, first, distance to frontier. Suppose, in
particular, that a firm is at the technology frontier, so that it is the first firm implementing
¢
¡ ¢
¡
technology k. In this case, nik = 0, and so q hik = 1/2 and π 0; hik = q0 = 1/2 < δ. Thus,
¡ ¢
when no public information is available, the firm will choose delegation, d∗i,k hik = 1. Next,
consider the other extreme where the firm is far behind the technology frontier, so that many
other firms have implemented the same technology before. In this case, we have nik → ∞
¡ ¢
¡
¢
and p limni −→∞ q hik = 1 from Lemma 2. Equation (6) then implies p limni −→∞ π 0, hik =
k

k

1 − ε > δ, where the inequality follows from Assumption 1. Hence, the firm will (almost surely)
¡ ¢
choose centralization, d∗i,k hik = 0. This discussion establishes the following proposition:
Proposition 1 (Distance to Frontier) Consider the adoption decision of technology k by
firm i, and suppose that Assumption 1 holds and x∗k = L. Then:

¡ ¢
(i) For a firm at the frontier, i.e., nik = 0, the principal chooses delegation, d∗i,k hik = 1.

(ii) For a firm sufficiently far from the frontier, i.e., nik → ∞ , the principal chooses almost
¡
©
ª¢
surely centralization, i.e., p limni −→∞ d∗i,k hik = nik , ñik = 0.
k

¢
¡
From this proposition and the fact that, E qki |nik is increasing in nik (Lemma 2), one might
expect a more general result, such that as distance to frontier nik increases, decentralization
becomes more likely. Unfortunately, though intuitive, this result is not correct because of
integer issues. To illustrate the problem, consider Figure 4, which plots the probability of
centralization as a function of nik from an example with δ = 0.65 and ε = 0.3. As implied
by Proposition 1, delegation is always chosen for nik ≤ 2 and never chosen as nik exceeds 30.
In between, however, due to integer problems the relationship is non-monotonic.11 Clearly, if
one smooths out the plot taking a moving average, the probability of centralization is indeed
increasing with nik . Therefore, in the empirical analysis, we disregard the integer problem and
focus on the prediction that centralization increases with the distance to the frontier. We will
proxy distance to the frontier with the gap between the productivity of a firm and the highest
productivity (or more precisely the highest percentile productivity) in the same industry. It
is clear that firms further from the frontier in terms of having high nik ’s are less productive,
11

In particular, when ntk = 3, delegation is chosen when ñtk = 1 or when ñtk = 2, so that the probability
of centralization overall is approximately 0.37. On the other hand, when ntk = 4, delegation is chosen for
ñtk ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and the probability of centralization is approximately 0.25. Thus, the probability of centralization
is smaller for ntk = 4 than for ntk = 3.

12

since these are the firms that have been unlucky and have had fewer opportunities to adopt
technologies, and they are also likely to be the ones with relatively low pi ’s, that is, those that
are slower in climbing their technology ladder.

³
´
¡ ¢
We next turn to heterogeneity. Let us define Pr d∗i,k hit = 1 as the ex ante probability

that firm i facing technology k at time t will choose decentralization. This probability is
clearly a function of the parameters of the model, in particular ε, which measures the extent of
heterogeneity, and the firm’s distance to frontier. In particular, recall that greater ε translates
into a greater heterogeneity in the firm’s environment. The following proposition establishes
that greater heterogeneity—higher ε—encourages decentralization (proof in Appendix A):
Proposition 2 (Heterogeneity) Consider the adoption decision of technology k by firm i.
Given the distance to frontier, we have
³
´
¡ ¢
∂ Pr d∗i,k hit = 1
∂ε

≥ 0,

so that an increase in ε makes delegation more likely.
Intuitively, when ε is small, the performance of firms that have implemented the same
technology in the past reveals more information about the reference action. Thus, firms’
posterior beliefs are more responsive to public information. Note that this applies to both
“correct” and “incorrect” beliefs. For instance, suppose that x∗k = L, but in the sample available
to the firm R has been successful more than half of the time; then, when ε is small, the firm
¡
¢
will assign higher probability to R being the correct action (i.e., π 0; hik | xi,k = R will take
on a larger value). The complication in establishing Proposition 2 comes from the fact that a
change in ε affects the likelihood of different histories. Nevertheless, Appendix A establishes
that a greater ε changes the ex ante distribution of different histories so as to also increase
³
´
¡ ¢
Pr d∗i,k hit = 1 .
Proposition 2 provides the most interesting testable implication of our approach; it suggests
that there should be more decentralization in industries with greater dispersion of performance
across firms and also for firms that are more dissimilar to others.

3.4

Delegation and Age

Finally, we briefly extend our basic model to derive a relationship between firm age and organizational structure. In the model analyzed so far the deviation between the reference action
and the correct action for each firm was independently and identically distributed across technologies, firms and time. Consequently, a firm’s information on how to implement technology
13

k was independent from that firm’s actions and performance on previous technologies k 0 < k.
More generally, one could assume that there is a positive correlation between the correct actions that a firm should take across successive technologies, for example, because the specific
skills of the employees or the culture of the organization differ across firms. In this case, the
firm could learn from its own past experience as well as from the experiences of other firms.12
Since solving the signal extraction problem with multiple sources of uncertainty is complicated and not our main focus here, we assume in this subsection that firms cannot learn from
other firms. This enables us to focus instead on firms’ learning from their own performance.
The analogue equation to (8) is as follows. For any Ii (k; t) = 1, we have:
½
with probability 1 − εi
x∗i
,
x∗i,k =
∼ x∗i
with probability εi
so that the reference action for firm i is x∗i ∈ {L, R}, the correct action for technology k may
differ from this with some probability εi < 1/2.
This equation implies that the updating problem is now identical to that discussed previously, up to a reinterpretation of the information set. In particular, what used to be history
ª
©
ª
©
hik = nik , ñik is now replaced by hik = nki , ñki , where, given Ii (k; t) = 1, nki denotes the
number of technologies that firm i has implemented before technology k, and ñki denotes the
number of times in which action L turned out to be the correct choice in this firm’s own experience in the past. Given this reinterpretation, our previous analysis implies (proof omitted):
Proposition 3 (Age) Consider the adoption decision of technology k by firm i, and suppose
that Assumption 1 holds and x∗i = L. Then:

¡
¢
¡
¢
(i) For the youngest firm with nki = 0, we have q hit = {0, 0} = π 0, hit = {0, 0} = 1/2 < δ,
¡ ¢
and the principal chooses delegation, d∗i,k hit = 1;
¡
©
ª¢
(ii) For a sufficiently old firm i.e., nki → ∞ , we have p limnk −→∞ q hit = nki , ñki
= 1,
i
”
¡
©
ª¢
p limni −→∞ π 0, hit = nki , ñki
= 1 − ε > δ, and the principal almost surely chooses centralk
¡
©
ª¢
= 0.
ization, i.e., p limni −→∞ d∗i,k hit = nki , ñki
k

12

For example, one can modify equation (2) as follows. Given Ii (k; t) = 1,
8
∗
with probability ξ k
< xk
∗
x∗i
with probability 1 − ξ k − ξ i
xi,t,k =
:
η i,k,t
with probability ξ i

(8)

where η i,k,t is equal to L with probability 1/2 and equal to R with probability 1/2, and also i.i.d across
technologies, firms and time. As before, firms do not observe x∗k or x∗i , whereas informed managers know x∗i,k,t .
The case analyzed in the text corresponds to the one where ξ k = 0 and εi = ξ i /2.

14

4

Econometric Specification and Data

4.1

Empirical Strategy

In our empirical work, we will document a number of correlations motivated by the theory presented in the previous section. Recall that the main predictions of our approach, as summarized
in Propositions 1-3, are:
1. Delegation should be more common for firms closer to the technological frontier.
2. Delegation should be more prevalent in environments with greater heterogeneity.
3. Young firms should be more likely to choose delegation.
We investigate these predictions by studying the correlation between various explanatory
factors and decentralization decisions of several thousand French and British firms. Consider
the following equation:
0
d∗ilt = αHilt−1 + βP Filt−1 + γP M Cilt−1 + δageilt−1 + wilt−1
ζ + uilt ,

(9)

where i denotes firm, l denotes industry and t denotes time. d∗ilt is a latent variable indicating
the propensity to delegate authority to managers. Hilt−1 is a measure of heterogeneity (or in
some experiments inverse heterogeneity, or “homogeneity”), P Filt−1 is a measure of “proximity
to the frontier” (inverse measure of “distance to the frontier”), ageilt−1 denotes the age of
the firm, wilt−1 is a vector of other controls, and P M Cilt−1 is a measure of product market
competition, which we find to be a robust predictor of delegation and thus include it as part
of our main specification (we return to an interpretation of this term below in subsection 5.9).
All right-hand side variables refer to t − 1, while the dependent variable is for t, which is
an attempt to prevent the most obvious form of reverse causality. Nevertheless, we do not
view estimates from equation (9) as corresponding to causal effects, since there may be other
omitted factors, simultaneously affecting both the (lagged) right-hand side variables and the
delegation decisions. Below, we deal with part of this endogeneity issue by using values from
the UK manufacturing sector to instrument for H and P F . For now, all omitted factors are
captured by the error term uilt , which we assume to be normally distributed.
In all of our specifications, we observe an indicator of decentralization, dilt ∈ {0, 1}, and in
our baseline specifications, we assume that
½
1 if d∗ilt > 0
,
dilt =
0 if d∗ilt ≤ 0
15

(10)

where d∗ilt is given by (9). Equation (10) leads to the standard probit model (see Wooldridge,
2002, Chapter 15). We therefore estimate (9) by maximum likelihood probit. We check the
robustness of our results by using logit and linear probability specifications. In all cases, the
standard errors are robust and allow for arbitrary variance-covariance structure at the fourdigit industry level (White, 1980).

4.2

Data and Measurement

We use two datasets of French firms and one of British firms. The use of multiple datasets
is an important cross-validation of the robustness of our results. Our first and main dataset,
“Changements Organisationnels et Informatisation” (COI),13 covers just over 4,000 manufacturing firms. Using unique firm identifiers, firms in this dataset are matched to the dataset
FUTE (see Appendix B), which contains the entire population of French firms with more than
20 employees.14 Many of our right-hand side variables are constructed from the FUTE and
thus refer to this entire population. Since the COI contains some firms with less than 20
employees, the match leaves us with a total of 3,570 firms for our basic analysis.
Using the COI, we build a measure of decentralization based on the organization of a firm’s
business units into profit centers (see Appendix B for a more detailed description). In practice,
once a firm grows beyond a certain size it faces the choice of retaining centralized control
or allowing some decentralization. Firms are generally organized into business units, with
different degrees of responsibility delegated to the managers of these units. While some firms
retain complete command and control at the center, most create some form of “responsibility
centers” for business unit managers.15 These responsibility centers (from the most to the
least decentralized) are profit centers, cost centers and revenue centers. Our key indicator for
decentralization is whether the firm is organized primarily into profit centers. As the name
suggests, when a firm organizes into profit centers, a manager is responsible for the profits of the
unit that she manages. She is given considerable autonomy to make decisions on the purchase
of assets, hiring of personnel, the management of inventories and determination of bonuses and
13

For previous uses of this dataset see, Aubert, Caroli and Roger (2004), Janod (2002), Janod and Saint-Martin
(2004), Crépon, Heckel and Riedinger (2004), and Greenan and Mairesse (1999).
14
FUTE also contains population of non-manufacturing firms with more than ten employees. These data are
not published in the French National Accounts, so we worked directly with the underlying micro data located
in the French statistical agencies in order to construct the appropriate variables. Similarly the information on
the demographic structure of each firm (skills, worker age, hours, gender, etc.) had to be built up from the
employee level datasources aggregated to the firm level (see Appendix B).
15
For the meaning of the terms responsibility centers and profit centers in the business literature
and in management, see, for example: http://smccd.net/accounts/nurre/online/chtr12a.htm. In addition,
http://www.aloa.co.uk/members/downloads/PDF%20Output/costcentres.pdf, provides a standard discussion
of autonomy of profit centers. Janod (2002) and Janod and Saint-Martin (2004) have previously used these data
on profit centers as a measure of decentralization.

16

promotions. She keeps track of both revenues and costs with the aim of maximizing profit.16
In contrast, a cost (revenue) center manager is responsible only for costs (revenue). Milgrom
and Roberts (1992, pp. 229-230), for example, contrast cost and profit centers managers as
follows: “Managers who are given responsibility for profits, for example, are commonly given
broader decision authority than those responsible just for costs or sales.” Overall about 30%
of French firms in our sample are organized into profit centers.
Our second dataset, the “Enquête Reponse” (ER), is a survey of just under 3,000 French
establishments covering all sectors of the economy conducted in 1998. This dataset is also
matched with the FUTE to construct the right-hand side variables, which leaves us with a
dataset of around 2,200 establishments. In this data set, delegation can be measured in two
ways. First, there is a direct question asked to plant managers over the degree of autonomy
they have in investment decisions relative to Head Quarters. Since this question only makes
sense for firms that are part of a larger group, the analysis is restricted to this sub-sample (of
1,258 establishments). Second, there is a question related to delayering, which indicates whether
there was any reduction in the number of hierarchical layers between 1996 and 1998. Although,
a priori, delayering may increase or reduce delegation (it may, for example, reduce delegation
by making the chief executive more informed about lower layers), existing evidence shows that
delayering is associated with delegating power down the managerial hierarchy (Rajan and Wulf,
2005, Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001). Since delayering provides information on organizational
“changes” (i.e., whether a firm became more or less hierarchical) rather than “levels”, we use a
variation of equation (9).
Finally, we draw on a UK dataset, the 1998 Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS),
which is similar in structure to Enquête Reponse (in fact, ER was modeled on earlier waves of
WERS). WERS does not have a question on plant managers’ autonomy in investment decisions,
but contains a question on their autonomy from headquarters in making employment decisions.
We use this question to denote the degree of decentralization (a binary variable equal to unity
if a manager could make recruiting decisions without having to consult headquarters). Unlike
the French data for confidentiality reasons, we are not allowed to legally match WERS with
productivity at the firm level, though we can match in productivity information at the fourdigit industry level.17
16

Merchant’s (1989, p.10) textbook on profit centers explains: “The profit center managers frequently know
their business better than top management does because they can devote much more of their time to following
up developments in their specialized areas. Hence, top level managers usually do not have detailed knowledge
of the actions they want particular profit center managers to take, and even direct monitoring of the actions
taken, if it were feasible would not ensure profit center managers were acting appropriately.”
17
Full details from COI, ER and WERS are in the Appendix B and Appendix Tables B1 and B2 contain

17

For Hil we use two measures; Hl+ and Hi− . Both of these measures are constructed from
the FUTE dataset (in the UK we can construct Hl+ using the ABI Census data). The main
measure we use of heterogeneity, Hl+ , is the dispersion of firm productivity growth within a
four-digit sector. In terms of the model in Section 3, high values of Hl+ therefore correspond
to high values of ε. This variable is constructed using the entire FUTE dataset (regardless of
whether a firm was surveyed by in COI or ER). We measure productivity growth by the average
annual growth in value added per hour over the 1994 to 1997 period.18 Our main measure of
dispersion is the the difference in productivity growth rates between the 90th percentile and
the 10th percentile in the four-digit industry
Hl+ = (∆ ln yil )90 − (∆ ln yil )10

(11)

where (∆ ln yil )P is the P th percentile of the distribution of productivity growth across all firms
in industry l. Productivity growth is defined as the three-year average change in (the log of)
value added per hour. We also consider several alternatives such as the difference between the
95th and the 5th percentiles (instead of the 90-10), the standard deviation of firm productivity
growth rates and the standard deviation of the trimmed productivity growth distribution.
Since the measure of Hl+ is the same across all firms in a four-digit industry, we also
constructed a second firm-specific measure. This second index, Hi− , is an inverse measure of
heterogeneity, i.e., a measure of homogeneity, hence the “−” superscript. In terms of the model
in Section 3, high values of Hi− therefore correspond to low values of ε. This measure attempts
to quantify how many other firms are close “neighbors” in the product space. When there
are more similar firms (neighbors), the firm will have greater opportunity to learn from the
experiences of other firms. This measure of closeness is inspired by Jaffe’s (1986) approach,
but uses the proportion of production in a four-digit industry.19
First, for each firm i we compute the distribution of production across 400 four-digit sectors.
Let the set of firms in this dataset be denoted by N , and denote the set of firms in COI by C.
Let Sil denote the production of firm i ∈ N in industry l for all industries l ∈ L ≡ {1, .., L},
and define Si = (Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ) as the vector of production for firm i. We then define
P
the share of a firm’s total production in industry l as sil = Sil / j∈L Sij . The denominator
detailed descriptive statistics.
18
As discussed in detail in the Appendix B, data before 1994 are not reliable. Note that we only average over
two years if the firm enters the sample in 1995 and one year if it enters in 1996.
We also report TFP-based measures as a robustness check. TFP is closer to the theory, but more likley to be
affected by measurement error.
19
Jaffe originally used patents technology class, which has the potential disadvantage that many firms do not
patent, especially in service sectors.

18

of sil is the total production of the firm, so that sil will be unity for a firm that only operates
in industry l (and zero for other industries). More generally, for firms operating in multiple
industries it will lie between zero and one. The firm-specific vector of production shares across
all L industries for firm i ∈ N is then





Sil
SiL 
Si1


,..., P
,..., P
si =  P
.
S
S
 h∈L Sih
h∈L ih
h∈L ih 
| {z }
| {z }
| {z }
si1

sil

siL

We then calculate the “closeness” of any two firms, i and i0 as the uncentered correlation
P
sil .si0 l
cii0 = q P l∈L P
,
( l∈L s2il ).( l∈L s2i0 l )
which takes greater values when the production profiles of two firms are more similar, and is
equal to unity when the two profiles are identical.
Since our theoretical approach emphasizes the importance of similarity in the context of
experimenting with new technologies, our preferred measure of homogeneity for firm i ∈ C at
time t, Hi− , is

P
Hi−

=

0

0

i ∈N ,i 6=i
P

cii0 · ITi0

i0 ∈N ,i0 6=i ITi0

(12)

where ITi0 is calculated as the level of investment in IT by firm i0 , so that (12) weights firms
according to their investment in new technology. Equation (12) also emphasizes that Hi− is
calculated from the similarity of each firm in our dataset to any firm in the FUTE, i.e., the
entire French population of firms.
A possible shortcoming of the index Hi− is that many new technologies may fall outside
the IT category, so we also check the robustness of our results by looking at an alternative
unweighted measure, calculated as
HiA− =
where N =

P
i0 ∈N

1
N −1

X

cii0 ,

(13)

i0 ∈N ,i0 6=i

i0 denotes the number of firms in the FUTE sample. We also construct

another alternative measure, HiR− , which weights firms differentially depending on their geographic proximity, and this measure is described in greater detail in Appendix B.
An important concern with these homogeneity measures is that they may be related to the
level of product market competition. If there are many other firms “close” to a company in the
product market space, then this company may be facing tougher competition.20 To alleviate
20

See Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen (2004) for a discussion.

19

this concern, we control for a number of measures of the extent of product market competition
in our main specifications. Nonetheless, it is important to note that to the extent that our
homogeneity measure is correlated with product market competition (beyond our controls),
this will likely bias the results towards finding a positive effect of our homogeneity variables
(i.e., the opposite of the prediction in Section 3). This is because, as we document below, there
is a fairly robust positive relationship between product market competition and delegation.21
Our key indicator of proximity to the frontier is the gap between the log labor productivity
of a firm (measured as value-added per hour) and the frontier (log) labor productivity in
the primary four-digit industry of the firm, ln yilt − ln yF lt , where F denotes the frontier,
measured in a number of alternative ways. In addition to average labor productivity, we also
report robustness checks using Total Factor Productivity (TFP).22 We also construct several
indicators of “frontier” productivity. Our main measure is the highest productivity in the
firm’s primary four-digit industry (defined as the 99th percentile to mitigate any measurement
error from outliers that might arise had we used the maximum) again calculated from the
FUTE dataset. We repeat the same exercise using other percentiles (90th and 95th), and we
consider alternative measures based on the firm’s productivity rank in the four-digit industry—
an ordinal measure which relies less on our cardinal measurement of productivity.
As a robustness check on our main specification, we also allow ln yilt−1 and ln yF lt−1 to
have different coefficients in the regression equation, by estimating
0
d∗ilt = αHilt−1 + β 1 ln yilt−1 + β 2 ln yF lt−1 + γP M Cilt−1 + δageilt−1 + wilt−1
ζ + uilt .

(14)

This specification allows us to test whether β 2 < 0 (i.e., whether as predicted by our theory,
delegation is negatively correlated with lagged frontier productivity) and also whether β 1 =
−β 2 . This robustness check is particularly important, since a positive correlation between
distance to frontier and decentralization may reflect a positive effect of decentralization on
productivity. Equation (14) enables us to check for this directly by seeing whether β 2 = 0.
In addition, since our motivating theory relates to the implementation of new technologies,
we also estimate (9) and (14) separately in high-tech and low-tech firms. We expect the
patterns suggested by our model to be more pronounced for high-tech firms.
To measure age, ageilt−1 , we use four dummies for age ranges less than 5 years, between
5 and 10 years, between 10 and 20 years, and the reference category, greater than 20 years.23
21
This is also consistent with the results in Nickell, Nicolitsas and Patterson (2001) and McKinsey Global
Institute (2002).
22
In specifications that also include firm-level and industry-level capital intensity variables, the labor productivity terms also approximate TFP.
23
Since our main models are cross-sectional, we cannot distinguish age and cohort effects. Nevertheless, the

20

Finally, our main measure of product market competition is the Lerner index, calculated as
profits (value added minus labor costs) divided by sales from the FUTE dataset.
As an attempt to control for the potential endogeneity of heterogeneity/homogeneity and
proximity to frontier measures, and also to examine the direction of potential biases, we also
experiment with an instrumental-variable strategy treating these terms as endogenous, and
using values of the same variables in the corresponding four-digit UK industry as instruments
(see Hausman and Taylor, 1981). The idea is that, as discussed above, firm-specific or French
industry-specific shocks to d∗ilt could feedback to the heterogeneity or distance to frontier terms,
biasing the coefficient estimates.24 The UK values of heterogeneity should be correlated with
the French values insofar as they represent “fundamentals” about the industry, but should not
be affected by shocks specific to French firms. Similarly, fundamental technological changes
should simultaneously raise the UK and French frontier (for example, because the US makes a
breakthrough that benefits frontier firms in UK and France). It is important to note, however,
that this instrumental variables strategy will not necessarily estimate causal effect either, since
there may still exist omitted factors that are common to both French and UK industries that
affect both the right-hand side variables and delegation.

5

Results

5.1

Decentralization

Table 1 presents the basic findings using the decentralization measure from COI. In this table,
all regressions are estimated by maximum likelihood (ML) probit following equations (9) and
(10) above. We report marginal effects evaluated at the sample means. As in all other tables,
standard errors are computed using the Huber formula allowing for heteroskedasticity and
an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix at the four-digit industry level. Moreover, all of our
regressions include a full set of three-digit industry dummies.25
The first column is the most parsimonious specification to look at the effect of the heterogeneity measure, Hl+ . The regression only includes this variable and a full set of three-digit
industry dummies. Consistent with the predictions in Section 3, there is a positive correlation
between heterogeneity and decentralization, so that firms in more heterogeneous environments
results in Table 6 below suggest that the patterns we document are not purely due to cohort effects.
24
The fact that we are using lagged values on the right-hand side ameliorates but does not solve this problem
because of potential serial correlation in these variables.
25
The frontier productivity term and the heterogeneity measure Hl+ are defined at the four-digit level, so
we can only include three-digit industry dummies if we want to identify their coefficients. We present some
specifications including four-digit dummies to show the robustness of the marginal effects of the other variables.

21

are more likely to be decentralized. The marginal effect of heterogeneity is -0.212 and is
significant at the 5% level.
The second column estimates an equation similar to (14) in order to look at the effect of
the frontier productivity term (measured as the 99th percentile of the productivity distribution in the primary four-digit industry of the firm) and the firm’s own productivity. This
specification still includes a full set of three-digit industry dummies. Both productivity terms
are significant, and consistent with the predictions above, there is a negative coefficient on the
frontier productivity term (i.e., β 2 < 0) and a positive coefficient on the own productivity term
(i.e., β 1 > 0). The Wald test at the bottom of the table rejects the restriction that β 1 = −β 2 ,
though when additional covariates are included in columns (7) and (8) this restriction will no
longer be rejected. The third column imposes that the coefficients are equal and have opposite
signs, and includes a single “proximity to frontier” variable as in equation (9). The marginal
effect is now estimated to be 0.159 (standard error = 0.024). Overall, these patterns suggest
that firms closer to the technology frontier of their industry are more likely to be decentralized.
The fourth column looks at the effect of age and includes only the dummy variables for
the age of the firm (this regression includes a full set of four-digit industry dummies). The
youngest firms (under 5 years old) are 13% more likely to be decentralized than the oldest
firms (those over 20 years old) and this difference is significant at the 5% level.
The remaining columns include all these variables simultaneously and look at the effect
of including additional covariates. Without the additional covariates, in columns (5) and (6),
heterogeneity, age, and the proximity terms remain jointly and individually significant. The
magnitudes are also quite similar to those in columns (1)-(4).
The final two columns include a large number of additional controls to check whether
the partial correlations are due to some other omitted variables. These additional covariates
include the following variables: the Lerner Index, a foreign ownership dummy, the log number
of plants of the firm, the (log of) capital stock divided by value added, log firm size, the fraction
of employees working with computers,26 the fraction of high skilled workers, the average age
of workers, the firm’s market share, a diversification index (see Appendix B), as well as a
number of industry-level variables, in particular, (in logs) capital stock divided by employment,
IT expenditures divided by employment and the Herfindahl index. The capital stock and
computer use variables are included both as potential controls and also to bring the measure
of labor productivity closer to TFP by controlling for the contribution of various components
26
We also experimented with the firm-level IT investment intensity, but this variable was never significant
given the industry-level IT measure and the fraction of employees using computers (which is consistent with the
results in Askenazy et al, 2005).

22

of the capital stock. Firm-level worker characteristics are included since these may affect
organizational choices; for example, firms with more skilled workers and/or younger workers
might be more likely to decentralize control. Finally, centralized management may be more
difficult for more diversified and larger firms (Colombo and Delmastro, 2004). The full results
from these regressions are presented in Table C1 in Appendix C. Columns (7) and (8) in Table
1 report the estimates for our main variables of interest. The additional controls improve
the fit of the model. Nevertheless, the heterogeneity, age and productivity terms all remain
individually significant at the 5% level or less. Also interestingly, in this specification we can
no longer reject the hypothesis that β 1 = −β 2 , i.e., the hypothesis that frontier and own labor
productivity terms have equal and opposite-signed coefficients.
The full results in Appendix Table C1 show that consistent with the results in the previous
literature, firms that are more skill-intensive (Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001), that employ
younger workers (Aubert et al, 2004) and/or that are more in more IT-intensive industries
(Bresnahan et al, 2002) appear significantly more likely to be decentralized. Furthermore,
firms that are large, multi-plant, foreign owned and/or more diversified are also more likely
to decentralize. Firm-level capital stock or industry-level capital stock do not appear to have
a major effect on decentralization. The Lerner index (a proxy for the price cost margin) is
strongly negatively associated with the probability of decentralizing. We show that this a very
robust empirical result suggesting that firms with market power are less likely to delegate. In
subsection 5.9, we discuss a potential explanation for the relationship between competition and
decentralization based on our model in Section 3.
Overall, the results in Table 1 suggest that, consistent with our model and the relationships
shown in Figures 1-3, firms that operate in more heterogeneous environments, that are closer to
the technology frontier, and that are younger are significantly more likely to be decentralized.

5.2

Magnitudes

It is also useful to look at the magnitudes of the effects estimated in Table 1. To gauge the
quantitative magnitudes of these estimates, we look at the impact of doubling each variable
starting from its sample mean.
Using the estimate in Table 1 column (8), 0.251, we find that doubling the mean value of
heterogeneity (the inter-decile range of firm productivity growth in the industry) from 0.275
to 0.550 increases the predicted probability of a firm being decentralized into profit centers by
approximately 7 percentage points (0.251 × 0.275 ≈ 0.069) starting from a base of 30 percent,
which is a sizeable effect. Thus, in “elasticity” terms, a doubling of heterogeneity is associated

23

with a 23% increase in the probability of decentralization (a 6.9 percentage point increase
on a base of 30 percent).27 Again using the estimate from column (8) of Table 1, doubling
the proximity measure leads to a substantial increase in the probability of decentralization of
about 11 percentage points which represents a 37% increase on the base of about 30 percent
(0.164 × ln 2/0.3). Also using the estimates from column (8) of Table 1, increasing the age
of a firm from four years to eight years reduces the probability of decentralization by a third
(11 percentage points on a 30 percent base), while doubling the Lerner index at the mean
(0.075) reduces decentralization probabilities by about 5.5 percentage points (18% on the 30
percent base). These calculations suggest that the statistical associations documented in Table
1 appear to be economically as well as statistically significant.

5.3

Alternative Measures of Heterogeneity

Table 2 contrasts our basic measure of heterogeneity (the decile ratio of firm productivity
growth rates in the industry) with several alternative indicators of heterogeneity. The first
column of Table 2 replicates the specification from the last column of Table 1 for comparison.
The next three columns (2)-(4) use alternative measures of heterogeneity, Hl+ still based on
the dispersion of productivity growth rates across firms within the four-digit industry. Column
(2) shows a similar result to column (1) using the difference between the productivity growth
rates at the 95th and 5th percentiles (instead of the 90th and 10th percentiles). The marginal
effect is 0.142 with a standard error of 0.069. In column (3) we use the standard deviation of
the growth rate, which also has a positive marginal effect, but is only significant at the 10%
level. This lack of precision is due to a number of outliers in the firm-level productivity growth
distribution. When we calculate the standard deviation after trimming the top and bottom
5% of the firm-level productivity growth distribution, we obtain a much larger and much more
significant marginal effect in column (4). Overall, the results in this table show that there is a
robust positive association between heterogeneity and decentralization.28
As an alternative to Hl+ we use an index of homogeneity, Hi− .29 Recall that this index
measures is the IT-weighted distance of a firm to all other firms, where “distance” is defined
27

A one standard deviation increase in heterogeneity (0.148) results in a smaller increase in the likelihood of
decentralization: a 3.7 percentage point, or 12% increase.
28
One concern with any measure of heterogeneity is that, since it is correlated with uncertainty in firm’s
environment, it may affect the extent of the moral hazard problem between the firm and the manager (an issue
we have abstracted from in the model). Nevertheless, everything else equal, this effect would bias the results
against finding a positive association between heterogeneity and decentralization, since greater uncertainty in
the environment will increase agency costs and make centralization more attractive.
29
All of the results in Table 1 are similar if we use these homogeneity index, Hi− , instead of the heterogeneity
index Hl+ . For example, the most parsimonious specification in column (1) of Table 1 gives a marginal effect of
Hi− of 0.112 with a standard error of 0.034 (further results available upon request, and see also Appendix C1).

24

over the sectors in which the firm is active. This is an entirely different source of variation
in heterogeneity, so constitutes a useful cross-validation for whether the relationship between
the heterogeneity index and decentralization in Table 1 is indeed related to the effect of heterogeneity of the environment facing the firm on decentralization decisions. In column (5)
of Table 2, the homogeneity index takes its expected negative sign with a marginal effect of
-0.063 and a standard error of 0.031. In column (6) we look at the simpler unweighted measure
of homogeneity (HiA− ). This is also useful as another check to see whether our homogeneity
measure is capturing some competition-related factors. If this were the case, we would expect
the unweighted measure to be stronger. The unweighted measure also has a negative effect,
but with a smaller coefficient that is not statistically significant at the 5% level. This suggests
that the IT weights increase the explanatory power of the homogeneity index.30
We also experimented with a third alternative homogeneity index, which exploits the geographical proximity of firms, HiR− . This index captures the idea that it may be easier to
learn from firms that are physically close as suggested by the economic geography literature
(e.g., Keller, 2002). Essentially, HiR− gives a greater weight to firms that are geographically
(as well as technologically) close to each other (See Appendix B for the exact definition of this
variable). In the final column we see that the marginal effect of homogeneity rises to -0.069
with a standard error of 0.034, slightly stronger than the simpler version of homogeneity, Hi− ,
in column (4).

5.4

Differences Between High-Tech and Low-Tech Sectors

Since the theory in Section 3 relates the propensity to decentralize to the adoption of new
technologies, we may expect a stronger relationship between decentralization and heterogeneity/homogeneity in the high-tech industries than in the low-tech sectors. This is investigated
in Table 3. We define “high-tech” sectors to be those with an average ratio of IT investment
per worker greater than the sample median.
The first three columns use the baseline heterogeneity index, Hl+ , measured as the 90-10
dispersion of productivity growth while the last three columns use the homogeneity index, Hi− .
The first column of Table 3 repeats column (8) of Table 1 for comparison purposes. The
second column presents the results for the high-tech sectors and the third column presents
results for the low-tech sectors. Consistent with our expectations, the marginal effects and
significance of the distance to frontier and heterogeneity variables are stronger in the high30

If we include both the weighted and the unweighted measures together with all covariates, the weighted
measure is negative and significant at the 5% level (coefficient = -0.184, standard error = 0.096), while the
unweighted measure is positive (coefficient = 0.142, standard error = 0.109).

25

tech sectors than in the low-tech sectors (the pattern is similar but less clear for age). For
example, column (3) shows that the heterogeneity index, Hl+ , is positive and significant in the
high-tech sectors, but negative and insignificant in the low-tech sector. The marginal effects
of proximity to frontier and the youngest age bin are twice as large in the high-tech sectors as
the low-tech sectors. The Wald tests at the bottom of the table show that these differences
are significant at the 1% level for heterogeneity, the 5% level for proximity to frontier but
insignificantly different for age. The next three columns repeat the same regressions using the
homogeneity index, Hi− . The pattern of differences between high-tech and low-tech sectors is
similar to those for heterogeneity. For example, the marginal effects of proximity and youngest
firm are twice as large in the high-tech sectors as the low-tech sectors. The marginal effect of
homogeneity is almost five times as large in absolute magnitude in the high-tech sector. With
the homogeneity measure, however, the marginal effects in the two subsamples are statistically
different only at the 10% level.
These results are encouraging since they suggest that, consistent with our theory in Section
3, the relationship between heterogeneity or proximity to frontier and decentralization appears
to be more pronounced in high-tech sectors.

5.5

Further Robustness Checks

Table 4 reports the results of a further series of robustness checks. It is designed to show
that the results do not depend on the precise functional form, control variables or sample used
in the main regressions. Each column corresponds to a separate regression and reports the
marginal effects and standard errors of the key variables (heterogeneity, frontier productivity,
own productivity, age and competition).
The first column replicates the baseline results from column (7) of Table 1 for comparison.
Column (2) reports the marginal effects from a logit model instead of a probit; these results are
very similar to the probit estimates. Column (3) reports estimates from a linear probability
model. The results are again very similar to the baseline of the probit model.
Column (4) uses TFP instead of labor productivity as the measure of the proximity to
frontier.31 TFP is more closely related to the theoretical idea of productivity we wish to
capture, though it is also likely to be subject to greater measurement error. Both frontier and
own TFP remain statistically significant with the expected signs; the estimate is smaller in
absolute magnitude on frontier TFP and larger in absolute magnitude on the firm’s own TFP.
31

TFP is constructed using the four-digit industry specific wage bill shares to weight the factor inputs and
assumes constant returns (see Appendix B for details).

26

In column (5), we construct the rank of the firm’s labor productivity in the four-digit
industry. This measure relies less on the exact distance in productivity space between two
firms, and only exploits the ordinal ranking of firms. We find the same pattern of results:
companies further down the productivity ranking are significantly less likely to decentralize.
In columns (6) and (7), we use the 95th and 90th percentiles of the productivity distribution to represent the frontier instead of the 99th percentile as in our baseline specifications.
Although the coefficient on frontier productivity remains negative, it becomes smaller and less
precise as we move down the percentiles of productivity. This is not entirely surprising, since
the 99th should be a better measure of the “frontier” than the 95th or the 90th percentiles.
Column (8) weights the regression by firm size as the variables may be measured with
greater error for smaller firms. We obtain somewhat more significant results in this weighted
regression, but the standard error is similar to that in the baseline specification.
Although a single firm can be organized into divisions with each division decentralized as a
profit center, the measure of profit centers may be more natural for firms that are part of larger
groups. To investigate this issue further, in column (9) we re-estimated the equation on the
sub-sample of 1,793 “under control” firms, which are those that are part of a larger corporate
group.32 The marginal effects of heterogeneity and frontier are considerably larger and more
significant for this subsample, suggesting that the baseline results, if anything, underestimate
the importance of heterogeneity and proximity to frontier. An alternative to this sub-sample
is to consider only joint stock firms (dropping the smaller limited liability firms). We do this
in column (10) and again find that the results are robust.
Another concern is that we have allocated a single “frontier” to each firm, whereas firms
that operate across multiple industries will have multiple “frontiers”. To address this concern,
we limit the sample to firms that have at least 80% of their sales in their primary four-digit
industry, since the multiple industry issue should not be a serious concern for these firms.
This restriction reduces our sample to 2,555 firms. Column (11) shows that the frontier term
remains negative and significant in this smaller sample, though its marginal effect is also
somewhat smaller -0.179 as compared to -0.225 in the baseline specification.
Recall that the specification in column (7) of Table 1 includes a dummy for foreign ownership. Column (12) goes one step further and drops all the foreign-owned firms from the sample.
The results remain robust.
We also performed a number of additional robustness checks, including the same set of
32
An additional reason for focusing on the “under control” sub-sample is that this sample likely excludes
owner-managed firms.

27

regressions in Table 4 using the homogeneity measure. Overall both the robustness checks reported here and others indicate that there are robust associations between distance to frontier,
heterogeneity and age, on the one hand, and decentralization.

5.6

Endogeneity

In Table 5 we make an attempt to address the issue of endogeneity of our main right-hand
side variables. As discussed above, our strategy is to instrument for these variables using their
UK counterparts.33 We use industry-level variables constructed from British establishment
micro-data (the ABI ) and matched to our French four-digit industries for identical time periods. More specifically, we constructed heterogeneity variables identical to Hl+ based on the
dispersion of productivity growth between British firms to instrument French heterogeneity.
We also constructed the 99th percentile of the productivity distribution in each British fourdigit industry as an instrument for the French proximity to frontier. Appendix B contains
more details on the construction of these variables.
Our first strategy uses an instrumental variable probit model (Lee, 1981), but we also
compare these results with alternative “two-step” methods (Rivers and Vuong, 1988) and twostage least squares estimates of the linear probability model.
The first column of Table 5 repeats the baseline specification for the sub-sample where we
have French and UK data (which is slightly smaller - 3,518 firms - than our baseline sample
of 3,570 firms). The results are practically identical to those in the larger sample. The second
column shows the first-stage for the French heterogeneity variable in a specification where only
the heterogeneity term is treated as endogenous. UK heterogeneity is positively and significantly associated with French heterogeneity in the same industry, even after conditioning on
all the other exogenous variables (the t-statistic of the excluded instrument is over 3 and the
partial R2 is 0.091, so weak instruments are unlikely to be an issue). The third column shows
results from IV probit; all of our key variables are again correctly signed and significant at
the 5% level. Interestingly, the marginal effect of heterogeneity is now much larger, 1.185 as
compared to 0.230 in the baseline specification. This suggests that the probit estimates in
Tables 1-4 may have been biased downwards due to attenuation, which may be corrected by
the instrumentation strategy.34 The presence of downward attenuation bias is not entirely surprising since the heterogeneity index (and the proximity to frontier measure below) correspond
33

We chose the UK over the US, since the UK is both geographically closer to France and likely to be more
coordinated with the French economy because of the European Union.
34
If, instead of the IV probit model, we estimate the linear probability model using two stage least squares,
the estimated marginal effect is very similar: 1.105 with a standard error of 0.526.

28

only approximately to the theoretical concepts we would like to measure in the data.
Column (4) shows the first stage for proximity to frontier, which is now the only variable
treated as endogenous and instrumented with the UK frontier variable. The UK frontier variable has the expected negative sign (recall that French frontier productivity is the denominator
of the level of the proximity to frontier term that is being instrumented). The first-stage relationship is again quite strong and the t-statistic on the excluded instrument is now over 4. The
fifth column shows the IV probit results treating the proximity to the frontier as endogenous.
The estimate of the marginal effect of proximity to the frontier in this IV specification is also
larger than the baseline probit estimate reported in column (1); 0.341 versus 0.167. The other
variables retain the same signs as in column (1).35 This specification, therefore, also suggests
that the main effect of endogeneity might be a downward bias due to attenuation.36
In the last columns of Table 5, we simultaneously treat heterogeneity and proximity to
frontier as endogenous. Columns (6) and (7) show the two first stages. Encouragingly, the
UK heterogeneity measure predicts French heterogeneity and not the French proximity to
frontier, while UK frontier productivity predicts French proximity to frontier and not the
French heterogeneity term. The decentralization equation is given in the final column. The
heterogeneity and proximity to frontier terms are both individually significant at the 5% level
in this IV probit regression and as in the previous columns, the marginal effects are larger than
in the probit regressions that treat them as exogenous.37 The IV results of Table 5, therefore,
suggest that treating heterogeneity and proximity as exogenous likely makes us underestimate
their importance for decentralization.
Overall, the results in Table 1-5 suggest that, consistent with the broad implications of our
model, firms that operate in more homogeneous environments, that are further from the technology frontier, and that are older are significantly more likely to be centralized. Furthermore,
these effects appear to be stronger for firms in the high-tech industries.
35

Two stage least squares estimate of the effect of proximity to frontier in the linear probability model is 0.293
(standard error = 0.118).
36
If we split the proximity to frontier into its two components (as in Table 1 column (7)) and use the UK
frontier to instrument only the French frontier, the marginal effect of the frontier increases from -0.244 in the
probit specification to -0.967 in the IV probit specification.
37
Using two stage least squares in the linear probability model again generates very similar results. The effect
of heterogeneity is estimated to be 1.452 with a standard error of 0.663 (compared with a coefficient of 0.204
with a standard error of 0.111 in the OLS). The coefficient on proximity to frontier is estimated to be 0.410
with a standard error of 0.189 (compared with 0.147 with a standard error of 0.026 in the OLS regressions).

29

5.7

Alternative Measures of Decentralization

We next consider two alternative measures of decentralization; control over investment decisions
and delayering. Whether an establishment’s senior managers can make investment decisions
without consulting headquarters is clearly directly related to delegation of authority. Case
study and econometric evidence suggests that reducing the layers of the managerial hierarchy
tends to be associated with decentralized decision making.38 In the COI dataset there is an
indicator of the number of hierarchical levels, but as discussed in the Appendix B, a better
datasource to measure delayering is the Enquête Reponse (ER).39 The question of autonomy
over investment decisions is only available in the Enquête Reponse.
Table 6 shows the results of estimating equation (14) for these alternative measures.
Throughout, we show results separately for the full sample and also for the high-tech and
the low-tech sub-samples (created using industry IT intensity as in Table 3). We limit the
sample to firms that are “under control” (i.e., part of a larger group as defined above) because
the question on delegation of investment decisions from headquarters is only relevant for these
firms. In columns (1) through (3) the dependent variable is the binary indicator of whether
the firm allows autonomy to its plant managers in making investment decisions. In columns
(4) through (9), the dependent variable is defined as an indicator for whether there was a
reduction in the number of layers in the managerial hierarchy between 1996 and 1998.
In column (1) of Table 6 frontier productivity is negatively and significantly related to the
probability of allowing managers to make investment decisions without consulting headquarters (decentralization). Heterogeneity is positively related to decentralization but (like age) is
insignificant. When we split the sample into high-tech and low-tech sectors, the results are
stronger. In the high-tech sectors heterogeneity is positively related to the probability of delayering at the 5% significance level, whereas in the low-tech sectors heterogeneity is insignificant.
Similarly, the frontier productivity term is negatively and significantly related to decentralization in the high-tech sectors, but is insignificant in the low-tech sectors. Own productivity and
age are insignificant in both subsamples.
The next six columns use the measure of delayering as the dependent variable. In column
(4) the productivity terms are both correctly signed and significant at the 5% level, suggesting
that the more proximate the firm is to the frontier the more likely it is to delayer. Younger
38

See, for example, Rajan and Wulf (2005) or Caroli and Van Reenen (2001).
Briefly, this is because the Enquête Reponse question on delayering refers explicitly to changes in management, which is the concern of the theory. The COI question, by contrast, refers to the number of “hierarchical
levels” that likely includes the levels of hierarchy including those for production workers as well as those for the
management.
39

30

firms are significantly more likely to delayer than older firms.40 The heterogeneity term is
positive and significant at the 10% level. When the samples are split into high-tech (column
(5)) and low-tech (column (6)) sectors, the marginal effects of heterogeneity and proximity are
larger in the high-tech sectors than in the low-tech sectors, but the standard errors are also
much larger in both samples. In contrast, the age effects are larger in the low-tech sample,
which is the opposite of the prediction of our theory.
Since the delayering variable measures “organizational change” (rather than the “level” of
the centralization as our previous dependent variable), we also consider regressions where the
productivity terms are in differences rather than in levels. Since we do not have reliable timeseries information on the heterogeneity term and some of the other covariates, they are still
included as lagged levels. The results are presented in columns (7) through (9). The results are
similar to those before, but somewhat weaker. The frontier growth term is correctly signed, but
no longer significant and the own productivity terms is also insignificant.41 The heterogeneity
measure remains positive and significant in the full sample. With the sample split, it is no
longer significant in either sample (presumably because of the smaller number of observations),
though, as expected, the marginal effect is substantially larger in the high-tech sample than in
the low-tech sample.
In summary, the results from using delayering and autonomy on investment decisions as
alternative indicators of decentralization broadly support our earlier conclusions. Decentralization is more likely when the environment is more heterogeneous and firms are closer to the
technology frontier, particularly in high-tech sectors, though the age results appear less robust.

5.8

Decentralization in Britain

We complement our evidence from the French micro datasets with an analysis of the British
Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS98). The French Enquête Reponse was modeled
on WERS and we use the 1998 wave to match the year used in ER. The WERS cross-section
does not have a question on autonomy over investment decisions, but there is a similar question
on the establishment manager’s autonomy on employment decisions. Senior managers were
40

Although the ER data is that the establishment level, the regressions in Table 6 use firm age to make the
results comparable to those in Tables 1-5. The young firm dummy remains positive and significant if we also
condition on establishment age.
41
The weakness of the frontier growth term is related to the higher correlation between the productivity
growth terms and our heterogeneity variable (recall that heterogeneity is defined here as the decile ratio of
productivity growth rates in the firm’s four-digit industry). In column (7) if we drop the heterogeneity and
firm productivity terms, the marginal effect of frontier productivity growth increases to -0.064 with a standard
error of 0.031. If we use the full specification of column (7), but just include two-digit (instead of the usual
three-digit) industry dummies, the marginal effect of frontier growth becomes -0.074 with a standard error of
0.038.

31

asked whether they were able to take decisions on staff recruiting without consulting company
headquarters. Our WERS sample is further restricted because we are only able to match
manufacturing establishments to industry-level information (unfortunately Census information
on non-manufacturing is not available over the necessary time period).42 Finally, we are unable
to condition on the rich-set of firm level covariates as in the French data, because confidentiality
restrictions limit the data that can matched in at the firm level (such as firm-level output,
capital or age).
The results are presented in Table 7. Column (1) includes the first measure of heterogeneity
(the ratio of the 95th percentile to the 5th percentile of the productivity growth rates in the
four-digit industry) with only a full set of three-digit industry dummies. Heterogeneity is
positively and significantly associated with decentralization at the 5% level. The next column
performs the same exercise for the 90-10, the relationship is still positive and significant at the
10% level. Column (3) includes the frontier growth term which is negatively signed as we would
expect from the theory, but insignificant. The fourth column includes the establishment age
dummies. These are insignificant and show no clear pattern (possibly because in this dataset
we only have establishment age rather than firm age).
The fifth and sixth columns include all the covariates. There appears to be some evidence
that firms facing less competition are significantly less likely to decentralize. More importantly,
the heterogeneity terms remain positively and significantly associated with the probability of
decentralization using either the 90-10 (column (5)) or the 95-5 (column (6)). The frontier
term enters negatively in the regressions in both columns and is significant at the 5% level.
Both of these findings are consistent with the theory and the results we presented from the
French datasets, even though they are taken from a different dataset from a different country.

5.9

Interpreting the Competition Effects

In addition to the main predictions of our theory in Section 3, the empirical results presented so
far also show a robust and negative association of competition and decentralization. Although
competition was not a variable we originally considered in our model, these results made us
reconsider whether there are natural reasons for competition to affect decentralization.
One of the effects of competition would be similar to the heterogeneity/homogeneity variables. Firms with more competitors would learn from the experience of their competitors.
However, this effect is the opposite of that found in Tables 1-7, which indicate that firms in
more competitive environments are more, not less, decentralized.
42

Because of the smaller sample size in the UK, the sample split into high-tech versus low-tech industries and
the IV specifications yield highly imprecise estimates.

32

A more interesting extension is to allow the value of information to vary across firms and
sectors. In particular, greater competition may increase the return to the correct implementation of new technologies, so that firms avoid falling behind their competitors. If so, greater
competition will induce the principal to delegate authority to the manager with superior information. Yet another effect of a more competitive environment may be through disciplining the
manager; faced with greater competition, managers may be forced to take profit-maximizing
decisions more often, thus reducing the conflict of interest between the principal and the manager. This would naturally increase delegation, since delegation becomes more attractive to
the principal. We do not present these generalizations here because of space constraints.

6

Conclusions

Despite considerable academic and popular interest in the changes in the internal organization
of the firm, we are far from a theoretical or an empirical consensus on the determinants of the
organizational decisions of firms and on the reasons why there has recently been a significant
move towards greater decentralization. In this paper we presented a simple model of the
relationship between technology, information and decentralization, and empirically investigated
the main predictions of this model using three micro-level datasets. In our model, firms delegate
authority to managers, i.e., “decentralize”, in order to use the manager’s superior information
about implementation of new technologies. Because the interests of the manager and the
principal are not perfectly aligned, such delegation entails a costly loss of control for the
principal. The model predicts that as available public information about the implementation
of new technologies increases, firms should become less likely to decentralize, whereas firms
dealing with new (frontier) technologies should be more likely to decentralize. We also showed
that firms in more heterogeneous environments and young firms are more likely to choose
decentralization. These are intuitive, but quite novel, predictions, and have, to the best of our
knowledge, never been investigated empirically.
We documented that in all three datasets the correlations are consistent with the predictions
of our model. Firms in more heterogeneous environments and those that are closer to the
frontier of their industry are more likely to choose decentralization. Moreover, consistent with
the predictions of the theory, these results are stronger for firms in high-tech sectors. The
results are robust to using UK values to instrument for French heterogeneity and proximity to
frontier, alleviating some of the endogeneity concerns. They are also robust to using alternative
measures of decentralization and heterogeneity. We also found that younger firms tended to be
more likely to decentralize, although this result was less robust when we looked at alternative
33

measures of decentralization.
The theory and empirical results taken together suggest that learning and information
accumulation may have important effects on the internal organization of firms, and may be especially important for decentralization decisions. It would be interesting to document the same
issue using data from other countries, and also investigate whether the relationship between
proximity to frontier or heterogeneity and decentralization correspond to the causal effects of
the these variables on the internal organization of the firm. Specifying and estimating a more
structural model would be a fruitful approach for this purpose. Finally, our approach suggests
a natural reason for cross-country differences in the internal organization of firms; we may expect less decentralization in developing countries where most firms use well-established (rather
than frontier) technologies. Theoretical and empirical analysis of cross-country patterns of organizational forms and their implications for economic performance is another promising area
for future research.

34

Appendix A
A.1

Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1
The probability of success for a firm choosing centralization, conditional on action xi,k is:
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
π 0; hik | xi,k = L = q hik (1 − ε) + (1 − q hik )ε,
(15)
¡
¢
¡ i¢
¡ i¢
i
π 0; hk | xi,k = R = (1 − q hk )(1 − ε) + q hk ε,
(16)
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
where q hik is given by (7). In equation (15), q hik (1 − ε) is the posterior probability that the
reference
is L and that the correct action for the firm coincides with the reference action, whereas
¡ action
¢
(1 − q hik )ε is the posterior probability that the reference action is R and that the correct
¡ ¢ action for
the firm differs from the reference action. Equation (16) has a similar form, with (1 − q hik )(1 − ε) as
the posterior probability that the¡ reference
action is R and that the correct action for the firm coincides
¢
with the reference action and q hik ε as the posterior probability that the reference action is R and
that the correct action for the firm differs from the reference action.
Thus
¢
­ ¡
¢ ¡
¢®
¡
π 0; hik
= max π 0, hik | xi,k = L , π 0, hik | xi,k = R

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
ε + q hik (1 − 2ε)
if q hik ≥ 1/2

,
=
¡
¡ ¢¢
¡ ¢

ε + 1 − q hik (1 − 2ε)
if q hik < 1/2.
establishing the result.¥

Proof of Lemma 2
¡
¢
i
(1) To see that E qki |nik is increasing in nik , let (qn )k denote the posterior probability of firm i that
³ ´i
¡
¢
i
x∗k = L conditional on a history of length n, i.e., qnik
≡ E qki |nik . We need to prove that (qn )k is
i

k

increasing in n when x∗k = L. First note that (qn )k is a sufficient statistic for the history hik . Thus, by
the Law of Iterated Expectations, we have
³
´
i
i
i
i
(qn+1 )k = E (qn+1 )k | (qn )k > (qn )k .
Therefore, it is sufficient to prove that
³
´
i
i
i
E (qn+1 )k | (qn )k > (qn )k .
i

Consider a firm with a posterior (qn )k conditional on a sample of n and suppose that it obtains an
additional observation, i.e., observes the realization of a n + 1st firm. Since, given x∗k = L, L and R will
be revealed to be the right choice for the n + 1st firm with respective probabilities 1 − ε and ε, Bayes’
rule implies that

(qn )ik ×(1−ε)

with prob. 1 − ε

 (qn )ik ×(1−ε)+(1−(qn )ik )×ε
i
(qn+1 )k =


(qn )ik ×ε

with prob. ε
(1−(qn )ik )×(1−ε)+(qn )ik ×ε

35

Therefore,
³
´
i
i
E (qn+1 )k | (qn )k

i

=

(1 − ε) ×

(qn )k × (1 − ε)
³
´
i
i
(qn )k × (1 − ε) + 1 − (qn )k × ε
i

+ε × ³
This implies that
³
´
i
i
E (qn+1 )k | (qn )k

i

´

(qn )k × ε
i

1 − (qn )k × (1 − ε) + (qn )k × ε

.

i

− (qn )k
=

³
´2
i
2
i
1 − (qn )k (1 − 2ε) × (qn )k
³
³
´
´³
³
´´
i
i
i
i
ε × (qn )k + 1 − (qn )k × (1 − ε) (qn )k × (1 − ε) + ε × 1 − (qn )k

>

0,

establishing the desired result.
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
(2) Next, to prove p limnik −→∞ qi,k hik = 1 note that from the viewpoint of t = 0, q hik is a
i
random
¡ i ¢ variable, since the history hk is a random vector. We need to show that for almost all histories
q hk will become arbitrarily close to 1. We will do this by using the Continuous Mapping Theorem
(e.g., van der Vaart, 1998, Theorem 2.3). First, when x∗k = L, by the strong law of large numbers
p limnik →∞ ñik /nik = 1−ε. The Continuous Mapping Theorem then implies that any continuous function,
¡
¢
¡
¢
G ñik , nik , converges in probability to limnik →∞ G (1 − ε) nik , nik . (7) is such a function, so
¡ ¢
p i lim qi,k hik =
nk −→∞

lim

nik −→∞

1
= 1,
ε nik [2(1−ε)−1]
)
1 + ( 1−ε

where the last the quality follows from ε < 1/2. ¥

Proof of Lemma 3
First, we note that the value of the firm admits a recursive representation, so that for s∗ ∈ S that
i
maximizes
¡
¢ (3) with starting productivity yi and corresponding history hk , let this maximum value be
i
Vi yi , hk . Then
¡
¢
£ ¡
¢
¤
Vi yi , hik = max E Vi yi , hik | di,k | hik , and
(17)
di,k ∈{0,1}

¢
¡
Vi yi , hik | di,k
=

¡
¢¡
£ ¡
¢ i ¤¢
pi π di,k ; hik γyi + βE Vi γyi , hi+1
k+1 | hk
¡
¡
¢¢ ¡
£ ¡
¢
¤¢
+ 1 − pi π di,k ; hik
yi + βE Vi yi , hik+1 | hik .

In particular, with probability pi , the opportunity
to
¡
¢ implement the next technology arrives and it
is successfully implemented with probability π di,k ; hik . If it is successfully implemented, yi increases
to γyi , and otherwise it stays at yi . Future probabilities of opportunities and success are unaffected
by these choices or realizations. The resulting optimal policy d∗i,k in this recursive representation is the
organizational form induced by s∗ .
To characterize the form of the value function in (17) and the optimal policy d∗i,k , we guess and
¡
¢
verify that Vi yi , hik | di,k takes a linear form, namely
¡
¢
¡
¢
Vi yi , hik | di,k = Ai hik | di,k yi .

36

¡
¢
We then substitute the guess into the value function so as to solve for the unknown coefficient Ai hik | di,k .
This yields the following recursive equation for Ai :
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢¢
Ai hik | di,k
= pi π di,k ; hik γ + 1 − pi π di,k ; hik +
(18)
¡
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢¢¢
£ ¡ i
¢ i¤
i
i
β pi π di,k ; hk γ + 1 − pi π di,k ; hk
max
E Ai hk+1 | di,k+1 | hk .
di,k+1 ∈{0,1}

¡
¢
The optimal organizational form is simply that ¡which maximizes
Ai hik | di,k .£ This
¢
¡ is equivalent,
¢ in¤
turn, to choose organization so as to maximize π di,k ; hik (note that the term E A hik+1 | di,k+1 | hik
¢
¡
is ¡outside
of the firm’s control). Namely, the firm will choose organizational form di,k = 1 if π 1; hik >
¢
π 0; hik , and di,k = 0 otherwise. Since the program
we have established that choosing
¡ is recursive,
¢
i
organization period-by-period so as to maximize π di,k ; hk maximizes the value of the firm.
The second part of the Lemma follows immediately from the previous analysis.¥

Proof of Proposition 2
The Proposition will be proved using the following three lemmas (which are themselves proved below).
Lemma 4 For all nik ∈ N and ñik ∈ N with ñik ≤ nik , we have
¢¢
¡ ¡
¢¢
¡ ¡
π 0; nik , ñik = π 0; nik , nik − ñik .
This lemma states that firms updates their beliefs symmetrically after signals suggesting either L
or R to be the more likely correct action.
¡ ¡
¢¢
¡
¢
Lemma 5 Either π 0; nik , ñik < δ for all ñik ∈ [0, nik ], or there exists a unique integer, Q ε, nik ∈
Z+ , such that

¡
¢
ñik ≤ Q ε, nik ,
 either
¡ ¡ i i ¢¢
π 0; nk , ñk ≥ δ ⇔
¡
¢

or
ñik ≥ nik − Q ε, nik .
¡
¢ ¡
¢
¡
¢
In the latter case, Q ε, nik ≤ nik − 1 /2 and Q ε, nik is non-increasing in ε.
This lemma states that the posterior that the firm will choose the correct action will be greater
than the threshold for decentralization, δ, if the number of successful L ¡actions
¢ in the past are either
smaller or greater than a specific threshold depending on the integer Q ε, nik . Finally, we have the
following technical result:
Lemma 6 Let

¡
¢
£
¤
£
¤
χ nik , ñik , ε, Q̄ ≡ Pr ñik ≤ Q̄ + Pr ñik ≥ nik − Q̄

Then,
¡
¢
and for any Q̄ ≤ nik − 1 /2,

(19)

¢
¡
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q̄
≥ 0,
∂ Q̄
¢
¡
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q̄
≤ 0.
∂ε

¢¢
¡ ¡
Lemmas 4, 5 and 6 prove Proposition 2. In particular, unless π 0; nik , ñik < δ for all ñik ∈ [0, nik ],
we have that
¡
¡ ¢
¢
¡
¡
¢¢
Pr d∗i,k hit = 1 = χ nik , ñik , ε, Q ε, nik .

37

By definition,
³
´
¡ ¢
d Pr d∗i,k hit = 1
dε

¡
¡
¢¢ ¯
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q ε, nik ¯¯
=
¯
¯
∂ε

Q(ε,nik )=Q̄

¡
¡
¢¢
¡
¢
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q ε, nik dQ ε, nik
¡
¢
+
.
dε
∂Q ε, nik

¡
¢
Lemma 6 implies that
first term is non-positive
and that
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q̄ /∂ Q̄ ≥ 0, while Lemma 5
¡ the
¢
¡
¡
¢¢
i
i
i
i
i
establishes that dQ
³ ε,¡nk¢ /dε ´≤ 0. Finally, if π 0; nk , ñk < δ for all ñk ∈ [0, nk ], a change in ε has
no impact on Pr d∗i,k hit = 1 , which is equal to 0. This establishes the proposition.¥
Proof of Lemma 4: The equality follows
from
the assumption that q0 = 1/2. More formally, equations
¡
¢
(6) and (7) imply that for all ñik ≤ nik − 1 /2,


¡ ¡ i i ¢¢
1
π 0; nk , ñk
= ε + 1 −
¡ 1−ε ¢nik −2ñik  (1 − 2ε)
1+ ε
¡ ¡ i i
¢¢
1
i
= ε+
¡ 1−ε ¢−(nik −2ñik ) (1 − 2ε) = π 0; nk , nk − ñk .
1+ ε
¡
¢
The same conclusion follows from applying (6) to the case in which ñik > nik − 1 /2.¥
¡ ¡
¢¢
Proof
of
Lemma 5: Suppose that there exists ñik ∈ [0, nik ] such that π 0; nik , ñik
≥ δ. Let
¡
¢
X ε, nik ∈ R+ be the unique value of X that solves the following equation:


¢¢
¡ ¡ i
1
π̃ 0; nk , X ≡ ε + 1 −
¡ 1−ε ¢nik −2X  (1 − 2ε) = δ.
1+ ε
¡ ¡ i i ¢¢
i
i
This equation
¡ has
¡ i a iunique
¢¢ solution since, by hypothesis, π 0; nk , ñk ≥ δ for some ñk ∈ [0, nk ];
moreover, π̃ 0; nk , nk /2 = 1 − ε < δ, and the¡left-hand
¢ 43side is continuous and monotonically decreas¡
¢
i
i
ing in both ε¡ and
X
in
the
range
where
X
∈
0,
n
/2
.
Therefore,
there
exists
a
unique
X
ε,
n
k
k
¡
¡
¢¢¢
¡ ¡
¡
¢¢¢
such
π̃ 0; n¡ik , X ¢¢¢
ε, nik
= δ. Lemma
4 implies that π̃ 0; nik , X ε, nik
= δ if and only if
¡ ¡that
¡
¢
π̃ 0; nik , nik − X ε, nik
= δ. Let Q ε, nik ∈ Z+ be the largest integer
smaller
than
X, which will
¡ ¡ i i ¢¢
be¡the threshold
number
of
realization
of
either
L
or
R
such
that
π
0;
n
,
ñ
>
δ.
More
k
k
¢
©
¡
¢ª
¡
¢
¡formally,
¢
i
i
i
Q ε, nik ≡ max
z
≤
X
ε,
n
.
The
properties
of
X
ε,
n
immediately
imply
that
Q
ε,
n
is
z∈Z
+
k
k
k
¡ i
¢
no larger than nk − 1 /2 and is non-increasing in ε.¥
Proof of Lemma 6: Since ñik is the number of successes out of nik in a Bernoulli trial, then holding Q
constant at Q̄, we have that
¶
Q̄ µ
X
£ i
¤
i
i
nik
ñi
(1 − ε) k εnk −ñk , and
Pr ñk ≤ Q̄ =
i
ñ
k
i
ñk =0

£
¤
Pr ñik ≥ 1 − Q̄ =

i

nk
X
ñik =nik −Q̄

=

µ

nik
ñik

¶

ñik

(1 − ε)

i

i

εnk −ñk ,

¶
Q̄ µ
X
i
nik
ni −ñi
εñk (1 − ε) k k .
i
ñ
k
i

ñk =0

h


nik −2X i−1
To see that π̃ 0; nik , X
is decreasing in ε, let ζ nik , X ≡ 1 + 1−ε
. In the range X ∈
ε
i




∂ζ
n
,X
( k )
∂
π̃ 0; nik , X = 1 − 2 1 − ζ nik , X − (1 − 2ε)
. Since ζ nik , X < 1/2 and
0, nik /2 , we have ∂ε
∂ε
∂ζ nik , X /∂ε > 0, ∂ π̃ 0; nik , X /∂ε < 0 follows.
43

38

The latter equation implies
£
¤
∂ Pr ñik ≥ 1 − Q̄
∂ε

=
=

¶
Q̄ µ
´
X
∂ ³ ñik
nik
ni −ñi
ε (1 − ε) k k
i
ñk
∂ε
ñik =0
µ i ¶³
´
nk
ni −1
−nik (1 − ε) k
+
0
µ i ¶³
´
¡
¢
nk
ni −1
ni −2
(1 − ε) k − nik − 1 ε (1 − ε) k
+
1
µ i ¶³
´
¡
¢
nk
ni −2
ni −3
2ε (1 − ε) k − nik − 2 ε2 (1 − ε) k
+
2
....... +
µ
¶³
´
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢¢
nik
ni −Q̄−1
ni −Q̄
Q̄ − 1 εQ̄−2 (1 − ε) k
− n − Q̄ − 1 ε(Q̄−1) (1 − ε) k
+
Q̄ − 1
µ i ¶³
´
¡
¢
nk
ni −Q̄
ni −Q̄−1
Q̄εQ̄−1 (1 − ε) k
− n − Q̄ εQ̄ (1 − ε) k
.
Q̄

Evaluating these terms and canceling them pairwise, we obtain
£
¤
µ i ¶
¢
∂ Pr ñik ≥ 1 − Q̄
nk ¡
ni −Q̄−1
=−
n − Q̄ εQ̄ (1 − ε) k
.
Q̄
∂ε
A similar argument establishes:
£
¤ µ
¶
¢
∂ Pr ñik ≤ Q̄
i
nik ¡
Q̄
=
n − Q̄ (1 − ε) εnk −Q̄−1 .
Q̄
∂ε
Combining these two expressions, we have
¡
¢
£
¤
£
¤
∂χ nik , ñik , ε, Q̄
∂ Pr ñik ≥ 1 − Q̄
∂ Pr ñik ≤ Q̄
=
+
,
∂ε
∂ε
µ i ¶∂ε
´
¢³
i
nk ¡
Q̄
ni −Q̄−1
=
n − Q̄ (1 − ε) εnk −Q̄−1 − εQ̄ (1 − ε) k
,
Q̄
Ã
µ i ¶
µ
¶Q̄ µ
¶ni −Q̄−1 !
¢
1−ε
1−ε k
nk ¡
nik −1
=
n − Q̄ (1 − ε)
−
< 0,
Q̄
ε
ε
¡
¢
where the last inequality follows using the facts that ε < 1/2 and Q̄ ≤ nik − 1 /2.¥

A.2

Analysis with Managerial Contracts

In this Appendix, we briefly discuss the possibility that firms may use incentive contracts to induce
managers to choose the right action. We will show that when B (the benefit accruing to the manager
when she chooses her preferred action) is sufficiently large, such incentive contracts will not be optimal.
The intuition is that because managers are credit constrained, incentive contracts give the right incentive
to managers only by transferring rents to them. If B is large, this is not profitable for the principal.
Let us assume that the principal decides whether to hire the manager before knowing whether that
Ii (k, t) = 1. Let us also normalize the outside option of the manager to zero, and recall that the
manager is also risk neutral. Given the credit constraints of the manager , the optimal contract takes
a simple form: the principal will pay the manager Byi,t−1 in case of success. Both when the manager
is unsuccessful in the implementation of the new technology and when there is no new technology to
be implemented, it is optimal for the principal to pay him zero. This contract will induce the manager

39

to choose the right action. It will also meet his participation constraint, since the manager will receive
Byi,t−1 with probability pi δ > 0.
The alternative is to pay the manager zero irrespective of success, and let him choose his preferred
action. This contract also meets the manager’s participation constraint, since he derives private benefits
from the implementation of the project. This option was the one analyzed in the text. Since the issue
of whether there is delegation or not is only interesting in the case when there is a technology to be
implemented, let us focus on time t such . We then have:
Proposition 4 Suppose that B > (γ−1)(1−δ)
and that Ii (k, t) = 1. Then, for any history hik ∈ Hkt , the
1−βpi γ
optimal strategy for the principal of firm i is not to offer an incentive contract to the manager.
Proof. Let di,k = 2 denote firm i’s decision to delegate control with full compensation to the manager
for choosing the profit-maximizing action at date t on technology k when Ii (k, t) = 1. The value of the
decentralized firm offering the manager an incentive contract is
¡
¢
£ ¡
¢
¤
Vi yi , hik | 2 = pi [(γ − B) yi + βE Vi γyi , hik+1 | hik ]
£ ¡
¢
¤
+(1 − pi ){yi + βE Vi yi , hik+1 | hik ].
¡
¢
¡
¢
Solving this functional equation leads to Vi yi , hik | 2 = Ai hik | 2 yi , where:
¡
¢
Ai hik | 2 =

[pi (γ − B) + 1 − pi ] +
β[pi γ + 1 − pi ]

max

di,k+1 ∈{0,1,2}

¢
¤
£ ¡
E Ai hik+1 | di,k+1 | hik .

(20)

Instead, the value of a decentralized firm offering the manager a flat wage is Vi (yi , htk | 1) = Ai (htk | 1) yi ,
where
¡
¢
Ai hik | 1 = [pi (δγ + (1 − δ)) + 1 − pi ]
(21)
£ ¡ i
¢ i¤
+β[pi (δγ + (1 − δ)) + 1 − pi ]
max
E Ai hk+1 | di,k+1 | hk .
di,k+1 ∈{0,1,2}

¡
¢
Which of the two
yields a larger value to the firm depends on whether Ai hik | 1 is larger or
¡ regimes
¢
smaller than Ai hik | 2 . To establish when this is the case, note that
¡
¢
Ai hik | 1
B

¡
¢
> Ai hik | 2 ⇔
>

µ
(γ − 1) (1 − δ) 1 + β

max

di,k+1 ∈{0,1,2}

¶
£ ¡ i
¢ i¤
E Ai hk+1 | di,k+1 | hk .

(22)

An upper bound to the future value of the firm can be calculated by assuming that, from period (t + 1)
onwards, the firm will innovate successfully whenever a new technology opportunity arises, which takes
place with probability pi , and will pay no managerial wage. This yields
max

di,k+1 ∈{0,1,2}

£ ¡
¢
¤
E Ai hik+1 | di,k+1 | hik < Ā ≡

pi γ
.
1 − βpi γ

¢
¤
£ ¡
Thus, substituting maxdi,k+1 ∈{0,1,2} E Ai hik+1 | di,k+1 | hik by Ā we obtain the sufficient condition
B>

¡
¢
¡
¢
(γ − 1) (1 − δ)
⇒ Ai hik | 1 > Ai hik | 2
1 − βpi γ

for incentive contracts not to be profitable for the principal.

40

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, and Zilibotti, Fabrizio (1999), “Information Accumulation in Development,” Journal of Economic Growth, 4, 5-38.
[2] Aghion, Philippe, and Tirole, Jean (1997), “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,”
Journal of Political Economy, 105, 1-29.
[3] Aubert, Patrick, Caroli, Eve, and Roger, Muriel (2004), “New Technologies, Workplace
Organization and the Structure of the Workforce: Firm-Level Evidence,” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
[4] Askenazy, Philippe, Thesmar, David, and Thoenig, Mathias (2005), “On the Relation Between Organizational Practices and New Technologies: The Role of (Time Based) Competition”, Economic Journal, forthcoming.
[5] Baker, George, Gibbons, Robert, and Murphy, Kevin (1999), “Informal Authority in Organizations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 56-73.
[6] Baker, George, and Hubbard, Thomas (2003), “Make Versus Buy In Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design and Information”, American Economic Review, 93, 551-72.
[7] Baker, George, and Hubbard, Thomas (2004), “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On
Board Computers and Governance in US Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
1443-79.
[8] Baron, David, and Besanko, David (1992), “Information, Control, and Organizational
Structure”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 1, 237-275.
[9] Billingsley, Patrick (1995, 1986), Probability and Measure, New York: Wiley and Sons.
[10] Black, Sandra, and Lynch, Lisa (2001), “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and Information Technology on Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
83, 434-445.
[11] Bloom, Nicholas, Schankerman, Mark, and Van Reenen, John (2004), “Technological
Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry”, Centre for Economic Performance Discussion
Paper, 675.
[12] Bolton, Patrick, and Dewatripont, Mathias (1994), “The Firm as a Communication Network,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 809-839.
[13] Bouwens, Jan, and Van Lent, Laurence (2004), “Assessing the performance of profit center
managers,” mimeo, University of Tilburg.
[14] Bresnahan, Timothy, Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Hitt, Lorin (2002), “Information Technology, Workplace Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 339-376.
[15] Caroli, Eve, and Van Reenen, John, (2001), “Skill Biased Organizational Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1448-1492.
[16] Colombo, Massimo, and Delmastro, Marco (2004), “Delegation of Authority in business
organizations: An empirical test,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 52, 53-80.
[17] Crépon, Bruno, Heckel, Thomas, and Riedinger, Nicolas (2004), “Computerization, Organizational Change and Productivity: Microeconometric Evidence for France,” mimeo,
INSEE.
41

[18] Cully, Mark, O’Reilly, Andrew, Woodland, Stephen, Dix, Gill (1999), Britain at Work,
London: Routledge.
[19] Dearden, John (1987), “Measuring profit center managers,” Harvard Business Review, 65,
84-88.
[20] Dessein, Wouter (2002), “Authority and Communication in Organizations,” Review of
Economic Studies, 69, 811-838.
[21] Garicano, Luis (2000), “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,”
Journal of Political Economy, 108, 874-904.
[22] Geanakoplos, John, and Milgrom, Paul (1991), “A Theory of Hierarchies Based on Limited
Managerial Attention,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 5, 205-225.
[23] Greenan, Nathalie, and Mairesse, Jacques, (1999), “Organizational Change in French Manufacturing: What Do We Learn From Firm Representatives and From Their Employees,”
NBER Working Paper, 7285.
[24] Hart, Oliver, and Moore, John (2005), “On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination versus
Specialization,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 675-702.
[25] Hausman, Jerry, and Taylor, William (1981), “Panel data and unobservable individual
effects,” Econometrica, 49, 1377-1398.
[26] Ichniowski, Casey, Prenushi, Giovanna, and Shaw, Kathryn (1997), “The effects of Human
Resource Management: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” American Economic Review,
87, 291-313.
[27] Jaffe, Adam (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers from Firms’ Patents,
Profit, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76, 984-1001.
[28] Janod, Véronique (2002), “Changements Organisationnel, Qualification et Croissance,”
PhD Dissertation, Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne.
[29] Janod, Véronique, and Saint-Martin, Anne (2004), “Measuring Work Reorganization and
its Impact on Firm Performance: an Estimate on French Manufacturing Firms over 19951999,” Labour Economics, 11, 785-798.
[30] Keller, Wolfgang (2002), “Geographic localization of international technology diffusion,”
American Economic Review, 92, 120-142.
[31] Lee, Lung-Fei (1981), “Simultaneous equation models with discrete and censored dependent variables,” in Manski, Charles, and McFadden, Daniel (eds), Structural Analysis of
Discrete Data and Econometric Applications, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 346-364.
[32] Lerner, Josh, and Merges, Robert (1998), “The Control of Biotechnological Alliances: An
Empirical Examination of the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics,
46, 125-156.
[33] McKinsey Global Institute (2002), “Reaching Higher Productivity Growth in France and
Germany,” MGI Reports, http://www.mckinsey.com/knowledge/mgi/europe/index.asp
[34] Melumad, Nahum, Mookherjee, Dilip, and Reichelstein, Stefan (1995), “Hierarchical Decentralization of Incentive Contracts,” Rand Journal of Economics, 26, 654-672.
[35] Merchant, Kenneth (1989), Rewarding Results: Motivating Profit Center Managers, Cambridge: Harvard Business School Series in Accounting and Control.
42

[36] Milgrom, Paul, and Roberts, John (1992), Economics, Organization and Management,
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
[37] Mookherjee, Dilip (2005), “Decentralization, Hierarchies and Incentives: A Mechanism
Design Approach,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
[38] Nickell, Stephen (1996), “Competition and Corporate Performance,” Journal of Political
Economy, 104, 724-746.
[39] Nickell, Stephen, Nicolitsas, Daphne, and Patterson, Malcolm (2001), “Does Doing Badly
Encourage Managerial Innovation?,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 3, 5-28.
[40] Radner, Roy (1993), “The Organization of Decentralized Information Processing,” Econometrica, 61, 1109-1146.
[41] Radner, Roy, and Van Zandt, Timothy (1992), “Information Processing in Firms and
Returns to Scale,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 25/26, 265-298.
[42] Rajan, Raghuram, and Zingales, Luigi (2001), “The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A
Theory of the Origin and Growth of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 805-851.
[43] Rajan, Raghuram, and Wulf, Julie (2005), “The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel
Data on the Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
[44] Rivers, Douglas, and Vuong, Quang (1988), “Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 39, 347–366.
[45] Sah, Raaj, and Stiglitz, Joseph (1986), “The Architecture of Economic Systems: Hierarchies and Polyarchies,” American Economic Review, 76, 716-727.
[46] van der Vaart, Aad (1998), Asymptotic Statistics, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[47] White, Halbert (1980), “A Heteroskedasticity - Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator
and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48, 817-838.
[48] Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge: MIT Press.

43

0

% Firms decentralized into Profit Centers
10
20
30

40

Figure 1: Heterogeneity and decentralization
Decentralization to Profit Centers (COI)

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

-

heterogeneity increases

NOTES: The X-axis divides all firms into deciles of heterogeneity from the first decile (low heterogeneity) to the tenth
decile (high heterogeneity). Heterogeneity is measured by an index of dispersion (the difference of the 90th minus the 10th
percentile) of productivity growth between firms in a four digit industry (see text). The Y-axis indicates the proportion of
firms that are decentralized into profit centers in the relevant decile group. The sample is the COI sample (3,570 French
firms in 1997).

0

% Firms decentralized into Profit Centers
10
20
30
40

Figure 2: Proximity to frontier and decentralization
Decentralization to Profit Centers (COI)

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

-

proximity increases

NOTES: The X-axis divides all firms into deciles of proximity to frontier (in terms of value added per hours) from the first
decile (low proximity to frontier) to the tenth decile (high proximity to frontier). The Y-axis indicates the proportion of
firms that are decentralized into profit centers in the relevant decile group. The sample is the COI sample (3,570 French
firms in 1997).

44

0

% Firms decentralized into Profit Centers
10
20
30
40

50

Figure 3: Age and decentralization
Decentralization to Profit Centres (COI)

<5 years

5−9 years

10−19 years

>19 years

NOTES: Firms are grouped into age bands (dated from the birth of the firm). The Y-axis indicates the proportion of
firms that are decentralized into profit centers in the relevant age group. The sample is the COI sample (3,570 French
firms in 1997).

Figure 4: Probability of centralization as function of sample size

NOTES: The underlying parameters are the following: ε = 0.3, δ = 0.65.

45

46
no

Other firm and industry
controls
yes (73)
5.49
(0.019)
3,570

no

-

-

-

-

-0.084
(0.036)
0.178
(0.026)
-

-

(2)

3,570

yes (73)
-

no

-

-

-

-

0.159
(0.024)

-

-

-

(3)

3,570

yes (120)
-

no

-

0.133
(0.040)
0.002
(0.021)
-0.011
(0.019)

-

-

-

-

(4)

yes (73)
3.52
(0.061)
3,570

no

-

0.151
(0.040)
0.012
(0.021)
-0.007
(0.019)

-0.101
(0.039)
0.182
(0.026)
-

0.211
(0.107)

(5)

3,570

yes (73)
-

no

-

0.151
(0.040)
0.012
(0.021)
-0.007
(0.019)

0.167
(0.024)

-

-

0.252
(0.102)

(6)

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers

yes (73)
2.64
(0.104)
3,570

yes

-0.660
(0.144)

0.172
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.039
(0.019)

-0.225
(0.045)
0.141
(0.033)
-

0.296
(0.127)

(7)

3,570

yes (73)
-

yes

-0.733
(0.136)

0.174
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

0.164
(0.028)

-

-

0.251
(0.115)

(8)

NOTES: Estimation by Probit maximum likelihood with marginal effects at the sample means reported (robust standard errors are below marginal effects in brackets);
standard errors are also corrected for clustering on four-digit industries. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit
level). All right hand side variables are lagged and averaged between 1994 and 1997. Labor productivity is the log of value added per hour, frontier is defined as the
99th percentile of the productivity distribution in the firm’s four-digit industry. Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of productivity growth rates within a four digit
industry (the 90th percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm age is “above twenty years”. “Other firm controls” include the log of number of plants, a
dummy variable for foreign ownership, the log of the ratio of capital to value added, the log of firm size (employment), the proportion of workers using new technologies,
the proportion of high skilled workers, the average age of workers in the firm, the firm’s market share, and a firm diversification measure. “Other industry controls”
include the log of the ratio of capital to employment, the log of the ratio of IT investment to employment, and the Herfindahl index of concentration. See appendix C1
for full results on firm and industry level covariates.

3,570

yes (73)
-

-

Lerner index

Industry dummies
Wald test A+B=0
(p-value)
Observations

-

-

5≤ Firm age<10 years

10≤Firm age<20 years

-

-

-

-

0.212
(0.106)

(1)

Firm age<5 years

Frontier (99th percentile)
(A)
Labour productivity (firm level)
(B)
Proximity to frontier
(constrained term B-A)

Heterogeneity

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)

Table 1: Probability of firm being decentralized
(Enquête COI)

47

0.174
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

Firm age<5 years

yes (73)
3,570

Industry dummies
Observations

yes (73)
3,570

-0.750
(0.137)

0.173
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.041
(0.019)

0.168
(0.029)

yes (73)
3,570

-0.708
(0.134)

0.171
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

0.152
(0.028)

0.231
(0.132)
-

(3)

Standard
deviation

yes (73)
3,570

-0.743
(0.136)

0.173
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

0.165
(0.028)

0.870
(0.316)
-

(4)

Std dev
after
trimming

yes (73)
3,570

-0.721
(0.136)

0.177
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.041
(0.019)

0.159
(0.028)

-0.063
(0.031)

-

(5)

IT
weighted

yes (73)
3,570

-0.697
(0.133)

0.173
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

0.146
(0.027)

-0.055
(0.035)

-

(6)

Unweighted

yes (73)
3,563

-0.764
(0.145)

0.172
(0.041)
0.068
(0.023)
0.047
(0.020)

0.168
(0.030)

-0.069
(0.034)

-

(7)

IT and
geographically
weighted

NOTES: All columns are from separate regressions, estimation by Probit maximum likelihood with marginal effects at the sample means reported (robust standard
errors are below marginal effects in brackets); standard errors are also corrected for clustering on four-digit industries. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit
level (except industry dummies at the three-digit level); all right hand side variables are lagged and averaged between 1994 and 1997. In column (1) the measure of
heterogeneity is the difference between the productivity growth rate for the firm at the 90th percentile less the 10th percentile; in column (2) it is the 95th percentile less
the 5th percentile; in column (3) it is the standard deviation of productivity growth rates and in column (4) it is the same as column (3) except we trim the bottom and
top 5% of productivity growth distribution in each four-digit industry. In column (5), the homogeneity measure is IT weighted; in column (6) it is not weighted whereas
in column (7) it is both IT and geographically weighted (this regression also includes 20 regional dummies; Corsican observations are lost because all centralized). The
reference for firm age is “above twenty years”. All regressions also include additional firm level controls (log of number of plants, dummy variable for foreign ownership,
log of the ratio of capital to value added, log of firm size - employment, proportion of workers using new technologies, proportion of high skilled workers, average age
of workers in the firm, firm’s market share, firm diversification measure) and industry level controls (log of the ratio of capital to employment, log of the ratio of IT
investment to employment, and Herfindahl index of concentration). See Appendix C1 for full results on firm and industry level covariates.

-0.733
(0.136)

Lerner index

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤ Firm age<10 years

0.164
(0.028)

0.142
(0.069)
-

(2)

(1)
0.251
(0.115)
-

95th
−5th
percentiles

90th
−10th
percentiles

(log Homogeneity) /10

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers
Heterogeneity measure:
Dispersion of productivity growth
in four-digit industry

Proximity to frontier

(log Homogeneity) /10

Heterogeneity

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)
Measure of
homogeneity/heterogeneity

Table 2: Probability of firm being decentralized: alternative measures of heterogeneity
(Enquête COI)

Table 3: Probability of firm being decentralized
broken down into high-tech and low-tech sectors (Enquête COI)
Dependent variable
Measure of
heterogeneity/homogeneity

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers
Dispersion of productivity
growth in industry

(log Homogeneity) /10
IT weighted

Full
sample
(1)

Hightech
(2)

Lowtech
(3)

Full
sample
(4)

Hightech
(5)

Lowtech
(6)

0.251
(0.115)
-

0.679
(0.189)
-

-0.062
(0.135)
-

-

-

-

-0.063
(0.031)

-0.098
(0.048)

-0.019
(0.037)

Proximity to frontier

0.164
(0.028)

0.224
(0.040)

0.103
(0.044)

0.159
(0.028)

0.208
(0.039)

0.104
(0.043)

Firm age<5 years

0.174
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

0.215
(0.059)
0.069
(0.032)
-0.008
(0.027)

0.122
(0.055)
0.049
(0.029)
0.083
(0.028)

0.177
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.041
(0.019)

0.214
(0.060)
0.068
(0.032)
-0.005
(0.027)

0.123
(0.056)
0.049
(0.029)
0.082
(0.028)

Lerner index

-0.733
(0.136)

-0.947
(0.168)

-0.547
(0.218)

-0.721
(0.136)

-0.895
(0.168)

-0.544
(0.218)

Industry dummies
Observations
Log-likelihood ratio test (split)
(p-value)
Wald test: Heterogeneity (p-val)
Wald test: Homogeneity (p-val)
Wald test: Proximity (p-val)
Wald test: Firm age<5 (p-val)

yes (73)
3,570

yes (52) yes (42)
1,767
1,803
64.40 (45)
(0.030)
(0.001)
(0.040)
(0.254)

yes (73)
3,570

Heterogeneity
(log Homogeneity) /10

5≤ Firm age<10 years
10≤Firm age<20 years

-

-

yes (52) yes (42)
1,767
1,803
62.08 (45)
(0.046)
(0.197)
(0.075)
(0.264)

NOTES: Estimation by Probit maximum likelihood with marginal effects at the sample means reported (robust standard
errors are below marginal effects in brackets); standard errors are also corrected for clustering on four-digit industries.
Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit level). All right hand
side variables are lagged (and averaged between 1994 and 1997). The definition of “high-tech” is if the firm is in an
industry which has greater than median IT investment per worker; “low-tech” are all other firms. “Log-likelihood ratio
test: Split” tests the equality of all coefficients between high-tech and low-tech sectors. P-values of tests of whether
individual marginal effects at the respective (high-tech and low-tech) sample means are significantly different between
high-tech and low-tech sectors are given below the log-likelihood ratio test. Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of
productivity growth rates within a four digit industry (the 90th percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm
age is “above twenty years”. All regressions also include additional firm level controls (log of number of plants, dummy
variable for foreign ownership, log of the ratio of capital to value added, log of firm size - employment, proportion of
workers using new technologies, proportion of high skilled workers, average age of workers in the firm, firm’s market share,
firm diversification measure) and industry level controls (log of the ratio of capital to employment, log of the ratio of IT
investment to employment, and Herfindahl index of concentration).

48

49

0.172
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.039
(0.019)

Firm age<5 years

yes (73)
2.64
(0.104)
3,570

Industry dummies
Wald test A+B=0
(p-value)
Observations

yes (73)
2.65
(0.103)
3,570

-0.672
(0.144)

0.172
(0.044)
0.061
(0.023)
0.035
(0.020)

-0.228
(0.044)
0.144
(0.033)
-

yes (73)
1.86
(0.173)
3,570

-0.586
(0.124)

0.151
(0.034)
0.057
(0.017)
0.035
(0.016)

-0.191
(0.040)
0.128
(0.030)
-

0.261
(0.119)

(3)

Linear
probability
model

yes (73)
5.71
(0.017)
3,479

-0.543
(0.146)

0.157
(0.042)
0.075
(0.023)
0.041
(0.020)

-0.066
(0.023)
0.202
(0.060)
-

0.243
(0.095)

(4)

Frontier:
TFP

3,570

yes (73)
-

-0.521
(0.123)

0.164
(0.041)
0.02
(0.022)
0.039
(0.019)

-0.038
(0.012)

-

-

0.239
(0.105)

(5)

Firm rank in
productivity
distribution

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers

yes (73)
0.28
(0.595)
3,570

-0.636
(0.144)

0.170
(0.041)
0.065
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

-0.179
(0.077)
0.137
(0.033)
-

0.221
(0.121)

(6)

Frontier:
95th
percentile

yes (73)
0.08
(0.772)
3,570

-0.634
(0.144)

0.170
(0.041)
0.065
(0.022)
0.04
(0.019)

-0.104
(0.091)
0.132
(0.033)
-

0.181
(0.117)

(7)

Frontier:
90th
percentile

NOTES: All estimation by Probit maximum likelihood (marginal effects at the sample mean reported) except column (2) which is estimated by by Logit (marginal effects
at the sample mean reported) and column (3) which is estimated by by OLS (linear probability model). Coefficients with robust standard errors below (in brackets);
standard errors are also corrected for clustering on four-digit industries. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit
level); all right hand side variables are lagged and averaged between 1994 and 1997. Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of productivity growth rates within a four
digit industry (the 90th percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm age is “above twenty years”. All regressions also include additional firm level controls
(log of number of plants, dummy variable for foreign ownership, log of the ratio of capital to value added, log of firm size - employment, proportion of workers using
new technologies, proportion of high skilled workers, average age of workers in the firm, firm’s market share, firm diversification measure) and industry level controls (log
of the ratio of capital to employment, log of the ratio of IT investment to employment, and Herfindahl index of concentration). Exact definition of each experiment is
described in text. In column (4), the proximity to frontier terms are expressed in TFP instead of labor productivity. In column (5), the indicator of proximity to frontier
is the firm’s rank (in terms of labor productivity) in its four-digit industry. In columns (6) and (7), the frontier term is defined as the 95th or 90th percentile of the
four-digit industry labor productivity (instead of the 99th in the main specification).

-0.660
(0.144)

Lerner index

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤ Firm age<10 years

-0.225
(0.045)
0.141
(0.033)
-

Frontier term
(99th percentile)
Labour productivity
(firm level)
Firm rank

0.293
(0.121)

(2)

(1)
0.296
(0.127)

Logit ML
(marginal
effects)

Baseline
(marginal
effects)

Heterogeneity

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)

Table 4: Robustness checks on the probability of firm being decentralized
(Enquête COI)

50
yes (73)
2.69
(0.101)
3,570

Industry dummies
Wald test A+B=0
(p-value)
Observations

yes (67)
5.48
(0.019)
1,793

-0.827
(0.244)

0.125
(0.053)
0.059
(0.035)
0.061
(0.029)

-0.303
(0.056)
0.146
(0.052)

yes (67)
0.84
(0.359)
2,990

-0.658
(0.174)

0.224
(0.042)
0.084
(0.025)
0.048
(0.022)

-0.192
(0.041)
0.144
(0.042)

0.403
(0.116)

(10)

Joint
stock firms

yes (73)
1.44
(0.230)
2,555

-0.533
(0.156)

0.184
(0.050)
0.073
(0.024)
0.026
(0.021)

-0.179
(0.053)
0.110
(0.034)

0.324
(0.159)

(11)

Specialized
firms

yes (73)
0.00
(0.952)
2,951

-0.675
(0.139)

0.158
(0.048)
0.067
(0.024)
0.032
(0.021)

-0.152
(0.041)
0.155
(0.032)

0.309
(0.120)

(12)

French
owned

NOTES: (-cont.) In column (8), all firms are weighted (in the regression) by the log of their employment. In column (9) “Under control” means that the firm is part of a
larger group (either French or foreign). In column (10) “Joint stock firm” means that the firm is a joint stock fim, as opposed to limited liability firms, etc. In column
(11) ”Specialized” indicates that the firm has at least 80% of its sales in one four-digit industry. In column (12) ”French owned” means that the firm is part of a French
group.

-0.688
(0.173)

0.151
(0.045)
0.060
(0.025)
0.044
(0.022)

Lerner index

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤ Firm age<10 years

Firm age<5 years

-0.251
(0.051)
0.152
(0.040)

Frontier term
(99th percentile)
Labour productivity
(firm level)

0.461
(0.140)

(9)

(8)
0.368
(0.138)

Under
control

Weighted:
log(employment)

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers

Heterogeneity

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)

Table 4: (-cont.) Robustness checks on the probability of firm being decentralized
(Enquête COI)

51
yes (71)
3,518

yes (71)
3,518

-0.017
(0.008)
0.007
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.005
(0.002)
0.035
(0.025)

-

yes (71)
3,518

1.185
(0.681)
0.187
(0.185)
0.156
(0.042)
0.066
(0.022)
0.038
(0.020)
-0.767
(0.545)

-

-

(3)

Endogenous
heterogeneity

Profit
centers

yes (71)
3,518

-0.054
(0.027)
-0.030
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.011)
2.896
(0.109)

-0.218
(0.053)
-0.419
(0.230)
-

-

(4)

(First
stage)

Proximity
(France)

yes (71)
3,518

0.310
(0.130)
0.341
(0.123)
0.175
(0.042)
0.077
(0.023)
0.044
(0.020)
-1.228
(0.387)

-

-

(5)

Endogenous
proximity

Profit
centers

yes (71)
3,518

0.008
(0.003)
0.004
(0.003)
0.005
(0.002)
-0.015
(0.015)

-

0.157
(0.054)
0.005
(0.027)
-

(6)

(First
stage)

Heterogeneity
(France)

yes (71)
3,518

-0.057
(0.027)
-0.031
(0.015)
-0.008
(0.011)
2.903
(0.110)

-

-0.093
(0.099)
-0.217
(0.057)
-

(7)

(First
stage)

Proximity
(France)

yes (71)
3,518

1.572
(0.699)
0.456
(0.194)
0.165
(0.042)
0.073
(0.022)
0.037
(0.020)
-1.542
(0.570)

-

-

(8)

Both
endogenous

Profit
centers

NOTES: Estimation by Probit (multivariate normal) maximum likelihood, marginal effects at the sample mean reported. Observations only kept when match between
UK and French four-digit industry is possible. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit level). All right hand side
variables are lagged and averaged between 1994 and 1997. Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of productivity growth rates within a four digit industry (the 90th
percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm age is “above twenty years”. All regressions also include additional firm level controls (log of number of plants,
dummy variable for foreign ownership, log of the ratio of capital to value added, log of firm size - employment, proportion of workers using new technologies, proportion
of high skilled workers, average age of workers in the firm, firm’s market share, firm diversification measure) and industry level controls (log of the ratio of capital to
employment, log of the ratio of IT investment to employment, and Herfindahl index of concentration). In column (1), heterogeneity and proximity to frontier are both
assumed exogenous in the “profit centers” equation. In columns (2) and (3), heterogeneity is assumed endogenous, while proximity to frontier is assumed exogenous.
In columns (4) and (5), proximity to frontier is assumed endogenous, while heterogeneity is assumed exogenous. In columns (6) to (8), heterogeneity and proximity to
frontier are both assumed endogenous.

Industry dummies
Observations

Lerner index

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤ Firm age<10 years

Heterogeneity
(France)
Proximity to frontier
(France)
Firm age<5 years

0.230
(0.120)
0.167
(0.029)
0.166
(0.041)
0.071
(0.022)
0.043
(0.020)
-0.723
(0.137)

-

(99th percentile)

UK Frontier

(2)

(1)
0.156
(0.048)
-

(First
stage)

Both
exogenous

-

Heterogeneity
(France)

Profit
centers

UK Heterogeneity

of heterogeneity and proximity

Assumptions over the exogeneity

Dependent variable

Table 5 : Allowing for potential endogeneity of heterogeneity and proximity to frontier
(Enquête COI)

52

-0.110
(0.054)
0.072
(0.052)
-0.036
(0.056)
-0.007
(0.048)
0.004
(0.040)
-0.034
(0.009)

Frontier (99th percentile)

yes (49)
8.83
(0.003)
0.475
648

-0.249
(0.079)
0.064
(0.077)
-0.016
(0.080)
-0.044
(0.074)
-0.015
(0.059)
-0.046
(0.024)

0.455
(0.235)

High tech
(2)

yes (31)
0.35
(0.552)
0.493
610

0.021
(0.103)
0.104
(0.075)
-0.027
(0.092)
0.022
(0.061)
0.026
(0.054)
-0.029
(0.114)

-0.127
(0.415)

Lowtech
(3)

yes (70)
8.27
(0.004)
0.440
1,049

-0.115
(0.051)
0.126
(0.056)
0.183
(0.088)
0.047
(0.056)
0.069
(0.039)
-0.934
(0.288)

0.355
(0.185)

Full
sample
(4)

yes (47)
5.16
(0.023)
0.553
526

-0.152
(0.080)
0.118
(0.072)
0.099
(0.113)
-0.007
(0.064)
0.059
(0.054)
-0.166
(0.416)

0.398
(0.283)

High tech
(5)

Level

yes (43)
0.19
(0.663)
0.325
523

0.011
(0.086)
0.066
(0.081)
0.275
(0.129)
0.076
(0.084)
0.068
(0.055)
-0.981
(0.402)

0.075
(0.301)

Lowtech
(6)

yes (69)
0.00
(0.988)
0.436
1,011

-0.058
(0.048)
-0.056
(0.101)
0.054
(0.107)
0.034
(0.059)
0.072
(0.040)
-0.666
(0.257)

0.434
(0.200)

Full
sample
(7)

yes (47)
1.98
(0.160)
0.553
505

-0.078
(0.064)
0.164
(0.157)
0.102
(0.171)
-0.031
(0.068)
0.056
(0.053)
0.048
(0.036)

0.396
(0.304)

High tech
(8)

-0.043
(0.067)
-0.137
(0.108)
0.017
(0.114)
0.095
(0.090)
0.099
(0.054)
-0.977
(0.359)

0.102
(0.294)

Lowtech
(9)

yes (42)
0.52
(0.472)
0.320
501

Growth rate

Some delayering between 1996 and 1998

NOTES: Estimation by Probit ML (marginal effects at the sample mean reported), coefficients with robust standard errors below (in brackets); standard errors are also
corrected for clustering on four-digit industries. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit level). All right hand
side variables are lagged and averaged between 1996 and 1998, or between 1994 and 1996. All establishments are part of a larger (French or foreign) group but are not
Head Quarters. The definition of “high-tech” is if the firm is in an industry which has greater than median IT investment per worker ; “low-tech” are all other firms.
Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of productivity growth rates within a four digit industry (the 90th percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm
age is “above twenty years”. All regressions also include additional firm level (log of number of plants, dummy variable for foreign ownership, log of the ratio of capital
to value added, log of firm size - employment, proportion of workers using new technologies, proportion of high skilled workers, average age of workers in the firm, firm’s
market share, firm diversification measure) and industry level (log of the ratio of capital to employment, log of the ratio of IT investment to employment, and Herfindahl
index of concentration) controls.

Industry dummies
Wald test A+B=0
(p-value)
Mean of dependent variable
Observations

Lerner index

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤Firm age<10 years

Firm age<5 years

yes (81)
5.22
(0.022)
0.484
1,258

0.108
(0.165)

Heterogeneity

Labour productivity (firm)

Full
sample
(1)

Level

Decentralization of
investment decisions, 1998

Industries

Specification of proximity
to frontier

Dependent variable

Table 6: Alternative indicators of decentralization
(Enquête Reponse)

Table 7: Probability of being decentralized
(British WERS98)
Dependent variable
(mean=0.805)

Decentralization of employment decisions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.273
(0.130)
-

-

-

-

-

0.540
(0.325)

-

-

0.316
(0.129)
-

-

-

-0.051
(0.073)

-

-0.204
(0.073)

-0.156
(0.073)

Establishment age<5 years

-

-

-

5≤Est. age<10 years

-

-

-

10≤Est. age<20 years

-

-

-

-0.076
(0.115)
0.086
(0.081)
-0.127
(0.077)

-0.099
(0.116)
0.055
(0.089)
-0.164
(0.076)

-0.123
(0.114)
0.049
(0.089)
-0.173
(0.075)

Many competitors

-

-

-

-

Few competitors

-

-

-

-

0.127
(0.082)
0.210
(0.070)

0.150
(0.078)
0.228
(0.065)

no

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes (64)
236

yes (64)
236

yes (64)
236

yes (64)
236

yes (64)
236

yes (64)
236

Heterogeneity
(95th − 5th percentiles)

Heterogeneity
(90th − 10th percentiles)

Frontier
(99th percentile)

Other firm and industry
controls
Industry dummies
Observations

0.659
(0.312)

NOTES: These are data from the 1998 British Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS), manufacturing
establishments only. Estimation is by OLS, coefficients with robust standard errors below (corrected for clustering by
four-digit industry). Dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether “Establishment’s manager is able to
make decisions on which staff to recruit without consulting Head Office”. Industry variables defined at the four-digit level
(except industry dummies at the three-digit level). Heterogeneity and frontier are averaged between 1994 and 1997. The
reference for establishment age is “above twenty years” and the reference for the PMC indicator is “no competitors”. All
regressions include a control for employment size (current, lagged one year and lagged five years), the proportion of young
workers (under 20 years old), the proportion of older workers (aged over 50 years old), the proportion of unskilled manual
workers and the proportion of part-time workers.

53

APPENDICES NOT FOR PUBLICATION FOR
Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Claire Lelarge,
John Van Reenen, and Fabrizio Zilibotti
“Technology, Information and the Decentralization of the Firm”
Appendix B
B.1

French Data

COI (“Changements Organisationnels et Informatisation,” SESSI)
This is a firm level survey providing information on organization and other firm characteristics conducted
in 1997. It covers manufacturing sectors only (4,153 firms). There are several questions on organizational
design.
ER (Enquête Reponse 1998; “Relations Professionnelles et Négociations d’Entreprise,”
DARES)
The Enquête Reponse is an establishment level survey. This contains information about organizational
change between 1996 and 1998. It covers both manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors and
is an updated version of the Reponse 1992 survey used by Caroli and Van Reenen (2001). 2,943
establishments of manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors were surveyed with senior managers
being asked questions about industrial relations, organization and other aspects of performance in 1998.
FUTE files (“Format Unifié Total d’Entreprises,” INSEE)
The FUTE dataset is the key data we use to construct many of the variables used in the paper. FUTE
is constructed from the merging of two datasets, the BRN (“Bénéfices Réels Normaux”) and the EAE
(“Enquêtes Annuelles d’Entreprises”) , that are then checked rigorously for consistency at INSEE.
The BRN files consist of firms’ balance sheets collected annually by the Direction Générale des
Impôts (Fiscal Administration) and provides firm-level accounting information (value added, capital
investment, wage bills,employment, etc.). This tax regime is mandatory for the companies that have
a level of sales higher than 3.8 million Francs, but can also be also disclosed by smaller firms. These
files include around 600,000 firms,44 in the private non-financial, non-agricultural sectors each year
and covers around 80% of total output in the French economy. The EAE survey is conducted by
SESSI (production industries), INSEE (Services and Trade), the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry
of Equipment (Transportation and Construction). The annual survey is mandatory and exhaustive for
firms hiring more than 20 workers. It includes a detailed sectoral description of the various activities of
each firm surveyed (the amount of each kind of output).45
DADS files (“Déclarations Annuelles de Données Sociales”)
The DADS files consists of yearly mandatory employer reports of each worker’s gross earnings subject
to payroll taxes. Hours are also reported since 1993 (but of good quality only since 1994). These files
44

630,593 firms in 1996 of which 489,783 report a strictly positive number of workers.
Question asked :
“Répartir le chiffre d’affaires net hors taxes et les exportations directes de votre entreprise selon les différentes
activités conformément aux nomenclatures officielles d’activités et de produits. Le total du chiffre d’affaires net
doit correspondre au montant du poste du compte de résultat. Les reventes en l’état de marchandises ou de
produits doivent être déclarées dans une ou plusieurs rubriques négoce.”
45

i

include around 27 million workers each year (27,535,562 in 1996 after some basic cleaning), which we
aggregate at the plant (1,587,157 plants in 1996) or firm level (1,379,032 firms in 1996) to get information
on the workforce structure (age, gender, skill group in terms of hours worked). We also use the total
hours series necessary for the measures of productivity underlying the heterogeneity and proximity to
the frontier measures (see below).
LIFI Surveys (“Liaisons Financières,” INSEE)
Yearly survey describing the structure of ownership of French firms of the private sector whose financial
investments in other firms (participations) are higher than 8,000 KF or having sales above 400,000
KF or a number of workers above 500. Firms cited (under control) are also included in the files. All
remaining firms are considered independent.
Even after keeping only firms who are in the COI, BRN, DADS and EAE we are still left with over
90% of the original COI sample (3,751 observations). The firms who we lose tend to be the smallest
firms. We loose a few more observations in our regressions due to missing values on the some of the
questions in COI (final sample for regressions is 3,570 observations). For the Reponse sample, we only
keep firms that are part of a larger French or foreign group, but that are not the corporate head quarters
(final sample for regressions is 1,258 observations).

B.2

Variable Definitions

The firm and industry level quantitative variables introduced in the regressions are averaged over four
years (COI) if available (three years for Reponse, “Delayering”). Unless otherwise indicated all industry
variables are at the four-digit NACE level.

B.2.1

Decentralization into Profit Centers

Our main measure of decentralization is from the COI. Managers were asked:
Is your firm organized into profit centers ?
The translation of the French definition used in COI is “Organization in profit centers. A profit
center is an enterprise unit that has a margin of budgetary manoeuvre, and therefore some relative
autonomy in their choices (usually it has its own accounting system to measure their profit).”46
We coded the measure of decentralization to be unity if the manager answered “yes” to this question
and zero if the answer was “no”.
Using the COI we build a measure of decentralization based on the organization of its business units
into profit centers.47 In practice, once a firm gets beyond a minimal size it faces the choice of retaining
central control or allowing some decentralization. Firms are generally organized into business units and
different firms make decisions about what degree of responsibility to devolve to the managers of these
units. Some firms retain complete command and control at the center, but most create some form of
“responsibility centers” for business unit managers.48 Business scholars delineate three broad types of
responsibility centers (from the most to the least decentralized): profit centers, cost centers and revenue
centers. Our key indicator for decentralization is whether the firm is organized primarily into profit
centers. As its name suggests, when a firm organizes into profit centers a manager is responsible for the
profits of the unit she manages. In general the profit center manager is given considerable autonomy to
make decisions on the purchase of assets, hiring of personnel, setting salary and promotion schedules
46

In French: “Votre entreprise utilise-t-elle les dispositifs organisationnels suivants?
- Organisation en centres de profit.
Un centre de profit est une unité de l’entreprise qui a une marge de manœuvre budgétaire, et donc une relative
autonomie dans ses choix (souvent, un système de comptabilité en propre, qui lui permet de mesurer son profit).”
47
This follows Janod (2002) and Janod and Saint-Martin (2004).
48
For an introduction to responsibility centers in general and profit centers in particular see, for example:
http://smccd.net/accounts/nurre/online/chtr12a.htm.

ii

and managing inventories. A manager of a profit center is concerned with all aspects of the business
that contribute to profitability. Such a manager keeps track of both revenues and costs with the aim of
maximizing profit. As one management specialist puts it:
“The profit center managers frequently know their business better than top management does because
they can devote much more of their time to following up developments in their specialized areas. Hence,
top level managers usually do not have detailed knowledge of the actions they want particular profit
center managers to take, and even direct monitoring of the actions taken, if it were feasible would
not ensure profit center managers were acting appropriately.” (Motivating Profit Center Managers,
Merchant, 1989, p.10)
In contrast to a profit center manager, a cost center manager will have the quantity or quality of
output set by someone higher up in the organization. The manager is delegated with some power,
however, in order to try and reduce costs. He will be able to decide on some short-run (but not longterm) asset purchases, hire temporary and contract staff (but not permanent employees) and manage
inventories. A revenue center manager has the least autonomy of all.49 She is told to spend a certain
amount of resource and account for revenues but has no (or little) discretion to exceed spending limits.
Inventories are managed but staff and investments are not acquired unless he is authorized explicitly to
do so.
There are numerous examples from the business literature on the greater autonomy of profit centers.
It is well recognized that organizing divisions into profit centers delegates more power to managers, and
it is generally agreed that a characteristic of companies that organize divisions into profit centers is that
it “allows decision making and power to be delegated effectively”. Similarly, the first disadvantage of
profit centers is viewed as “loss of overall central control of the company.” 50
Although it is possible in principle for a profit center manager to be monitored on profits and yet
not be given any powers to affect these profits would seem sub-optimal for the firm (Dearden, 1987,
Merchant, 1989, Bouwens and van Lent, 2004). A profit center manager would be held responsible for
outcomes that he cannot affect, so this would de-motivate such managers. Some organizations like this
probably exist - the only way to know more would be to have subjective questions on the degree to
which different profit center managers have greater decision making powers. Even if we had access to
such survey information one might doubt its reliability. The advantage of our profit center variable is
that it is an objective feature of the firm and does not rely on a manager’s subjective statement of his
power relative to a senior manager.
In short, we have an indicator equal to unity if the firm is organized into profit centers and a zero
otherwise. So the base group contains firms who are organized primarily into responsibility centers with
less autonomy (i.e. cost and revenue centers) and those firms who have no responsibility centers at all
and maintain command and control. Unfortunately, the data does not allow us to distinguish the latter
groups more finely.

B.2.2

Managerial Autonomy to Make Investment Decisions

In the Enquête Reponse 1998 the establishment’s senior manager was asked how much autonomy from
headquarters she had to make decisions over investment.51 Answers were coded to be one if she answered
that she had “full” autonomy or “important”’ autonomy and coded to zero if she had “limited” or “no”
autonomy. This is used as the dependent variable in the last three columns of Table 6. We consider only
49

In fact “revenue center” is rather a misnomer because a notional revenue is assigned by the organization’s
controller based on activities and transfer prices. “Expense center” is sometimes used as the manager accounts
mainly for the expenses incurred.
50
These quotes are taken from the educational web-site:
http://www.aloa.co.uk/members/downloads/PDF%20Output/costcentres.pdf
See also Janod (2002).
51
In French: “Par rapport au siège ou à la maison mère de l’entreprise ou du groupe, quelle est l’autonomie
de votre établissement en matière d’investissement?
Totale / Importante / Limitée / Nulle.”

iii

establishments that are part of a wider group (as a single site establishment will not have a separate
headquarters).

B.2.3

Delayering

While COI provides data about the current organization of the firm, the ER dataset provides information
on organizational “changes” (i.e., whether a firm became more or less hierarchical) rather than “levels”,
so we use a variation on equation (9) with these data.
Our preferred measure of delayering is from the Enquête Reponse 1998 where we use the following
question:52
For any of the following technologies and methods, would you tell us whether it is implemented in your
establishment ?
- Shortening of the hierarchical line (delayering of an intermediate hierarchical level).
The indicator used is a dummy variable coded to one if the respondent answered “yes” to this question.
Case study and econometric evidence suggest that delayering is associated with decentralization (Rajan
and Wulf, 2005, Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001).

B.2.4

Proximity to Technological Frontier

Value-added (V Aikt , FUTE) is defined as sales minus purchases of materials. It is deflated with the
value added price index at the two-digit level (NAF36) available from National Accounts (VA at the
1995 prices)
Total hours (HOU RSikt , DADS)
Capital Stock (Kikt , FUTE) is computed from firm level fixed assets. This information is registered at
historical cost in the balance sheets. We recover volumes in deflating the initial measure by the investment price index (National Accounts) at the date considered minus an estimated age of capital. This
age is calculated as the ratio of depreciated assets over fixed assets multiplied by an average equipment
length of life (16 years).
Our Labour Productivity variable is defined as:
yikt = ln(V Aikt ) − ln(HOU RSikt )
Our TFP variable is defined as:
T F Pikt = ln(V Aikt ) − αk ln(HOU RSikt ) − (1 − αk ) ln(Kikt )
Where αk is the wage bill share of value added in the four-digit NACE (we also considered an
economy-wide weight of 0.7). We drop firms reporting divergent values of total number of employees in
the FUTE and in the DADS (values greater than double one way or the other). Industries represented
by less than ten firms in the FUTE are also dropped. For each firm (and like other firm level variables
introduced in the regressions) the labour productivity and TFP values are averaged over four years if
available (three years respectively for Reponse, Delayering).
The industry “frontier” (yFk t or T F PFk t ) is defined as the 99th percentile (or 95th , or 90th when
y
specified) of the obtained series at the NACE four-digit level. The constrained term defined as GAPikt
=
ln(yikt ) − ln(yFk t ) is a firm level measure of proximity to the technological frontier.
Another alternative measure of distance to frontier is the rank of firms in their industry (the firms
are ranked according to their Labour Productivity in the regressions presented, same qualitative results
with a ranking based on TFP).
52
In French: “Pour les technologies et méthodes suivantes, pouvez-vous nous indiquer si elles sont utilisées
dans votre établissement ?
- Raccourcissement de ligne hiérarchique (suppression d’un niveau hiérarchique intermédiaire)”
In Reponse, this question about delayering is included in a section entitled “Nous allons maintenant parler de
l’organisation du travail”. “Delayering”” is explicitly defined as a “technologie, méthode (de management)”.

iv

B.2.5

Heterogeneity Measures

We use the FUTE to construct ∆ ln yikt , the firm specific annual productivity growth rate (value added
per hour) for all firms. We average this growth rate for up to three years. We then construct the
percentiles of the inter-firm productivity growth distribution within each four-digit NACE sector. The
90-10 is (∆lnyikt )90 − (∆ ln yikt )10 where (∆ ln yikt )90 is the productivity growth at the 90th percentile
and (∆ ln yikt )10 is productivity growth at the 10th percentile. Alternative measures of heterogeneity are
based on other indicators of dispersion of the same series of firm level labour productivity growth rates:
the 95-5 is (∆lnyikt )95 − (∆ ln yikt )5 , the standard deviation, the standard deviation after trimming
bottom and top 5 % of values in each four-digit industry.

B.2.6

Homogeneity Measures

We use the FUTE files to construct three types of measures.
A firm i is characterized by its vector of kind of productions (sold, l being one of its markets):


Si = (Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ),

or in shares :



Sil
SiL
Si1


si =  P
,..., P
,..., P

S
S
 h∈L Sih
ih
ih 
| {z }
| h∈L
{z }
| h∈L
{z }
si1

sil

siL

where L refers to the set of industries. Our main index of homogeneity is constructed as
P
0
0
i0 ∈N ,i0 6=i cii · ITi
Hi− = P
0
i0 ∈N ,i0 6=i ITi
for firm i at time t, with N referring to the sample of firms in the FUTE, and ITi refers to the level of
IT investment of firm i,53 and the closeness measure is
P
sil .si0 l
,
cii0 = q P l∈L P
( l∈L s2il ).( l∈L s2i0 l )
Our first alternative measure is an unweighted version of our main measure calculated as:
X
1
HiA− =
.
cii0 ,
N −1 0
0
i ∈N ,i 6=i

where N is the total number of firms in the set N .
The second alternative measure also takes the geographical dimension into account. A firm i is
characterized by its vector of kind of productions in the 21 French administrative regions g:
SiR = (Si11 , . . . , Sil1 , . . . , SiL1 , . . . , Si1g , . . . , Silg , . . . , SiLg , . . . , Si1G , . . . , SilG , . . . , SiLG )
|
{z
}
{z
}
|
|
{z
}
region 1

region G

region g

This vector is estimated by:






ŜiR = ei1 .(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ), . . . , eig .(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ), . . . , eiG .(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL )
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
region 1

region G

region g

where eig is the share of employment of firm i located in region g. In shares, we get:
ŝR
i =

P

ei1

h∈L
53

Sih

.(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ), . . . , P

eig

h∈L

Sih

.(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL ), . . . , P

!

eiG

h∈L

Sih

Note that the IT investment series (EAE/FUTE) are available in 1996 and 1997.

v

.(Si1 , . . . , Sil , . . . , SiL )

We then define a new closeness measure between any two firms i, i0 :
P
0
l∈L,g∈R silg .si lg
R
cii0 = q P
.
P
( l∈L,g∈R s2ilg ).( l∈L,g∈R s2i0 lg )
where R refers to the set of regions. cR
ii0 is estimated by (after factoring out the various terms):
P
0
g∈R eig .ei g
R
ĉii0 = cii0 . q P
.
P
( g∈R e2ig ).( g∈R e2i0 g )
We thus obtain a third IT and geographically weighted measure:
P
R
0
i0 6=i ĉii0 .ITi
R−
Hi = P
0
i0 6=i ITi

B.2.7

Other Firm Level Variables

All firm level variables are averaged over four years if available.
Lerner Index : defined as (value added minus labor costs) divided by sales. Sourced from FUTE.
Capital Intensity capital stock divided by value added. Sourced from FUTE.
Firm / Plant age: Information available from the SIRENE dataset (reproduced in the DADS) or
from files reporting the yearly creations of firms (Firm Demography Department). Plant age is available
in the Reponse survey.
Joint Stock Firms: Indicator of a firm being a Joint Stock Company (as opposed to smaller and
less anonymous structures, e.g. limited liability firms). Sourced from FUTE.
Under Control : Indicator of whether a firm is part of a larger (French or foreign) group but is not
Head Quarter. Sourced from LIFI.
Foreign Ownership: Indicator of whether a firm is part of a larger foreign group. Sourced from LIFI.
Number of Plants: Number of Plants belonging to each firm (and their region of localization).
Sourced from DADS.
Size: The number of workers at the plant level for Reponse and at the firm level for COI. Sourced
from DADS.
Skills: Share of hours worked by skilled workers at the firm level. We consider as unskilled: Industrial blue collar workers (CS 67, Ouvriers non qualifiés de type industriel); Craftsmen (CS 68, Ouvriers
non qualifiés de type artisanal), Foremen and Supervisors (CS 53, Agents de surveillance), Clerical (CS
55, Employés de commerce), Personnel of the direct services to the private individuals sectors (CS56,
Personnels des services directs aux particuliers). Others are considered as “skilled”. Sourced from DADS.
Worker age: Average age of workers at the firm level (weighted by hours worked). Sourced from
DADS.

vi

Technology: A pseudo-continuous variable of proportion of workers using micro-computers is constructed from information available in both Reponse 98 (relating to 1998) and COI (1997).
We use the FUTE dataset and the decomposition of the various activities of firms i in terms of
amount of each kind of product l produced and sold (Sil ) to construct the following indicators 54 :
Firm level Market Share:
M Si =

X Sil Sil
.
Si Sl
l

Herfindahl Index (Industry level sales concentration):
Hi =

X Sil
l

Si

.Hl , Hl =

Xµ
i

S
P il
0
i0 Si l

¶2

This is constructed in the standard way at the industry level (Hl ), but note that we weight this
measure if a firm operates in more than one market (by a firm’s market share in that sector ( SSili ), so it
has a firm specific component.
Firm level Diversification Indicator:
This simply indicates (the inverse of) the degree to which a firm operates across separate sectors
X µ Sil ¶2
SP Ei =
Si
l

B.2.8

Other Industry Level Information

All industry level variables are averaged over three years.
Sector Capital Intensity total capital stock in the four-digit industry divided by total number of
workers in the industry. Sourced from FUTE.
Sector IT Investment: total IT investment in the four-digit industry divided by total number of
workers in industry. Sourced from FUTE.

B.3
B.3.1

UK Data
Workplace Employee Relations Survey (WERS)

WERS 1998 is a survey of establishments in Britain conducted in 1998 (there were also surveys in 1980,
1984 and 199055 ). It is described in detail in Cully et al. (1999). In one part of the questionnaire
the establishment’s senior manager is asked whether she ”is able to make decisions without consulting”
Head Quarters. Some of these decisions are relatively minor (such as staff appraisal). We focus on
whether decisions over staff recruitment can be made by establishment’s management without consulting
someone higher in the corporate hierarchy as this is a key aspect of decentralized decision making
(unfortunately the question on investment decisions used in France was not asked).
P
P
Notations: Si = l Sil , Sl = i Sil
where firm i sells an amount Sil of product of type l. Note that firms are always i, i0 and industries h, l.
55
The 1984 and 1990 panels were used by Caroli and Van Reenen (2001). There was also a WERS conducted
in 2004 but the four digit industry codes have not yet been released (there are only 12 industry divisions) so we
could not use this for the analysis here which required this level of detail.
54

vii

This question was only asked if the establishment was part of a larger multi-plant firm. Although
the question was asked to all establishments we have to focus on manufacturing because the ABI data
is only available for services from 1997 onwards so we would not be able to construct a robust measure
of heterogeneity. The WERS data cannot be matched at the establishment-level to Census data so
we are unable to condition on as rich a set of covariates as we can in France. In particular, we do
not have information on value added, profits or capital. Consequently we cannot include measures
of the establishment’s own productivity or Lerner Index in the regression. WERS does contain basic
information on workers demographics (skill, age, female and part-timers) and we condition on these in
the regressions (see Table notes). As a proxy for market power we used the question asked to managers
whether the establishment faces no competitors, some competitors or many competitors (this is the
same as Nickell, 1996).

B.3.2

ABI ”Census” Data

To construct the instrumental variables used in the paper we constructed heterogeneity and GAP terms
for each UK four-digit industry to match with its French equivalent. The UK and France share the
European Unions’ NACE classification system so this was straightforward. The only restriction was
that industry averages with cell sizes below 25 are not allowed out of the Office of National Statistics
(ONS) so this lead to the loss of a few observations (52 French firms).
Our base dataset is a panel of establishments covering almost all sectors of the UK private sector
called the ABI (Annual Business Inquiry). This underlies many of the UK national statistics and is
similar in structure to the US Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) being a population sample of
large plants and a stratified random sample of smaller plants. The response rates to the ABI are high
because it is illegal not to return the forms to the Office of National Statistics (ONS). The ABI contains
all the basic information needed to estimate production functions (gross output, labour, materials,
investment, etc.). For each firm we constructed value per worker and followed the same rules described
for France to calculate heterogeneity (90-10 of productivity growth rates) and the Frontier productivity
(99th percentile). The UK data does not contain information on hours so the UK productivity measure
is cruder than in France.

viii

Table B1: “Enquête COI” sample, 1994-1997
Variable

Source

Mean

Median

St Dev

Heterogeneity measures: Industry level heterogeneity of labour productivity growth
90th − 10th percentiles
95th − 5th percentiles
Standard deviation
Standard deviation after trimming

0.275
0.443
0.177
0.088

DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE

0.263
0.406
0.165
0.082

0.087
0.160
0.066
0.033

7,564.954
0.138
8.931

2,699.990
0.049
2.381

0.163
0.508
0.358
-1.125

0.143
0.397
0.334
-1.096

0.089
0.315
0.159
0.457

0.304
0.173
0.502
0.838
3.092
21.658
1.143
323.463
59.669
27.004
38.870
0.075
1.732
0.049
53.971
0.831
1.318

0
0
1
1
1
18
0.907
88.375
71.846
22.623
39.010
0.068
0.404
0.031
31.987
0.931
1.074

0.216
0.143
0.500
0.369
8.510
12.740
1.036
677.080
26.300
20.202
3.403
0.077
4.171
0.057
69.721
0.203
0.499

289.242
0.600

369.064
0.725

Homogeneity measure (firm level, IT weighted)
Homogeneity, level
Homogeneity, normalized
log Homogeneity

FUTE

18,821.930
0.343
8.407

Distance to technological frontier
Firm labour productivity
Sectoral 99th perc. labour productivity
Proximity to frontier
log Proximity to frontier

DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE

Other firm level variables
Profit centers
Foreign ownership
Under control
Joint-stock companies
Number of Plants
Firm age
Capital Intensity ( / VA)
Number of Workers (Firm)
% workers working with computers
Unskilled workers
Age of workers
Lerner index
Market share
Herfindahl index
1 / Herfindahl Index
Specialization
1 / Specialization (diversification)

COI
LIFI
LIFI
FUTE
DADS
SIRENE
FUTE
FUTE
COI
DADS
DADS
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE

Other industry level variables
Capital intensity (per worker)
IT investment (per worker)

FUTE
FUTE

NOTES: 3,570 observations.

ix

404.987
0.849

Table B2: “Enquête Réponse” sample, 1996-1998
Variable

Source

Mean

Median

St Dev

Heterogeneity measures: Industry level heterogeneity of labour productivity growth
90th − 10th percentiles

0.323

DADS/FUTE

0.298

0.121

0.154
0.497
0.297
-1.214

0.228
0.837
0.171
0.577

0
0
0
17
4
0.987
535
35.000
14.862
39.659
0.057
1.180
0.026
38.820
0.801
1.248

0.496
0.500
0.483
12.816
27.695
1.312
4554
28.844
22.420
3.713
0.996
6.258
0.055
104.865
0.237
1.044

282.757
0.677

528.296
1.460

Distance to technological frontier
Firm labour productivity
Sectoral 99th perc. labour productivity
Proximity to frontier
log Proximity to frontier

DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE
DADS/FUTE

0.190
0.741
0.323
-1.278

Other plant / firm level variables
Delayering
Decentralization of investment decisions
Foreign ownership
Firm age
Number of plants
Capital intensity (/ VA)
Number of workers (firm level)
% workers working with computers
Unskilled workers
Age of workers
Lerner index
Market share
Herfindahl index
1 / Herfindahl index
Specialization
1 / Specialization (diversification)

Reponse
Reponse
LIFI
SIRENE
DADS
FUTE
FUTE
Reponse
DADS
DADS
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE
FUTE

0.436
0.484
0.371
20.586
15.192
1.265
2067
37.452
23.704
39.195
0.002
3.802
0.044
68.893
0.748
1.603

Other industry level variables
Capital intensity (per workers)
IT investment (per worker)

FUTE
FUTE

445.906
1.164

NOTES: 1,258 observations. All firms are part of a French or foreign group (and are not the corporate head quarters).

x

Appendix C: Full sets of Regression Results
In order to keep the Tables clear we have not included the coefficients on all the controls in the regressions. These are given below for completeness (other results are available from the authors on request).
Table C1 corresponds to Table 2.

xi

xii
-

Foreign ownership

log Number of plants

10≤Firm age<20 years

5≤ Firm age<10 years

0.151
(0.040)
0.012
(0.021)
-0.007
(0.019)

-

Sector log IT investment / worker

Firm age<5 years

-

-0.101
(0.039)
0.182
(0.026)
-

0.211
(0.107)
-

(1)

0.047
(0.025)
0.041
(0.015)

0.172
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.039
(0.019)

-0.064
(0.040)
0.116
(0.019)

-0.224
(0.045)
0.141
(0.033)
-

0.296
(.127)
-

(2)

0.045
(0.025)
0.041
(0.015)

0.174
(0.041)
0.066
(0.022)
0.040
(0.019)

-0.074
(0.040)
0.102
(0.019)

0.164
(0.028)

-

-

0.251
(0.115)
-

(3)

-

-

0.157
(0.040)
0.014
(0.021)
-0.004
(0.019)

-

-

-0.087
(0.036)
0.181
(0.026)
-

-0.111
(0.034)

-

(4)

0.049
(0.026)
0.040
(0.015)

0.177
(0.042)
0.067
(0.022)
0.041
(0.019)

-0.063
(0.043)
0.112
(0.019)

-0.203
(0.041)
0.141
(0.033)
-

-0.065
(0.031)

-

(5)

0.047
(0.025)
0.039
(0.015)

0.177
(0.041)
0.067
(0.022)
0.041
(0.019)

-0.070
(0.042)
0.102
(0.019)

0.159
(0.028)

-

-

-0.063
(0.031)

-

(6)

(log Homogeneity) /10
IT weighted

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers
Dispersion of productivity
growth in industry

Sector log capital stock / worker

Frontier (99th percentile)
(A)
Labour productivity
(firm level) (B)
Proximity to frontier
(constrained term B-A)

log Homogeneity /10
(IT weighed)

Heterogeneity

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)
Measure of
heterogeneity/homogeneity

Table C1: Probability of firm being decentralized into Profit Centers
(Enquête COI)

xiii
-

log Herfindahl index

log Firm specialization

0.008
(0.012)
0.110
(0.009)
0.220
(0.034)
0.169
(0.049)
-0.057
(0.025)
-0.660
(0.144)
-0.577
(0.260)
-0.015
(0.017)
-0.071
(0.030)
yes (73)
2.64
(0.104)
3,570

(2)

3,570

0.009
(0.012)
0.110
(0.009)
0.217
(0.034)
-0.153
(0.048)
-0.060
(0.025)
-0.733
(0.136)
-0.574
(0.257)
-0.011
(0.017)
-0.070
(0.030)
yes (73)
-

(3)

yes (73)
5.46
(0.019)
3,570

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

(4)
0.008
(0.012)
0.108
(0.010)
0.221
(0.035)
0.175
(0.049)
-0.060
(0.026)
-0.666
(0.144)
-0.521
(0.258)
-0.013
(0.016)
-0.081
(0.031)
yes (73)
1.60
(0.206)
3,570

(5)

3,570

0.009
(0.012)
0.108
(0.010)
0.219
(0.035)
0.162
(0.048)
-0.062
(0.025)
-0.721
(0.136)
-0.526
(0.257)
-0.010
(0.016)
-0.080
(0.031)
yes (73)
-

(6)

NOTES: Estimation by Probit maximum likelihood (marginal effects at the sample mean reported), coefficients with robust standard errors below (in brackets); standard
errors are also corrected for clustering on four-digit industries. Industry variables are defined at the four-digit level (except industry dummies at the three-digit level).
All right hand side variables are lagged (and averaged). Heterogeneity is defined as the dispersion of productivity growth rates within a four digit industry (the 90th
percentile less the 10th percentile). The reference for firm age is “above twenty years”.

yes (73)
3.52
(0.061)
3,570

-

Firm market share

Industry dummies
Wald test A+B=0
(p-value)
Observations

-

-

Firm (high) skill %

Lerner index

-

% Workers working with computers

-

-

log Firm size

Firm age of workers /10

-

(1)

(log Homogeneity) /10
IT weighted

Firm decentralized into Profit Centers
Dispersion of productivity
growth in industry

Firm log capital / value added

Dependent variable
(mean=0.304)
Measure of
heterogeneity/homogeneity

Table C1 (-cont.): Probability of firm being decentralized into Profit Centers
(Enquête COI)

