NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT GAP IN GRADES 3 TO 8
Charles T. Clotfelter
Helen F. Ladd
Jacob L. Vigdor
Working Paper 12207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

The authors wish to thank Robert Malme, Leona Christy, Patten Priestley, Aaron Hedland, and Marco
Hernandez for excellent research assistance, David Aman for useful information on test administration
in North Carolina, Frank Levy and an anonymous referee for helpful suggestions, workshop participants
at the Russell Sage Foundation, the New School, CUNY, Amherst, Columbia, NYU, and the University
of Chicago for valuable comments, and the Spencer Foundation for financial support.
© 2006 by Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Academic Achievement Gap in Grades 3 to 8
Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 12207
May 2006, Revised November 2007
JEL No. I21,J15
ABSTRACT
Using data for North Carolina public school students in grades 3 to 8, we examine achievement gaps
between white students and students from other racial and ethnic groups. We focus on successive
cohorts of students who stay in the state's public schools for all six years, and study both differences
in means and in quantiles. Our results on achievement gaps between black and white students are
consistent with those from other longitudinal studies: the gaps are sizable, are robust to controls for
measures of socioeconomic status, and show no monotonic trend between 3rd and 8th grade. In contrast,
both Hispanic and Asian students tend to gain on whites as they progress through these grades. Looking
beyond simple mean differences, we find that the racial gaps in math between low-performing students
have tended to shrink as students progress through school, while racial gaps between high-performing
students have widened for black and American Indian students.

Charles T. Clotfelter
Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Box 90245 Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu
Helen F. Ladd
Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Box 90245 Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
hladd@pps.duke.edu

Jacob L. Vigdor
Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Box 90245 Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jacob.vigdor@duke.edu

The Academic Achievement Gap in Grades 3 to 8
Charles T. Clotfelter, Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor
Duke University

I. Introduction
No topic goes to the heart of American concerns about equity in K-12 education more
than the racial achievement gap. In 2004 Secretary of Education Rod Paige (2004) stated: “The
academic achievement gap is the major driver of racial inequity in this country,” and
commentators across the political spectrum have expressed alarm over its size and
consequences.1 The racial gap itself has been a major impetus for federal education policy as
embodied in the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, and has entered into countless state and local
debates regarding school finance equalization, academic tracking, and school testing and
accountability programs.
Ever since the Coleman Report in 1966, researchers have known that average
achievement test scores of black students lag well behind those of white students, but this issue
has been taken up with renewed energy in the last decade. Efforts to describe and explain the
achievement gap include studies of differences across cohorts (Lee 2002; Perie et al. 2005) and
the progress of individual cohorts in the early school years (Fryer and Levitt 2004, 2005;
Murnane et al. 2006) or in later years (Hanushek and Rivkin 2006). These studies show a large
and persistent gap in achievement test scores between white and black students, but they differ

1

For example, Jencks and Phillips (1998, p.3-4) state, “if racial equality is America’s goal, reducing the
black-white test score gap would probably do more to promote this goal than any other strategy that commands
broad political support”; Thernstrom and Thernstrom (2003, p. 235) write, “Closing the skills gap is the key to real
racial equality in American society.” See also NAACP Legal Defense and Ed ucational Fund (2005).

1

regarding the size of the gap at the beginning of school, how much of the gap is explained by
socioeconomic status, and whether the gap widens as students advance through school grades.
This paper contributes to existing literature by studying racial/ethnic achievement gaps,
based on tests that are linked to the state’s standard course of study, exhibited by five consecutive
cohorts of North Carolina public school students as they progressed from 3rd to 8th grade. We
confirm some findings in existing literature: test-score gaps between black and white students are
sizable, even after controlling for several important student covariates; Hispanic and American
Indian students also lag behind whites, albeit less dramatically; and Asian students often score
higher than whites, particularly in later grades. Unlike other studies of which we know, we find
that the regression-adjusted mean test scores of minority groups other than blacks rise relative to
whites as students age, at least over the range of grades that we observe. The regression-adjusted
black-white gap in math test scores declines by less than 1% between 3rd and 8th grade but grows
by about 11% in reading.
Mean differences in test scores can be misleading if the test score distribution is truncated
or compressed at the high or low end. Mean differences are also potentially sensitive to
nonlinear transformations of the underlying variable. Although we show that the first concern is
not particularly relevant in North Carolina, we present additional evidence on measures of test
score disparities that are invariant to monotonic transformations of the underlying variable. The
proportion of black students scoring below the median of the white distribution, in both reading
and math, fluctuates within a narrow range between 79 and 83% as students progress from third
to eighth grade. The proportion of Hispanic students scoring below the white median declines
from 71% to 66% in both reading and math over the same interval. Thus our main conclusions
2

regarding central tendency are not sensitive to monotonic transformations in the test score scale.
Looking beyond measures of central tendency, we find that the trend towards improved
relative minority test scores in math is concentrated at the low end of the distribution. Disparities
in math scores between disadvantaged minority groups and whites shrink at the bottom of the test
distribution as students progress through school, but in most cases actually increase at the top.
The test score distributions for black and American Indian students become more compressed
relative to the white test score distribution over these grades. We suggest a possible explanation
for this phenomenon – the possibility that predominantly minority schools have redistributed
resources toward lower-performing students in response to policy incentives – but leave
hypothesis tests to subsequent work.
Previous research on the racial achievement gap is summarized in section II of the paper.
Section III describes our data. Section IV shows the size of racial achievement gaps in North
Carolina applying to different groups, before and after adjusting for socioeconomic differences
among students. Section V looks beyond mean differences to examine other aspects of
achievement distributions, and section VI concludes the analysis.

II. Previous Research on the Racial Achievement Gap
Research studies have examined racial and ethnic gaps in achievement using various
groups, but by far the most attention has been paid to the black-white gap.
The Black-White Gap
Starting in the 1990s researchers used nationally representative samples to document the
extent of and change in racial and ethnic gaps in achievement test scores. Several studies
3

examined data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). As summarized
by Phillips and Chin (2004, pp. 468-470), this research showed that the black-white gap at the 4th
grade narrowed during the 1970s and into the 1980s, after which it stagnated or grew again
slightly. As of 2000, this gap was 0.90 of a standard deviation in math and 0.83 in reading, as
shown in Table 1. The corresponding gap for 8th graders was more than a full standard deviation
(1.06) in math and 0.85 in reading. 2
In a pair of studies using the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS), Fryer and
Levitt (2004, 2005) find a gap of 0.66 in math and 0.40 in reading at the beginning of
kindergarten, as shown in Table 1. Over successive grades, however, these gaps grew. In
contrast, Murnane et al. (2006) find larger initial gaps when they examine a very similar sample
of students, but they do not find any growth in the gaps with grade level. As explanation for
those conflicting findings, these authors point to differences in the type of tests used in the two
studies: in comparison to the more general test used by Murnane et al., the one used by Fryer and
Levitt was more closely aligned to items that are learned in school, thus giving students from all
family backgrounds a more or less equal start in kindergarten. 3
Three previous studies of achievement gaps rely on administrative data from school
systems. Using data from Pasadena, Bali and Alvarez (2004) find black-white gaps roughly 0.55
s.d. and 0.35 in math and reading at 1st grade and about 0.50 and 0.45 at 4th grade.4 Hanushek
2

Precise gaps provided by Meredith Phillips. From this point forward, the units in which achievement gaps
are measured will be standard deviations unless otherwise indicated.
3

Wher eas the test used in the ECL S sample e xamined b y Fryer and L evitt empha sizes skills learned in
school, the tes t used in the M urnane et al. stud y stresses a wide r set of skills.
4

These figures were derived by dividing the reported gaps, measured as test scores, by the standard
deviation of the 4 th grade reading test, the only standard deviation reported in the article. See Bali and Alvarez

4

and Rivkin (2006) and Stiefel et al. (2007) employ much larger data sets. The former study,
covering the entire state of Texas and examining only math achievement, finds black-white gaps
of 0.70 in 3rd grade and 0.76 in 8th. The latter, covering New York City, finds slightly smaller raw
gaps in math, and quite a bit smaller adjusted gaps for reading in grade 5 than Murnane et al.
Since socioeconomic characteristics such as income and parental education tend to be
correlated with race, it is likely that at least a portion of the observed gaps between racial and
ethnic groups can be accounted for by non-racial factors. The research on achievement gaps has
sought to determine just how large this portion is, in part because it is the portion of the currently
observed gap that presumably will wither away over time as socioeconomic differences recede.5
In their study covering grades K-3, Fryer and Levitt (2005) find that adding a small set of
controls – including age, gender, birth weight, mother’s age at first birth, and indicators of
socioeconomic status – reduces estimated black-white gaps by more than half and actually
eliminates the pure racial component at the beginning of kindergarten, after which it grows at the
rate of about a tenth of a standard deviation through 3rd grade. Murnane et al. (2006) reach a
different conclusion, based, as noted above, on a different sort of achievement test. When they
control for socioeconomic status and other student covariates, they find a relatively constant
racial gap, a bit smaller than one standard deviation, in both kindergarten and 5th grade.
Gaps between Whites and Other Groups
Hispanic students nationwide now comprise a larger minority group than African

(2004, Tables 2 and 3).
5

For an analysis that discusses the relationship between changes in the achievement gap and long-term
socioeconomic differences, see Krueger, Rothstein and Turner (2005).

5

Americans. Although the historical circumstances and policy issues may differ between these
two groups, the issues related to measuring the test score gap with whites and adjusting the gap
for socioeconomic differences are quite parallel. As a general matter, the size of the Hispanicwhite gap tends to be smaller than the black-white one. In their analysis of the NAEP, for
example, Phillips and Chin (2004) find gaps on the order of 0.70 standard deviations on both
math and reading at the 4th grade level (compared to the 0.90 and 0.83 black-white gaps in math
and reading, respectively). At 8th grade, the corresponding Hispanic-white differences were
nearly 0.90 and 0.80, smaller than the black-white gap in math but about the same as the blackwhite gap in reading. In their 4th grade calculations, Bali and Alvarez (2004) find Hispanic-white
gaps about half the size of the black-white one. Although smaller than the black-white gap, the
Hispanic-white gap has been seen as stubbornly constant in recent decades.6 Nor does research
suggest any shrinkage in this gap as students progress through school. As a percentage of the
corresponding black-white gap on the NAEP in 2004, the Hispanic-white gap was 74% as large
at 4th grade and 88% at 8th grade (Perie et al. 2005, pp. 41-44). In their somewhat gloomy
National Research Council study, Tienda and Mitchell (2006, pp. 82-85) report that this gap
remains constant through elementary school, as Hispanic students suffer from disadvantageous
home environments, teacher biases, and low motivation.7
In a similar study of students in publicly supported English schools, Wilson, Burgess and
6

Lee (2002, Figures 2 and 3) shows that Hispanic-white gaps based on math and reading NAEP scores at
three age levels have not declined since the late 1980s and the gap in SAT scores increased in the 1990s. Kao and
Thompson (200 3, p. 431) find that, after controlling for socioeconomic status, the achievement of white and
Hispanic students was very close.
7

They state (p. 85): “Weak relations with teachers diminish students’ motivation to pursue academic work,
and in turn lower teachers’ expectations in a self-perpetuating cycle of academic disengagement and underachievem ent.”

6

Briggs (2005) examine the gaps in tests taken between ages 7 and 16, between white students and
those from several ethnic minority groups. They find that raw achievement scores for whites
exceeded those for most minority groups, there was little gap with respect to Indians, and whites
were consistently behind Chinese students. When scores are adjusted for differences in
socioeconomic status, both of these nonwhite groups consistently outperformed white students.
As students progress through school, most nonwhite groups gained relative to white students
over most years.8

III. Data
In this paper we analyze administrative data from North Carolina, one of the first and
most prominent of the states to develop a mandatory statewide testing and accountability
program. Having begun statewide testing in the 1970s and designed its own tests beginning in
1993, the state launched its accountability program, called the ABCs of Education, in the fall of
1996, which required the testing of all students in grades 3 to 8 and offered monetary rewards to
teachers in high-performing schools.9 The state is both large and ethnically diverse. In 2002 its
public schools enrolled 1.3 million public school students, giving it the 11th largest public school
enrollment among the 50 states (U.S. Department of Education 2005, Table 37). Its largest racial
minority is African American, with these black students making up 31.4% of the state’s public

8

The adjusted gap measured in standard deviation units, for example, shows Pakistani students 0.22 behind
whites at age 7 but 0.02 a head at age 11; black C aribbean students rem ain behind by 0.42 an d 0.19. B y contrast,
Indian and Chinese students are ahead of whites at both ages (Wilson, Burgess and Briggs 2005, Table 5).
9

For further background on testing in North Carolina, see North Carolina State Board of Education( n.d).
or Ward (n.d.).

7

school students in 2004/05. Another 7.5% were Hispanic, this share having grown rapidly in
recent years. Asian students comprised 2.0% of the total. And, reflecting concentrations of
Cherokee in the west and Lumbee in the east, another 1.5% of students were American Indian
(North Carolina Public Schools 2005, p. 24).
The data used in the present study are derived from administrative records created by
North Carolina’s Department of Public Instruction and maintained by the North Carolina
Education Research Data Center.10 The state required all students to take standardized
achievement tests in both math and reading at the end of every grade between 3 and 8. Using
unique student identifying numbers that had been assigned randomly to individual students by
the Data Center, we were able to match a student’s records over time, making it possible to
compare trends in student achievement using an intact sample of students. Not only does the
data set provide information on test scores and many of the usual set of demographic variables, it
also contains information on parents’ education and the school district attended. To facilitate
comparisons across years, we normalized the scaled scores for each test in every year over all
students in the state who took the test so that each test would have a mean score of zero and a
standard deviation of one. On this normalized scale, positive scores denote above-average
performances relative to the state-wide average, and negative scores denote below-average
performance. Because we have achievement test data for grades 3 to 8 spanning the school years
1994/95 to 2004/05, we were able to examine five cohorts of students, most of whom progressed

10

For mor e information on the Cen ter, see its W eb page at:
http://www.pubpol.duke.edu/centers/child/NC_Education_Research_Data_Center/nc_education_res_ctr.html, visited
12/21/05.

8

normally from grade 3 to 8.11
So that our results would not be influenced by the movement of students in or out of the
state or to and from private schools, we examined a series of intact cohorts of public school
students. For both the math and reading tests we included in each cohort all students who took
the corresponding 3 rd grade end-of-grade test in a given year and end-of-grade tests in each
succeeding year.12 Thus our results apply only to students who were enrolled in North Carolina
public schools for six years, a fact that is particularly important with respect to Hispanic students,
as we discuss in more detail in the next section. We have explicitly chosen to include in the
sample students who repeated one or more grades, provided they appeared for six years. Leaving
them out of the analysis would produce a seriously unrepresentative sample, in light of the high
rates of grade retention among black and Hispanic students. In order to deal with students who
fall behind in grade from those in their age cohort, we exploit the fact that standardized tests in
North Carolina employ a developmental scale explicitly designed “to measure growth in skills
and knowledge throughout the grades” (North Carolina State Board of Education 1996, p. 31).
Based on this feature, our basic estimates express a retained student’s test outcome in terms of

11

Appendix Table 1 shows the structure of the data by year and grade. Note that the sample sizes for the
reading cohorts (those students who had six successive years’ data) are slightly smaller than those for the
corresponding math cohorts. Limited English proficient (LEP) students could be excused their first year in the U.S.
for the end-of-grade test in reading, but not in math.
12

The last two lines in Appen dix Table 1 sho w the size of each year’s cohort for eac h of the two tests.
These cohorts grew in size much more rapidly than the state’s overall public school enrollment, which increased at
an average rate of 1.8% a year (calcula ted from N CES, Digest of Education Statistics 2004, Table 37,
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d04/tables/dt04_037.asp, 1/9/06), owing to a significant increase in the rate of
matching students’ records across grades made possible by the availability of names and social security numbers
beginning with data for the 1995/1996 school year.

9

standard deviations from the mean of his or her former peers.13 Because the scale scores may not
have been successfully aligned as intended, however, we offer several alternative measures of the
achievement gap, discussed below. By focusing on students who remained in the state’s public
schools for six successive years, we are necessarily examining an unrepresentative group. These
students on average had higher scores in 3rd grade and their parents had higher educational
attainment than those students who did not qualify.14 But we believe the benefits from our focus
on intact cohorts – most importantly, the exclusion of newly arrived immigrants from the sample
– outweighs this drawback.

IV. Mean Differences in Achievement Across Racial and Ethnic Groups
We begin our analysis of racial achievement gaps by examining levels and differences in
mean achievement level by grade, with no corrections made for location or socioeconomic
differences. We then note results using several alternative measures of raw gaps. Finally, we
present regression-adjusted estimates of mean differences.
Raw Achievement Gaps
Table 2 presents mean achievement gaps for five racial/ethnic groups in grades 3 to 8,
based on the cohorts who took their 3rd grade tests from 1995 to 1999. Figure 1 shows these gaps

13

For a student held back in 4 th grade, for example, we calculated a normalized score by applying the mean
and standa rd deviatio n of 5 th grade scores in that year to the student’s actual scale score on the 4th grade test.
Appendix A discusses our treatment of students who were retained in grade, and Appendix Figure 1 illustrates
differences in retention by race and ethnicity. Calculations b ased only on students who made norma l progress
through gra des not surp risingly produ ce higher av erage sco res, but the resu lting racial gaps are similar in size to
those based on entire cohorts, as illustrated for black and Hispanic students in Figures 3and 3b.
14

See App endix Ta ble 2 for a co mparison of students inclu ded and excluded from the 19 99 coho rt.

10

graphically for the four most numerous groups, highlighting patterns by grade level.15 The gap is
largest and most persistent for black students. In math, this gap began at 0.783 s.d. in grade 3
and ended at 0.814 in grade 8; in reading the gap rose from 0.710 to 0.776. For neither test was
there a monotonic progression, and what trends exist may largely if not entirely reflect statistical
noise. These black-white gaps are well within the range established by existing literature – very
close to those reported by Stiefel et al. (2007) for grades 5 and 8, somewhat smaller than those
obtained by Fryer and Levitt (2005) for grade 3 and Phillips and Chin (2004) for grades 4 and 8,
slightly larger than those observed by Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) for math in grades 3, 5, and 8,
and quite a bit larger than Bali and Alvarez’s (2004) 4th grade gap based on a single school
district. It is instructive to compare our calculated black-white gaps, based on intact cohorts, with
gaps based on data for all black and white students for whom data are available each year. As
shown in Figure 3a (and Appendix Table 3a), the black-white gap based on such repeated crosssections closely tracks those based on intact cohorts. Students of both races who moved in and
out of the public schools generally did worse than those with stable enrollment patterns, but the
black-white gap was not materially affected by including them.
For Hispanic students the pattern of gaps is quite different. Compared to black students,
Hispanic students started with a smaller gap in 3rd grade and then reduced that gap further as they
progressed into middle school. In math, they began an average of 0.516 standard deviation
behind whites, and by 8 th grade they were just 0.384 behind, a reduction of 25%. In reading, the

15

Students were observed in six successive years. As explained in the Appendix A, those few who
indicated different racial/ethnic groups were assigned to the group most often cited. Except in cases involving the
multiracial category, we dropped any student who cited two groups an equal number of years. When the multiracial
group wa s one of the gr oups in a tie, we assigned the stu dent to the o ther racial gro up if the other g roup was c ited in
at least three year s. Because of this asymme tric treatment, we give less attention to the gap for multiracial stude nts.

11

gap started out larger than in math; between 3rd and 8th grade this gap fell by almost 30%, from
0.562 to 0.397 standard deviation.16 Crucial to this result is our restricted focus on students who
were in the public schools for six consecutive years. This restriction not only leaves out Hispanic
students whose families moved out of North Carolina after the 3rd grade year, but, more
importantly, it also leaves out those who moved into the state after 3rd grade. Reflecting the
steady flow of immigrants into North Carolina over the years covered by our data, this second
group of Hispanic students was numerous, and they tended to have lower scores than the
Hispanic students in our cohorts. Thus an achievement gap based on repeated cross-sections
would be larger than those we calculate based on intact cohorts and would grow rather than
shrink with each grade. As shown in Figure 3b, Hispanic-white achievement gaps based on
repeated cross-sections were slightly larger at 3rd grade than those based on cohorts. In later
grades, however, the gap based on repeated cross-sections increased markedly (19% in math and
31% in reading) while that based on our cohorts decreased, as noted above.17 This stark contrast
illustrates why the pattern of raw gaps for Hispanic students shown in Table 2 differs so
profoundly from the impression given by the NAEP and other repeated cross-section
calculations.
Thus, the marked improvement we observe among Hispanic students relative to whites is
highly dependent upon our decision to focus on unchanging cohorts of students. Those Hispanic
students who began in 3rd grade and stayed in the state’s public schools for five more years
tended to learn English if they were not fluent before and proceeded to improve relative to whites

16

Fryer and Levitt (2005, p. 3) cite a similar convergence.

17

See Appen dix Table 3b for detailed measures of these gap s.

12

in both math and English.18 Our results serve as a warning not to obscure the promising gains
being achieved by established Hispanic students by combining them with the lower scores of
newly arrived immigrants – precisely the result that emerges from exclusive reliance on periodic
snapshots such as those provided by the NAEP-based national report cards.19
Asian students made steady progress from grade to grade relative to whites. By 8th grade,
the average Asian student had a math score more than a third of a standard deviation above that
of the average white student and was slightly ahead (by 9.5% of a standard deviation) in reading.
This pattern is remarkably similar to that found by Burgess and Wilson (2005) for Chinese and
Indian students in English schools. The American Indian students in North Carolina remained
more than half a standard deviation below white students in both tests. Multi-racial students
experienced gaps smaller than those for disadvantaged minority groups, and these gaps remained
rather stable as students progressed in school.
As noted above, our approach in assigning normalized scores to students who fall behind
in grade is based on the assumption that the underlying scale scores are directly comparable
across grades. This assumption will be violated if the scale scores on the state’s tests for
successive grades are not vertically equated so as to constitute a single measuring rod from grade
to grade. To assess how sensitive our results are to this assumption, we made calculations using
two alternative approaches that do not rely on this assumption. The first alternative is simply to
omit from the sample all students who failed or skipped a grade. Although this approach avoids

18

To illustrate, the percentage of the 19 99 cohort of H ispanic students classified as limited English
proficient fell from 37.9% in 1999 to 17.3% in 2002.
19

Strikingly, other unchanging cohorts of students who first appear in the 4th and 5th grades reveal larger
initial Hispanic-white achievement gaps b ut the same pattern of shrinking gaps in succe eding years.

13

the necessity of assigning a score to students who are behind in grade, it presents a distorted
picture of racial achievement gaps because it does not reflect the differential retention rates by
race, as noted above. As illustrated in Figures 3a and 3b, gaps based only on non-repeaters are
smaller than those for our cohorts, but the patterns of change over the six grades are very
similar.20
The second alternative uses a different assumption: that grade repeaters would have
scored below the median for their race had they made normal progress.21 Under this assumption,
we do not actually need to observe these counterfactual test scores so long as we focus on
comparing medians in the test score distribution, rather than means. While the median is a
conceptually distinct measure of central tendency, it is also interesting in its own right.22 Gaps
based on medians, where grade repeaters are assigned arbitrary scores below the median for their
racial/ethnic group, are shown for the black-white gap in Figure 3a and for the Hispanic-white
gap in Figure 3b.23 Median gaps are uniformly larger in all grades for both races in both subjects,
implying that the test score distributions of whites are differentially skewed as compared to those

20

These differences are shown in detail in Appendix Tables 3a and 3b.

21

This assum ption wou ld be suspe ct if the propo rtion of studen ts repeating a g rade app roached 50%.
Appen dix Figure A 1 shows tha t more than 8 0% of stud ents of any given race make normal pr ogress from grade 3 to
8 over six years.
22

Since virtually all grade repeaters obtain scaled scores below the median for their race anyway, an
analysis of median gaps using this assumption is basically identical to an analysis of median gaps under the original
assumption that scale scores are co mparable acro ss grades.
23

Appendix Tables 3a and 3b report calculations for all of these alternative measures for black and
Hispanic students. A third alternative measure addresses the sensitivity of our calculations to the possibility that the
standard deviations of actual scores do not reflect the true variation in ability. We thus calculated gaps assuming a
constant standard deviation of 10 scale points. (This contrasts with calculated values that ranged over the grades and
years of our sample from 8.3 to 11.9.) The gaps measured using this metric, shown in Appendix Tables 3a and 3b,
likewise retained the same pattern as ou r basic calculations.

14

of nonwhite groups. In section V below we confirm that the white test score distribution
generally has a longer lower tail than the black test score distribution, while the black test score
distribution has a longer upper tail. This difference is exactly consistent with a narrower gap in
means than in medians.
In the Hispanic-white case, median gaps track mean gaps quite well, diminishing as
students progress from 3rd to 8th grade, but black-white median gaps follow different patterns
from mean gaps in some respects. In math, the median black-white test score gap shows more
year-to-year fluctuation than the mean gap, and has a more noticeable downward trend. In
reading, the median gap lacks the downward trend shown in the mean gap. These differences in
the variability and trend between mean and median test scores imply that the relative shapes of
the black and white test score distributions are changing over the course of grade progression. If
the mean of one distribution increased relative to the other, but all other moments of the
distributions remained the same, we would not observe these differences. In section V below, we
show that the black test score distribution, particularly in math, becomes more compressed
relative to the white test score distribution as students progress from 3rd to 8th grade. Given the
skewness in the initial distribution, this compression has a stronger effect on the mean than the
median.
Regression-adjusted Achievement Gaps
Because students in various ethnic and racial groups typically differ in other ways that are
systematically associated with achievement levels, such as socioeconomic status, researchers
have sought to control statistically for such factors so as to isolate the component of achievement

15

gaps purely related to racial or ethnic category.24 The controls used in these studies are of two
types: measures of students’ personal and family characteristics and descriptive measures of
schools and teachers. A principal reason for including variables of the latter type is to explore
the extent to which observed gaps may be due to quality differences in schools attended by white
and minority students. In this paper, we use measures only of the first type, leaving for separate
analysis the examination of how schools and teachers affect achievement gaps. If such
socioeconomic measures were uncorrelated with school quality, unbiased estimates of adjusted
achievement gaps could be obtained simply by including such measures in regressions explaining
student achievement. However, there exists ample evidence that children of better educated and
more affluent parents tend to be taught in schools with teachers who have better credentials and
more experience.25 To mitigate the likelihood of omitted variable bias stemming from such
correlations, we estimate regressions explaining normalized achievement test scores, using as
regressors indicator variables for each racial group other than white, a set of other student
covariates for which we have data, and school fixed effects.26 This list of variables includes
gender, age in the spring of the 3rd grade, parental education, eligibility for free or reduced price
lunch, and indicator variables signifying type of district and region within the state.27 To obtain

24

Appendix Table 5 illustrates for the 1999 cohort how measures such as parental education and free lunch
status differ acro ss the racial and ethnic group s used in this study.
25

See, for example, Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor, and Wheeler (2007).

26

To be sure, school fixed effects may “overcorrect” for differences in school quality in that they will tend
also to correct for differences in neighbo rhood or com munity attributes.
27

Shown in Appendix Tables 4a and 4b , the 12 estimated regressions in sets of six for math and reading
scores, one per grade, pool observations from the five cohorts and restrict the estimated effect of covariates to be
equal across all racial groups. Regressions estimated with only two racial groups at a time, which effectively relax
this restriction, produce similar results. Regressions estimated separately for each cohort show little evidence of

16

gaps that are adjusted for differences in personal and family covariates but not school quality, we
hold constant the effects of covariates but allow mean school fixed effects to differ by
racial/ethnic group, thus eliminating only the effects of the covariates from the raw gaps.28 This
approach also allows us to decompose the raw gaps into three parts. One portion represents the
effect of differences in student covariates, and is simply the difference between the raw and
adjusted gaps shown in Figures 1 and 2. The adjusted gap can be further divided into the portion
attributable to school fixed effects and the portion that is otherwise unexplained by included
variables other than racial/ethnic indicators.
Figure 2 shows estimated gaps adjusted for differences in student covariates. Not
surprisingly, this statistical correction reduces the size of the black-white gap. For math, that
adjusted gap averages about half a standard deviation, roughly three-fifths the size of the raw
gap, which averaged about -0.80 s.d. over the six years covered (shown in Table 2). Similarly,
the adjusted gap in reading averages somewhat less than half a standard deviation, compared to
an average of about three quarters without adjustments. Although reduced in size, therefore, the
adjusted gap between white and black students remains sizable. While there is no discernible
trend over the grades in the reading gap, the math gap does decline slightly, by 0.08 s.d. The
decomposition noted above is shown in Table 3. For example, it shows that the total black-white
gap for math in 3rd grade (-0.783) can be divided into three parts: -0.231 due to differences in
student covariates, -0.021 due to school fixed effects, and -0.530 otherwise unexplained by

meaningful differences in the level or trend of any racial achievement gap.
28

Using estimated coefficients from regressions with school fixed effects to calculate gaps in mean
predicted scores by group when all covariates are set to zero.

17

included variables. As is evident, the school fixed effect is relatively small for both tests over all
grades, averaging just 7% of the total raw math black-white gap and 6% of the raw reading gap.29
Our findings suggest that variation in school quality and other aspects of communities correlated
with school attendance does not account for a large part of the total black-white gap in North
Carolina, though it does grow in importance over the grades we study.
For Hispanic students, the effect of the statistical adjustment for covariates is striking: by
5th grade these students were on a par with whites in both math and reading. By 8th grade,
adjusted scores for Hispanic students in the state surpassed those of observationally equivalent
whites by roughly a tenth of a standard deviation. These gains relative to whites are parallel to
those observed above in the raw gaps, only they begin with a smaller gap. Thus, once income and
educational background differences are taken into account, Hispanic students in North Carolina
were outperforming whites by the end of middle school.30 Two features of the analysis explain
this striking result, and serve to qualify it. First, the estimated equation underlying the
adjustment includes both family income and parental education, two characteristics on which
Hispanic students differ markedly from whites.31 Second, to repeat the point emphasized above,

29

The small contribution of school fixed effects in the present study is similar to the findings of Fryer and
Levitt for 3rd grade (20 05, Ta bles 1 and 6) but con siderably sm aller than those implied by H anushek an d Rivkin
(2006, Table 3) for Texas and Stiefel et al. (2007, Table 3) for New York C ity. Since public schools in Texas are
characterized by higher rates of segregation than those in North Carolina (Orfield and Lee 2004, Tables 11 and 14),
the large differe nce in Te xas could b e attributable to large differenc es in comm unity character istics or schoo l quality
between schools attende d by black and white stude nts.
30

Little if any of the relative improvem ent by Hisp anic students o ver the six grad es can be a ttributed to
their improved economic standing. A year-by-year comparison of subsidized lunch rates for the 1999 cohort, the
only one for which inform ation was ava ilable in every ye ar, shows the w hite-Hispan ic gap falling slightly (fro m 51.4
to 49.1%) between 3 rd and 5th grade and then remaining constant thereafter.
31

See Appendix Table 4 for a comparison of mean values by racial/ethnic group.

18

our focus on intact cohorts of Hispanic students necessarily ignores newly arrived immigrants
and their likely lower average achievement scores. Decomposing the Hispanic-white gap shows
that, averaging over all six grades, school fixed effects explain only 6% of the total gap in math
and 4% in reading, suggesting again that differences in school quality play a minor role in
explaining achievement gaps in North Carolina.
For Asian students, the statistical adjustment has only a small effect on the size of the
gap, because of their greater socioeconomic similarity with whites. The resulting estimates show
Asian students surpassing whites on both tests and in all years except 3rd and 4th grade reading.
For American Indians, the adjustment markedly reduces the gap with whites, cutting it by more
than half in most grades, owing to the large differences in income and education levels between
white and Indian families in the state. In this case school fixed effects play a larger role than with
other disadvantaged minority groups, accounting for 12% of the raw gap in math and 18% in
reading. This difference could reflect the comparatively high level of segregation for American
Indian students in the state: more than half of those students attend schools in two relatively
small counties (Robeson and Swain). The regression-adjusted estimates also show stronger
trends towards convergence for this group. The adjusted gap between multiracial students and
whites similarly shows convergence and is reduced in overall size.
Although the evidence of convergence for most disadvantaged minority groups
conditional on observable characteristics might be construed as promising, it necessarily implies
that the importance of certain other characteristics in determining test scores must be increasing
over time. Indeed, the estimated equations in Appendix Table 4a and 4b show that the gap
between poor and non-poor students (classified here according to their eligibility for subsidized
19

lunches in 7th or 8th grade) increases marginally as students get older.32 This increase might mean
that a portion of the racial gap is morphing into an economic gap as students age. Why a similar
change does not emerge from the parental education coefficients, however, is unclear.
A second factor showing increasing importance over time is student age. Students who
are old relative to their cohort perform worse than their younger counterparts, and this gap grows
over time. Disadvantaged minority students show a very slight tendency toward being older than
whites (see Appendix Table 5), possibly because they are more likely to be retained prior to
entering our analysis as 3rd graders. Thus, while the pattern of convergence in test score gaps is
encouraging in some respects, researchers and policy-makers should continue making efforts to
understand the widening gaps along other dimensions.

V. Racial Gaps at Other Points in the Achievement Distribution
Much of the existing literature on racial achievement gaps focuses on differences in raw
or regression-adjusted means. While the mean is certainly a useful, intuitive statistic for
measuring differences between racial and ethnic groups, there are several reasons to pay attention

32

We considered the possibility that this result might be due to measurement error, but this appears
unlikely. As noted in the text above, we used eligibility for free or reduced price lunch in grade s 7 or 8 because tho se
were the only two grades for which we had such information for all five cohorts. If families move in and out of
poverty in years when students are in these grades, our measure could be a less precise indicator of poverty for
students in early grades than when they were in grades 7 and 8. A consequence would be classic errors-in-variables
that would bias the coefficient of the subsidized lunch indicator in the earlier grades toward zero, which could in turn
raise the estima ted coefficien t on the race/e thnicity indicator s to the extent the y were corre lated with inco me level.
To test for this possibility, we examined data for the 1999 cohort only (the only cohort for which we had
subsidized lunch informa tion for each year). W e found that o ur grade 7 -8 measure of subsidize d lunch eligib ility is
indeed more highly correlated to contemporaneous eligibility (0.66 for 3 rd grade math versus 0.86 for 8 th grade math,
for examp le). This varia tion appe ars to exert little bia s, however. W e estimated re gressions of the form of those in
Appendix Tables 4a and 4b, comparing the results when the indicator for actual contemporaneous eligibility for
subsidized lunches was substituted for our indicator based on status in grades 7 and 8. We found no significant
difference b etween any o f the pairs of estim ated coefficie nts for the subsid ized lunch o r any of the race /ethnicity
indicators.

20

to other measures of racial disparities in test scores. Monotone transformations of a test score
scale can have very large effects on differences in means or medians. Compression or truncation
of the test score distribution at the high or low end can skew mean differences. Measures of
central tendency, whether means or medians, can also obscure offsetting relative movements
occurring at varying points in the test score distribution.
To address these concerns, Figure 4 and Tables 4a and 4b use a different methodology to
analyze test score disparities between whites and other racial groups, a cross-referencing of
percentiles. This method has the advantage of being entirely invariant to monotone
transformations of the test score distribution. Figure 4 shows the proportion of black or Hispanic
students with test scores at or below the median of the white distribution. Were there no racial
disparity in test scores, we would expect 50% of each group to score at or below the white
median. In both reading and math, the figure shows that four out of every five black students
have test scores below the white median. These significant disparities remain roughly constant
across grades, supporting the general conclusion that there is little net improvement or worsening
of the black-white achievement gap as students age. As for Hispanic students, Figure 4 shows
improvement relative to white students through the six grade levels, consistent with our findings
above based on intact cohorts. The proportion of Hispanic students scoring below the white
median in 3rd grade is about 71% in both math and reading. Six years later, the percentage if only
66%.
Tables 4a and 4b present similar statistics focusing at the upper and lower tails of the test
score distribution. In both tables, each row tracks the experience of a single cohort of students
between 3rd and 8th grade, in a single test score subject. To track trends at the lower tail of the
21

achievement distribution, we report the proportion of students of a given race who score below
the 10th percentile of the white distribution. Were there no racial disparity in test scores, we
would expect 10% of students of any given race to fall below the white 10th percentile. Higher
numbers indicate an over-concentration of minority students in the lower tail of the distribution.
To track trends in the upper tail, we report the proportion of white students who fall above the
90th percentile of a given minority group. Again, we would expect a value of 10% in a world
with no racial disparities. Higher numbers indicate that whites are concentrated at the high end
of the test score distribution.
Table 4a reveals substantial and persistent disparities in math scores between blacks and
whites, Hispanics and whites, and American Indians and whites, at each cohort and each point in
time. The black-white disparities are largest. At any given point in time, more than a quarter of
blacks test below the 10th percentile of the white distribution, and more than a third of whites
score above the black 90th percentile.
Tracking the experience of individual cohorts over time, we find important differences at
the low and high ends of the test score distribution. For each of the five cohorts tracked here, the
proportion of black students testing below the white 10th percentile decreased over time, by
between 2 and 4 percentage points. By contrast, the proportion of whites scoring above the black
90th percentile increased in four out of five cohorts. Thus, the black-white test score gap in math
narrows at the low end of the distribution, but widens at the high end of the distribution. In other
words, the black distribution becomes compressed relative to the white distribution. Similar, if
not more dramatic, compression occurs in the American Indian test score distribution. Hispanic
students show more consistent evidence of advancing relative to whites at both the high and low
22

ends, but in four out of five cohorts progress is more rapid at the low end.
Figures 5a and 5b illustrate the compression of the distribution of black math scores
relative to the white distribution, shown as kernal density plots of unnormalized scale scores
based on the 1999 cohort. Figure 5a presents 3rd grade distributions, while Figure 5b shows the
8th grade distributions. In third grade, the two distributions have very similar peaks, at a density
of 0.04. By the time these students reach 8th grade, the black test score distribution has a slightly
higher peak, clearly above 0.04, while the white peak is clearly below 0.04. Over time, the white
test score distribution transforms from one that is clearly skewed to one that is roughly
symmetric. The black test score distribution, if anything, switches from having an elongated
lower tail to having an elongated upper tail. This shift in distribution implies that the black mean
increases more rapidly than the black median over time. This, in turn, explains why the blackwhite gap in median test scores expands relative to the black-white gap in mean test scores in
Figure 3a. The black mean keeps pace with the white mean; the slower advance of the black
median relative to the mean implies that it falls behind the white median.33
Asian students clearly do not fit the mold of other minority groups. In virtually every
instance, Asian students start ahead of whites – with fewer than 10% of students starting below
the white 10th percentile and fewer than 10% of whites scoring above the Asian 90th percentile –
and advance still further between 3rd and 8th grade. Unlike other groups, there is no evidence that
Asian advances relative to whites are concentrated at the low end of the test score distribution.

33

The elongation of the upper tail referenced in the text explains the difference between the trend in Figure
3a and the steadiness ob served in Figure 4. Th e black math med ian is not keeping up with the white math me dian, so
the gap be tween med ians increases . The elon gation of the up per tail of the bla ck distribution allows the blac k 80th
percentile to keep up with the white median at the same time.

23

Table 4b presents the corresponding set of findings in the reading test score distribution.
Once again, there are sizable and persistent gaps between blacks and whites, Hispanics and
whites, and American Indians and whites. One-quarter or more of the black students in each
cohort score below the white 10th percentile, and roughly one-third of white students in each
cohort score above the black 90th percentile.
The only evidence of narrowing in the black-white reading test score gap is found at the
high end of the distribution, where black advances relative to whites are observed in four out of
five cohorts. At the low end of the distribution, disparities remain steady or increase, which is a
direct contrast to the math test score distribution. Thus, in reading, the black test score
distribution is widening, if anything, relative to the white test score distribution. Hispanic and
American Indian students show more consistent evidence of advancing relative to whites
between 3rd and 8th grade, at both the high and low ends of the distribution. Asian students, once
again, are at or above white achievement levels in 3rd grade and improve relative to white
students over the next five years, at both ends of the distribution.
Why do racial math test score gaps tend to close at the bottom end of the distribution and
widen at the top end? Why don’t reading test score gaps follow the same pattern? Although a
full evaluation of these findings is beyond the scope of this paper, one reasonable hypothesis
about the pattern for math is that it reflects efforts to meet standards imposed by school
accountability programs, such as North Carolina’s ABCs program and the federal No Child Left
Behind Act, which assign disproportionate weight to low-performing students. These and other
accountability programs include sanctions that punish schools where students fail to attain a
minimum level of achievement. This emphasis on bringing all students up to a certain threshold
24

may lead some schools to reallocate instructional resources away from high-performing children
and towards low-performing children. If schools with high concentrations of low-achievers
divert more resources away from high-performers than other schools, high-performers will be
disadvantaged when they attend such schools. The observed erosion of the relative position of
high-achieving black students might then reflect the tendency for these students to have more
low-performing classmates than their white counterparts.
The absence of compression in the reading test score distribution at first seems to
contradict this hypothesis, but it might reflect the marginally larger growth in the black-white gap
over the grades in reading. The fact that the black-white math gap grows less than that in reading
might reflect a more successful redistribution of instructional resources in math towards lowperforming children.34 We must, however, leave further analysis of this phenomenon to future
work. In any case, the possibility that raising the test scores of low-performing students in math
may come at the expense of scores of high-performing students merits additional research.

34

A straightforward test of this hypothesis would be to compare cohorts educated before and after the
implementation of North Carolina’s accountability system, to see if the system’s implementation is associated with a
decline in test sco res for high-pe rforming stud ents in schoo ls with a high pro portion o f low-perform ing students. W e
are unable to test this hypothesis because our earliest cohort did not reach 8th grade before the implementation of
accountability in North Carolina.
In considering the possible effects of accountability programs, it is instructive to ask how the mean
achievement gaps changed over the five cohorts. To test for secular trends in these gaps, we estimated regressions
with student covariates, interacting a linear time trend with indicators for each racial/ethnic group. The estimated
coefficients for those interaction terms, shown in Appendix Table 6, indicate the average annual change in each gap
at grades 3 and 8. Positive coefficients show improvement relative to white students, and negative ones show
worsening g aps.
The tab le shows that the black-white ga p gradua lly improved over the pe riod in math a t both grad e levels
and in read ing at grade 8 , but in no case changing b y as much as 2 % of a stand ard devia tion per year . The gap for
Hispanic students reveals a seemingly contradictory pattern, with a growing gap in math in grade 3 but a shrinking
gap for rea ding only at 8 th grade. Fo r Asian stude nts, the only statistically significa nt trend is in read ing at 8 th grade.
The gro up showing the most co nsistent progr ess in relation to w hites is Americ an Indians, w ho reduc ed their gap in
both subj ects at 3 rd grade and in math at 8 th grade. The rate of improvement in 8 th grade math for this group, 2.5% of
a standard deviation a ye ar, was abo ut twice the rate ex perienced by black stud ents and the ra tes of impro vement in
grade 3 were even higher. If continued, these rates imply that half the 3rd grade raw gaps with whites could be
eliminated in a decade.

25

VI. Conclusion
Our analysis of North Carolina administrative data adds to the body of research on racial
achievement gaps by focusing on several very large cohorts of students in an ethnically diverse
state, by examining gaps with respect to students in four different minority groups, and by
looking beyond the mean of the distribution to uncover a more complicated pattern. Because the
cohorts contain students who remained in the state’s public schools for six consecutive years, the
results are not influenced by immigration, private school enrollment, or movements across state
lines, any of which could change the composition of students in the public schools. To be sure,
restricting ourselves to students who remain in the state and in the public schools necessarily
limits the generalizability of our findings, but we believe this drawback is vastly outweighed by
the advantages of observing the academic performance of intact groups of students over time.
Only by comparing such intact groups can one identify how gaps change as students progress
through school.
Like previous studies, we find large gaps in mean achievement between white and black
students. In contrast to some of those studies, however, we find no appreciable growth in the gap
as students progress through school. Other disadvantaged minority groups, namely Hispanics
and American Indians, also display lower test scores than whites, but these gaps are uniformly
smaller than the black-white gap and show evidence of dissipating as students age. Asian
students surpass whites between 3rd and 8th grade. Our findings are also consistent with previous
research in that socioeconomic factors explain a sizable portion of these racial test score gaps, for
example, about a third of the black-white raw gaps. Indeed, these factors grow more important as
students advance in school. Our work departs from previous research, however, in showing that
26

the gap between cohorts of white and Hispanic students narrows markedly between 3rd and 8th
grades.
In the case of the black-white gap in math, the relative stability of the gap in means masks
two divergent trends in the tails of the achievement distribution. At the low end of the
achievement distribution, the gaps between white and black students shrink. At the high end,
however, test score gaps tend to increase by similar amounts as students age. This tendency may
reflect any number of different factors, but one important question for further research is whether
these divergent trends reflect tradeoffs that are being made in response to accountability
programs, such as NCLB and North Carolina’s ABCs program, designed to raise the
achievement of those at the bottom of the distribution.

27

References
Bali, Valentia A. And R. Michael Alvarez, “The Race Gap in Student Achievement
Scores: Longitudinal Evidence from a Racially Diverse School District,” The Policy Studies
Journal 32 (No. 3, 2004), 393-415.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, Jacob L. Vigdor and Roger Aliaga Diaz, “Do
School Accountability Systems Make It More Difficult for Low Performing Schools to Attract
and Retain High Quality Teachers?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management v.23 (2003).
pp.251-271.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “Federal Oversight, Local
Control, and the Specter of ‘Resegregation’ in Southern Schools,” American Law and Economics
Review 8 (Summer 2006), 1-43.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “Teacher-Student Matching
and the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness,” Journal of Human Resources 41 (Fall 2006), 778820.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, Jacob L. Vigdor, and Justin Wheeler, “High
Poverty Schools and the Distribution of Teachers and Principals,” North Carolina Law Review
85 (June 2007), 1345-1379.
Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt, “Understanding the Black-White Test Score Gap
in the First Two Years of School, Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (May 2004), 447-464.
Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt, “The Black-White Test Score Gap through Third
Grade,” American Law and Economics Review 8 (Summer 2006), 249-281.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Steven G. Rivkin, “School Quality and the Black-White
Achievement Gap,” NBER Working Paper 12651, October 2006.
Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips (eds.), The Black-White Test Score Gap
(Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1998).
Kao, Grace and Jennifer S. Thompson, “Racial and Ethnic Stratification in Educational
Achievement and Attainment,” Annual Review of Sociology 29 (2003), 417-442.
Krueger, Alan, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner, “Race, Income and College in 25
Years: The Continuing Legacy of Segregation and Discrimination,” NBER Working Paper
11445, June 2005.
Lee, Jaekyung, “Racial and Ethnic Achievement Gap Trends: Reversing the Progress
28

Toward Equity?” Educational Researcher 31 (January/February 2002), 3-12.
Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Kristen L. Bub, and Kathleen McCartney,
“Explaining Puzzling Patterns in Black-White Achievement Gaps,” Harvard Graduate School of
Education, January 2006.
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Closing the Gap (Washington:
NAACPLDEF, 2005).
http://www.naacpldf.org/content/pdf/gap/Closing_the_Gap_-_Moving_from_Rhetoric_to_Realit
y.pdf
North Carolina Public Schools, Statistical Profile 2005.
http://www.ncpublicschools.org/fbs/stats/statprofile05.pdf, 1/16/06.
North Carolina State Board of Education, End-of-Grade Tests, Technical Report #1,
August 1996.
North Carolina State Board of Education, “History of the North Carolina State Board of
Education,” NC State Board of Education website,
http://www.ncpublicschools.org/state_board/SBE_history/chapter3.html, 3/13/06.
Orfield, Gary and Chungmei Lee, Brown at 50: King’s Dream or Plessy’s Nightmare?
Harvard Civil Rights Project, January 2004.
Paige, Rod, address to National Urban League, July 22, 2004.
http://64.233.161.104/search?q=cache:ldWoiotQy64J:www.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/2004/07/
07222004.html+Paige+calls+achievement+gap&hl=en, 12/22/05.
Perie, Marianne, Rebecca Moran, Anthony D. Lutkus, and William Tirre, NAEP 2004
Trends in Academic Progress (Washington: Department of Education, National Center for
Education Statistics, July 2005).
http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pdf/main2005/2005464.pdf, 1/18/06
Phillips, Meredith and Tiffani Chin, “School Inequality: What Do We Know?” in
Kathryn Neckerman (ed.), Social Inequality (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004).
Public Schools of North Carolina, Website, The ABCs Accountability Model,
http://abcs.ncpublicschools.org/abcs/, 12/23/05.
Public Schools of North Carolina, Assessment Brief, vol. 5, no. 3, March 1, 2004 ,
“Understanding North Carolina End-of-Grade Testing”
http://www.dpi.state.nc.us/docs/accountability/testing/eog/AssessmentBriefEOG04.pdf,
12/23/05
29

Stiefel, Leanna, Amy Ellen Schwartz, and Ingrid Gould Ellen, “Disentangling the Racial
Test Score Gap: Probing the Evidence in a Large urban School District,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 26 (Winter 2007), 7-30.
Thernstrom, Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom, No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in
Learning (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2003).
Tienda, Marta and Faith Mitchell (eds.), Multiple Origins, Uncertain Destinies
(Washington: National Research Council, 2006).
Wilson, D., S. Burgess, and A. Briggs, “The Dynamics of School Attainment of
England’s Ethnic Minorities,” unpublished paper, U. of Bristol, October 2005.
Williams, Valerie S.L., Mary Pommerich, and David Thissen, “A Comparison of
Developmental Scales Based on Thurstone Methods and Item Response Theory,” Journal of
Educational Measurement 35 (Summer 1998), 93-107.
Williamson, Gary L., Charles L. Thompson, and Robert F. Baker, “North Carolina’s
Growth in Reading and Mathematics,” paper presented at the annual meeting of the North
Carolina Association for Research in Education, March 31, 2006.
U.S. Department of Education. 2005. Digest of Education Statistics, 2004. Web page:
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d04/tables/dt04_037.asp, 12/21/05.
Ward, Martha S., “Policies and Standards, Their Role and Revision: The Case of Ethics
in Testing in North Carolina,” unpublished paper, n.d., http://www.natd.org/Ward96.htm,
c:\wp\Ach gap\achgapdraft80707

30

Appendix A
Detailed Data Description
The construction of our panel data sets involved forming cohorts of students who took
six successive end-of-grade achievement tests. This appendix discusses the treatment of
students who failed at least one grade, the characteristics of students not included in the cohorts,
and the consistency of data for individual students.
Grade Retention
Any student who failed a grade necessarily did not take all tests in the same years as
most of his or her peers. Simply eliminating these students would have yielded a seriously
distorted sample, because rates of grade retention differ systematically by race. Figure A1
depicts the proportions of five racial/ethnic groups who progressed as expected from grade to
grade. It shows that school careers with normal grade progression were markedly less common
among black students than among white students, with Hispanic students falling between these
groups. Five years after the 1998/99 school year, only 84% of the black students in the cohort
had reached the 8th grade, compared to 89% of Hispanic and 94% of white students.35
Our approach to dealing with these repeaters is to base a student’s achievement on the
scale score received in a year regardless of the student’s grade. More precisely, we computed for
these students a score based on the student’s actual test performance but standardized according
to test performance in the student’s “normal” rather than actual grade. For example, we applied
the score a student obtained on the 3rd grade test after being retained in grade to the state
distribution of the 4th grade scores to infer where that student would have fallen if he or she had
taken the 4th grade test. We take this approach because it was the explicit aim of the state for its
“developmental scale scores” to be used in just this way – “like a ruler that measures growth in
reading and mathematics from year. Just like height in inches, the student’s scores in reading
and mathematics are expected to increase each year” (Public Schools of North Carolina 2004,
pp. 1-2). In the early 1990s the state devised the tests by converting raw scores based on the
number of correct answers on multiple choice tests at each grade level into a scale for each
subject calibrated in part by comparing performance by students in adjacent grades on sets of
identical questions, a process known as “vertical equating.” The resulting scale “uses the same
metric for student performance in different age groups or school grades, so that test performance
may be compared across grade levels and growth may be assessed in terms of changes in
average performance and variability from grade to grade” (Williams, Pommerich, and Thissen
1998, pp. 95-96, 93). As constructed in 1993, the mean scale score on the math end-of-grade
tests increased from 139.9 in 3rd grade to 168.3 in 8th. On the reading tests the mean rose from
142.7 in 3rd to 158.7 in 8th (North Carolina State Board of Education 1996, Table 16, p. 37).
Depending on the type of test and the grade level, the state’s published tables assume that a

35

As can be inferred from comparing the gender composition of groups A and B in the 1999 cohort shown
in Table A1, boys fail grades with more regularity than girls. The proportion of boys reaching 8th grade in the
normal five ye ars among white students w as 92% compar ed to 95 % for girls. Fo r black stude nts the comp arable
rates were 80 versus 88%, and for Hispanic students they were 87 versus 92%.

31

student showing “consistent mastery” should see growth in scaled scores ranging from a fraction
of 1% to about 3% per year. Although both the math and reading tests experienced at least one
re-calibration over the period of our sample, they retained the same format, with scaled scores at
a given mastery level showing gradual increases from one year to the next.
Our basic approach is strictly correct only to the extent that the intended aim of vertical
equating was actually achieved. Despite the state’s efforts, however, it is possible that the
attempt to vertically equate scores was not entirely successful – that is, that every student would
actually have achieved the same score by taking at the same time tests written for two different
grade levels – simply because successive tests are not identical. To allow for the possibility that
the scale scores were not, in fact, vertically equated, we present results based on several
alternative means of assessing achievement gaps, as discussed in the text and illustrated in
Appendix Tables 3a and 3b.
As noted in the text, simply omitting students who repeated a grade would affect the
representativeness of the sample. This may be illustrated by examining the cohort of students
who were 3rd graders in 1999. Appendix Table 2 gives sample sizes and mean values of several
variables for four groups of students. The first three columns include three groups who took the
3rd grade test in 1999: those who made normal progress through all six grades, those in the
cohort who repeated at least one grade, and those students who were excluded from the cohort
because they were not present in the data set all six years. Of these 98,857 students who took
the 3rd grade test in 1999, this last group numbered almost 20,000, or about a fifth of the total.
Of the remaining 79,406 students – those qualifying for the cohort – almost a tenth had to repeat
at least one grade. The table’s last column covers the parallel group of students who were in a
public school and took the math test in the last year, 2004, but who were not present all six
years.
The contrast between the cohort’s two groups, A and B, shows striking differences.
Compared to those with normal grade progression, the grade repeaters (group B) averaged
achievement scores in 3rd grade a full standard deviation below the normal-progress group.
These repeaters were also disproportionately male (64%, compared to 49% among those with
normal progress) and even more disproportionately black (52 vs. 29%). They were also more
likely to be Hispanic or American Indian and less likely to be Asian. Their parents were
markedly less likely to be college graduates and much more likely to have dropped out of school
before receiving a high school diploma. The repeaters were also more likely to have family
incomes low enough to qualify for subsidized lunches, and they were more likely to have been
classified as exceptional in some way other than being deemed gifted. The sharp differences
between groups A and B illustrate the importance of keeping the latter in the sample when
examining the racial achievement gap.
Characteristics of Non-cohort Students
By comparison, the mean values for groups C and D shown in Appendix Table 2 suggest
what kinds of students are omitted from the analysis by restricting our sample to those who are
present in all of the six years. Looking at the first group of mobile students, the table shows that
those in group C had slightly lower 3rd grade achievement than those with normal progress in the
cohort (roughly a fifth of a standard deviation), were much less likely to have college-educated
32

parents, but also less likely to have parents who were not high school graduates. The mobile
students in group D, comprising mostly students who arrived in the state after 1999, differed
most clearly in their larger share of Hispanic students (10.4%), with a correspondingly higher
share of students who were ever classified as having limited English. One other feature marking
both of these mobile groups is their high probability of being in one of the state’s five largest
school districts, a finding consistent with the high relative rates of growth and population
turnover in the largest metropolitan areas.
Data consistency
We performed several checks to see how consistent the administrative data were over
time. We were also interested in how students’ free and reduced price lunch status changed.
We report here results for the 1998 cohort, but other cohorts looked similar in these regards.
Three attributes that should not change over time are a student’s gender, age, and
race/ethnicity; yet occasional inconsistences do arise in all of these categories. Given the
vagaries of data collection in a multi-layered state administrative structure, some inconsistencies
are inevitable. When students change schools in the weeks before a test, for example, preprinted forms with student information cannot be made available, so students themselves must
provide information on gender, race, and date of birth, taking care to follow all instructions on
how to fill in forms, all of which leads to occasional mistakes. Fortunately, such mistakes are
relatively rare. In the case of gender, they are quite rare, with a mere 0.4% of the 1998 cohort
having at least one mistake over the six years. In fact, only 0.03% of the sample had no modal
gender. In these cases, for all but the 1999 cohort, staff of the North Carolina Education
Research Data Center examined the names to determine probable gender. Where that
examination proved inconclusive, and for all the cases in the 1999 cohort with no mode, gender
was assigned randomly. Inconsistencies were more common in the reporting of birthdays, with
5.4% of the 1998 cohort having at least one inconsistency. In these cases the modal birthday
was chosen. For the 0.14% of this cohort that had no mode, the midpoint was chosen.
The consistency of the race/ethnicity category is of special importance because of its
centrality to the current analysis. The issue of racial categories has also assumed more general
significance in light of the change in the census race categories in 2000 and the accompanying
scholarly debate over racial classification itself.36 North Carolina school records allowed for
these six categories in all years covered by our data: non-Hispanic white and black, Hispanic,
Asian, American Indian, and multi-racial. For purposes of reporting to the Department of
Education, however, the state used only the first five of these. For our purposes, we classified
students according to the group they were placed in four or more of the six years. For the vast
majority of students, there was no ambiguity: of the students in the 1998 cohort, 99% had the
same race designation in all six years. If students were classified as multi-racial for three years
and another race in three years, we assigned the student to the latter group. Students for whom
there was no majority designation were dropped from the analysis. Interestingly, consistency in
racial designation was highest for white and black students. The percentage of students in the
1998 cohort who showed only one race category over the six-year period was: white, 99.86%;
36

See, for example, Perlmann and Waters 2002 and B arr (2005).

33

black, 99.67%; Hispanic, 94.6%; Asian, 94.6%; American Indian, 91.3%; and multi-racial,
57.0%.
Because information on which students were eligible for the free and reduced price
lunch program was available only beginning in the 1998/99 year, we decided to define our
measure of low family income based only on eligibility in a student’s last two years, which for
most would be their 7th and 8th grade years. This information was available equally for all five
of our cohorts. Accordingly, we found that about 44% of students in the 1998 cohort were
classified as low-income, by virtue of being eligible for free or reduced price lunch in either
2002 or 2003. To see how well this variable distinguished students, we compared these
designations to information on eligibility in each year from 1999 to 2003. We found that three
quarters of those designated low income by our definition in fact were eligible in at least four of
the five years for which we could determine their status. On the other side, we found that only
16% of those not designated low income had ever qualified as eligible.
Our measure of parental education is based on information supplied by a student’s
teacher or counselor, who was asked to indicate the education level corresponding to “the
highest level completed by either of this student’s parents/guardians.” To check for any general
tendency to overstate or understate attainment by race/ethnicity, we compared the implied rates
by group with those obtained in the 2000 census for the parents of students aged 8 to 11 in
North Carolina. In general, the two distributions are very close to one another. Teachers and
counselors were inclined to overstate the college completion rate of white and Asian parents
(35.5% for whites compared to 30.9% from the census; 40.8% vs. 38.2% for Asians). But they
tended to understate the proportion of black parents who had not completed high school (7.3%
vs. 14.0% in the census). The tendency to overstate attainment for white and Asian parents
could lead to an overestimate of the importance of parental education since their children have
higher average achievement, but the tendency to overstate attainment for black parents would
have the opposite effect.

34

Figure 1. Raw Achievement Gaps, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts, Math and Reading

Note: Achievement gaps are differences in mean normalized achievement scores, measured in
standard deviation units, estimated in regressions combining five cohorts and containing
indicators for racial/ethnic groups other than whites and for cohorts other than 1995. See Table
2.
7/18/07

Figure 2. Covariate-adjusted Achievement Gaps, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts, Math and
Reading

Note: Achievement gaps are measured in standard deviation units, estimated in regressions
combining five cohorts and containing racial/ethnic indicators, other covariates, and school
fixed effects. See text for method. See Appendix Tables 4a and 4b for estimated gaps.
7/18/07

Figure 3a. Black-White Raw Achievement Gaps, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts, Math and
Reading, Alternative Measures

Source: Appendix Table 3a.
8/6/07

Figure 3b. Hispanic-White Raw Achievement Gaps, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts, Math and
Reading, Alternative Measures

Source: Appendix Table 3b.
8/6/07

Figure 4. Proportion of Group Scoring Below White Median, Black and Hispanic, 1995-1999
Combined Cohorts

Source: Appendix Tables 3a and 3b.
7/19/07

Figure 5a. Black and White Achievement Distributions, Math, 1999 Cohort, 3rd Grade

Figure 5b. Black and White Achievement Distributions, Math, 1999 Cohort, 8th Grade

Table 1. Calculated Black-White Achievement Gaps, Selected Studies and Grades, in Standard
Deviation Units
Grade

Study

K (fall) Fryer-Levitt1
K
Fryer-Levitt1
K
Murnane et al.2

Raw differences in
means
Math
Reading

Adjusted differences in
means
Math
Reading

-0.66
-0.73
-1.00

-0.40
-0.45
-1.18

-0.10
-0.21
-0.74

0.13
0.00
-0.92

1
1

Fryer-Levitt1
Bali-Alvarez3

-0.76
-0.55

-0.52
-0.35

-0.28
-0.28

-0.08
-0.21

3
3

Fryer-Levitt1
Hanushek-Rivkin4

-0.88
-0.70

-0.77
----a

-0.38

-0.28

4
4

Phillips-Chin5
Bali-Alvarez3

-0.90
-0.50

-0.83
-0.45

5
5
5

Hanushek-Rivkin4
Murnane et al.2
Stiefel et al.6

-0.73
-1.01
-0.81

----a
-1.09
-0.73

-0.81
----a

-0.87
-0.48

8
Phillips-Chin5
-1.06
-0.85
4
8
Hanushek-Rivkin
-0.76
----a
-0.55
-0.84
-0.78
----a
8
Stiefel et al.6
Note: Raw gaps are differences in mean achievement scores, and adjusted gaps are
estimated coefficient of black indicator in regressions with student covariates.
Blanks indicate that studies did not calculate comparable adjusted gaps.
a. Gaps calculated just for math scores. Comparable gaps not presented for this subject.
Sources:
1
Fryer and Levitt (2005, Tables 1, 2 and 3).
2
Murnane et al. (2006, Tables 2, 8).
3
Bali and Alvarez (2004, p. 409). Estimated by dividing reported gaps, measured in units of test
scores, by the standard deviation of 4th grade reading test.
4
Hanushek and Rivkin (2006, Table 3).
5
Phillips and Chin (2004) and spreadsheet made available by the authors.
6
Stiefel et al. (2007, Table 2; Table 3, without fixed effects).
7/24/07

Table 2. Raw Achievement Gaps, Grades 3 to 8, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts
Average normalized math score, by grade

Average normalized reading score, by grade

3

4

5

6

7

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

Black

-0.783
(0.003)

-0.817
(0.003)

-0.794
(0.003)

-0.830
(0.003)

-0.831
(0.003)

-0.814
(0.003)

-0.710
(0.003)

-0.755
(0.003)

-0.771
(0.003)

-0.755
(0.003)

-0.765
(0.003)

-0.776
(0.003)

Hispanic

-0.516
(0.011)

-0.473
(0.012)

-0.449
(0.012)

-0.456
(0.012)

-0.427
(0.012)

-0.384
(0.012)

-0.562
(0.012)

-0.515
(0.012)

-0.460
(0.012)

-0.440
(0.012)

-0.391
(0.012)

-0.397
(0.012)

Asian

0.028
(0.014)

0.133
(0.014)

0.207
(0.014)

0.247
(0.014)

0.292
(0.014)

0.342
(0.014)

-0.108
(0.014)

-0.060
(0.014)

0.005
(0.014)

0.033
(0.014)

0.091
(0.014)

0.095
(0.014)

Am. Ind

-0.589
(0.012)

-0.621
(0.013)

-0.674
(0.013)

-0.642
(0.013)

-0.632
(0.013)

-0.569
(0.013)

-0.634
(0.013)

-0.653
(0.013)

-0.714
(0.013)

-0.666
(0.012)

-0.652
(0.013)

-0.629
(0.013)

Multiracial

-0.279
(0.018)

-0.282
(0.018)

-0.263
(0.019)

-0.301
(0.018)

-0.289
(0.018)

-0.275
(0.018)

-0.227
(0.018)

-0.221
(0.018)

-0.201
(0.019)

-0.205
(0.018)

-0.207
(0.018)

-0.203
(0.018)

Note: For math, the cohorts contain 56,591 students in 1995, 61,593 in 1996, 71,753 in 1997, 76,398 in 1998 and 79,147 in 1999.
The cohort consists of NC public school students who took the grade 3 math end-of-grade test in the spring of 1998 and who took
end-of-year math tests in each of the following five years. For reading, the cohort is defined analogously and contains 56,473
students in 1995, 61,332 in 1996, 71,334 in 1997, 75,853 for 1998 and 78,431 in 1999.
Source: North Carolina Education Data Center; author’s calculations
7/18/07

Table 3. Decomposing the Raw Achievement Gap, Grades 3 to 8, 1995-99 Combined Cohorts
Group
Black

Hispanic

Asian

Portion of gap

Math score, by grade

Reading score, by grade

3

4

5

6

7

8

3

4

5

6

7

8

Total

-0.783

-0.817

-0.794

-0.830

-0.831

-0.814

-0.710

-0.755

-0.771

-0.755

-0.765

-0.776

Unexplained

-0.530

-0.528

-0.503

-0.478

-0.486

-0.454

-0.446

-0.470

-0.478

-0.440

-0.460

-0.465

Covariates

-0.231

-0.246

-0.255

-0.260

-0.270

-0.267

-0.242

-0.251

-0.254

-0.256

-0.255

-0.256

School F.E.

-0.021

-0.043

-0.036

-0.092

-0.075

-0.093

-0.023

-0.034

-0.039

-0.059

-0.050

-0.055

Total

-0.516

-0.473

-0.449

-0.456

-0.427

-0.384

-0.562

-0.515

-0.460

-0.440

-0.391

-0.397

Unexplained

-0.102

-0.025

0.009

0.020

0.055

0.101

-0.127

-0.064

0.011

0.023

0.084

0.084

Covariates

-0.404

-0.431

-0.441

-0.427

-0.451

-0.454

-0.425

-0.437

-0.457

-0.432

-0.458

-0.461

School F.E.

-0.010

-0.017

-0.018

-0.049

-0.031

-0.031

-0.010

-0.014

-0.015

-0.031

-0.017

-0.020

Total

0.028

0.133

0.207

0.247

0.292

0.342

-0.108

-0.060

0.005

0.033

0.091

0.095

Unexplained

0.071

0.186

0.239

0.273

0.318

0.384

-0.079

-0.022

0.040

0.050

0.110

0.120

Covariates

-0.023

-0.020

-0.016

-0.008

-0.010

-0.010

-0.024

-0.023

-0.025

-0.019

-0.026

-0.025

School F.E.

-0.020

-0.033

-0.017

-0.019

-0.016

-0.032

-0.005

-0.014

-0.010

0.003

0.006

-0.000

-0.589

-0.621

-0.674

-0.642

-0.632

-0.569

-0.634

-0.653

-0.714

-0.666

-0.652

-0.629

Unexplained

-0.299

-0.296

-0.285

-0.262

-0.262

-0.237

-0.291

-0.285

-0.281

-0.261

-0.251

-0.238

Covariates

-0.246

-0.263

-0.272

-0.275

-0.285

-0.284

-0.260

-0.269

-0.273

-0.272

-0.275

-0.276

School F.E.

-0.043

-0.062

-0.117

-0.105

-0.085

-0.048

-0.083

-0.099

-0.160

-0.133

-0.126

-0.115

-0.279

-0.282

-0.263

-0.301

-0.289

-0.275

-0.227

-0.221

-0.201

-0.205

-0.207

-0.203

Unexplained

-0.145

-0.139

-0.119

-0.133

-0.116

-0.091

-0.095

-0.090

-0.066

-0.060

-0.061

-0.054

Covariates

-0.122

-0.129

-0.134

-0.133

-0.140

-0.138

-0.125

-0.128

-0.130

-0.128

-0.130

-0.131

School F.E.

-0.012

-0.014

-0.010

-0.035

-0.033

-0.047

-0.007

-0.003

-0.005

-0.017

-0.016

-0.019

Am. Indian Total

Multiracial Total

Note: Total gaps are taken from Table 2; the unexplained portions are the coefficients of race/ethnicity indicators in regressions
explaining normalized end-of-grade test scores and including student covariates for gender, age, subsidized lunch, parental education,
year of cohort, type of district, region, and school fixed effects. The School F.E. portion is the difference from whites in the average
coefficient of the school effect, and the covariates portion is the difference from white based on covariates.
7/27/07

Table 4a. Achievement Gaps in the Tails of the Math Distribution
Proportion of students below the
10th percentile of whites

Proportion of white students above
the 90th percentile of each racial
group

Group

Cohort

3rd grade

8th grade

Change

3rd grade

8th grade

Change

Black

1995

0.31

0.29

-0.02

0.35

0.39

0.04

1996

0.30

0.27

-0.03

0.34

0.37

0.02

1997

0.30

0.26

-0.04

0.34

0.35

0.01

1998

0.31

0.29

-0.02

0.35

0.38

0.03

1999

0.29

0.27

-0.02

0.37

0.35

-0.03

1995

0.18

0.14

-0.05

0.21

0.20

0.00

1996

0.18

0.14

-0.04

0.22

0.20

-0.03

1997

0.24

0.17

-0.07

0.21

0.18

-0.03

1998

0.23

0.16

-0.07

0.24

0.18

-0.06

1999

0.20

0.17

-0.03

0.22

0.19

-0.03

1995

0.07

0.05

-0.01

0.06

0.03

-0.03

1996

0.09

0.04

-0.05

0.06

0.03

-0.03

1997

0.09

0.06

-0.04

0.09

0.05

-0.04

1998

0.11

0.05

-0.06

0.07

0.04

-0.03

1999

0.09

0.05

-0.03

0.07

0.03

-0.03

1995

0.29

0.21

-0.08

0.27

0.26

-0.01

1996

0.23

0.16

-0.08

0.22

0.25

0.03

1997

0.29

0.19

-0.10

0.25

0.29

0.03

1998

0.24

0.19

-0.04

0.27

0.27

0.00

1999

0.20

0.18

-0.02

0.26

0.28

0.02

Hispanic

Asian

Am. Ind.

7/19/07

Table 4b. Achievement Gaps in the Tails of the Reading Distribution
Proportion of students below the
10th percentile of whites

Proportion of white students above
the 90th percentile of each racial
group

Group

Cohort

3rd grade

8th grade

Change

3rd grade

8th grade

Change

Black

1995

0.25

0.27

0.02

0.35

0.32

-0.03

1996

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.32

0.33

0.01

1997

0.24

0.28

0.04

0.35

0.34

0.00

1998

0.27

0.27

0.00

0.36

0.33

-0.03

1999

0.25

0.26

0.01

0.35

0.33

-0.02

1995

0.15

0.14

-0.02

0.19

0.14

-0.04

1996

0.17

0.12

-0.05

0.24

0.16

-0.08

1997

0.22

0.19

-0.03

0.26

0.25

-0.01

1998

0.24

0.17

-0.07

0.27

0.18

-0.09

1999

0.23

0.18

-0.05

0.26

0.23

-0.03

1995

0.07

0.04

-0.03

0.09

0.05

-0.04

1996

0.09

0.04

-0.04

0.09

0.06

-0.03

1997

0.11

0.06

-0.04

0.10

0.09

-0.01

1998

0.12

0.05

-0.07

0.13

0.07

-0.07

1999

0.12

0.06

-0.05

0.07

0.05

-0.02

1995

0.28

0.23

-0.04

0.27

0.28

0.01

1996

0.24

0.19

-0.05

0.32

0.29

-0.04

1997

0.26

0.23

-0.03

0.30

0.30

-0.01

1998

0.26

0.20

-0.06

0.27

0.23

-0.04

1999

0.19

0.18

-0.01

0.31

0.28

-0.03

Hispanic

Asian

Am. Ind.

7/19/07

Appendix Figure 1. Grade Progression by Racial/Ethnic Group, 1999 Cohort

7/19/07

Appendix Table 1. Normal Grade, by Year and Cohort
School year

Cohort, by Year in 3rd Grade

Test date
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

1994/1995

1995

3

1995/1996

1996

4

3

1996/1997

1997

5

4

3

1997/1998

1998

6

5

4

3

1998/1999

1999

7

6

5

4

3

1999/2000

2000

8

7

6

5

4

2000/2001

2001

8

7

6

5

2001/2002

2002

8

7

6

2002/2003

2003

8

7

2003/2004

2004

8

Sample size
Math

56,591

61,593

71,753

76,398

79,147

Reading

56,473

61,332

71,334

75,853

78,431

7/18/07

Appendix Table 2. Sample Sizes and Mean Values for Selected Variables, Groups of 3rd Grade
Students, 1999; One Group of 8th Grade Students, 2004
1999 cohort
A
B
Normal progress Repeated a grade

Not present all six years
D
C
Present in
Present in
2004
1999
19,451
29,480

N
71,800
7,606
Normalized grade 3 score (a)
Math
0.169
-1.023
-0.053
-Reading
0.171
-1.008
-0.035
-Male
0.488
0.637
0.537
0.549
Race/ Ethnicity
White
0.646
0.423
0.633
0.521
Black
0.287
0.515
0.263
0.315
Hispanic
0.025
0.030
0.043
0.104
Asian
0.016
0.004
0.022
0.026
Am. Indian
0.015
0.017
0.011
0.009
Multiracial
0.012
0.011
0.019
0.020
Age May of grade 3 (b)
9.216
9.260
9.289
9.574
Parental education
College
0.296
0.040
0.094
0.121
HS, no college degree
0.647
0.763
0.871
0.812
No HS degree
0.057
0.196
0.035
0.068
Subsidized lunch (c)
0.420
0.656
-0.538
Ever exceptional
0.149
0.335
0.189
0.183
Ever limited English
0.018
0.023
0.026
0.059
District group
Largest five
0.276
0.232
0.334
0.335
Urban Coastal
0.095
0.130
0.125
0.116
Urban Piedmont
0.101
0.100
0.092
0.108
Urban Mountain
0.077
0.071
0.075
0.070
Rural Coastal
0.061
0.076
0.058
0.059
Rural Piedmont
0.240
0.293
0.200
0.205
Rural Mountain
0.149
0.098
0.116
0.107
Note: The 1999 cohort includes all students who took the 3rd grade end-of-grade math or
reading test in the spring of 1999, and the end-of-grade math and reading tests in each year
through 2004. Group A includes all those who progressed one grade each year. Group B is
comprised of students who were present in all six years but who repeated at least one grade.

The samples shown in columns C and D are comprised of students who did not have an end-ofgrade math or reading score or were otherwise not in the data set in each of the six years.
a. Each end-of-grade test was normalized using the statewide mean and standard deviation of
the scaled score, producing a normalized score with zero mean and unitary standard deviation.
For students who were retained in grade, scaled scores were applied to the statewide mean and
standard deviation applying to the grade in which they would have been had they made normal
progress. See text. Very few in group D were in a state's public schools in their third grade year,
so no mean is reported.
b. Age in years is exact only to the month since birth date was available only to the closest
month.
c. Percentage of students who were eligible for free or reduced price lunch in either of the last
two years covered by the sample, normally grades 7 or 8. Since very few in group C were in the
state's public schools in the last two years of the grade span, the mean for this group is omitted.
Source: North Carolina Education Research Data Center; authors' calculations.
7/19/07

Appendix Table 3a. Alternative Gap Measures: Black-White, Grades 3 to 8, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts

Fixed cohorts
Raw gap,
mean
Raw gap,
median
Proportion
scoring below
white median
Raw gap,
demeaned
scale score / 10
Gap adjusted
for covariates
Gap adjusted
for covariates
and school F.E.
Other samples
Raw gap,
cohort without
repeaters
Raw gap,
repeated crosssections

Math, by Grade
5
6

3

4

-0.783
(0.003)
-0.796
(0.001)

-0.817
(0.003)
-0.872
(0.003)

-0.794
(0.003)
-0.831
(0.001)

0.814

0.816

-0.883
(0.004)

Reading, by Grade
5
6

7

8

3

4

7

8

-0.830
(0.003)
-0.908
(0.000)

-0.831
(0.003)
-0.849
(0.006)

-0.814
(0.003)
-0.912
(0.002)

-0.710
(0.003)
-0.793
(0.001)

-0.755
(0.003)
-0.836
(0.001)

-0.771
(0.003)
-0.807
(0.002)

-0.755
(0.003)
-0.832
(0.003)

-0.765
(0.003)
-0.844
(0.007)

-0.776
(0.003)
-0.786
(0.005)

0.812

0.823

0.831

0.823

0.793

0.805

0.798

0.806

0.803

0.809

-0.858
(0.004)

-0.796
(0.003)

-0.871
(0.004)

-0.907
(0.004)

-0.903
(0.004)

-0.696
(0.003)

-0.716
(0.003)

-0.665
(0.003)

-0.713
(0.003)

-0.653
(0.003)

-0.653
(0.003)

-0.552

-0.571

-0.539

-0.570

-0.561

-0.547

-0.468

-0.504

-0.517

-0.499

-0.510

-0.520

-0.530
(0.004)

-0.528
(0.004)

-0.503
(0.004)

-0.478
(0.004)

-0.486
(0.004)

-0.454
(0.004)

-0.446
(0.004)

-0.470
(0.004)

-0.478
(0.004)

-0.440
(0.004)

-0.460
(0.004)

-0.465
(0.004)

-0.725
(0.003)

-0.756
(0.003)

-0.738
(0.004)

-0.782
(0.004)

-0.786
(0.004)

-0.769
(0.004)

-0.659
(0.003)

-0.704
(0.004)

-0.701
(0.003)

-0.711
(0.003)

-0.698
(0.003)

-0.715
(0.003)

-0.805
(0.003)

-0.818
(0.003)

-0.788
(0.003)

-0.824
(0.003)

-0.830
(0.003)

-0.821
(0.003)

-0.729
(0.003)

-0.766
(0.003)

-0.763
(0.003)

-0.774
(0.003)

-0.766
(0.003)

-0.794
(0.003)

Sample sizes: Fixed cohorts 345,482 for math, 343,423 for reading; fixed cohorts without repeaters 314,921 for math, 313,310 for
reading; repeated cross-sections vary in size from 471,726 for reading in 4th grade to 488,764 for math in 8th grade.
Source: North Carolina Education Data Center; author’s calculations
7/27/07

Appendix Table 3b. Alternative Gap Measures: Hispanic-White, Grades 3 to 8, 1995-1999 Combined Cohorts

Fixed cohorts
Raw gap,
mean
Raw gap,
median
Proportion
scoring below
white median
Raw gap,
demeaned
scale score / 10
Gap adjusted
for covariates
Gap adjusted
for covariates
and school F.E.
Other samples
Raw gap,
cohort without
repeaters
Raw gap,
repeated crosssections

Math, by Grade
5
6

3

4

-0.516
(0.011)
-0.539
(0.005)

-0.473
(0.012)
-0.500
(0.012)

-0.449
(0.012)
-0.498
(0.002)

0.712

0.689

-0.581
(0.013)

7

8

3

4

-0.456
(0.012)
-0.505
(0.000)

-0.427
(0.012)
-0.455
(0.019)

-0.384
(0.012)
-0.450
(0.005)

-0.562
(0.012)
-0.616
(0.005)

-0.515
(0.012)
-0.533
(0.003)

-0.460
(0.012)
-0.471
(0.008)

0.684

0.680

0.679

0.665

0.714

0.701

-0.494
(0.012)

-0.448
(0.012)

-0.475
(0.012)

-0.465
(0.013)

-0.425
(0.013)

-0.549
(0.012)

-0.112

-0.042

-0.008

-0.029

0.024

0.070

-0.102
(0.011)

-0.025
(0.011)

0.009
(0.011)

0.020
(0.011)

0.055
(0.011)

-0.495
(0.012)

-0.450
(0.012)

-0.433
(0.012)

-0.439
(0.012)

-0.532
(0.009)

-0.541
(0.009)

-0.587
(0.008)

-0.627
(0.008)

Sample sizes: See Appendix Table 3a.
7/27/07

Reading, by Grade
5
6

7

8

-0.440
(0.012)
-0.503
(0.012)

-0.391
(0.012)
-0.469
(0.026)

-0.397
(0.012)
-0.442
(0.018)

0.660

0.677

0.650

0.659

-0.489
(0.011)

-0393
(0.010)

-0.416
(0.011)

-0.336
(0.010)

-0.337
(0.010)

-0.137

-0.078

-0.003

-0.008

0.067

0.064

0.101
(0.011)

-0.127
(0.011)

-0.064
(0.011)

0.011
(0.011)

0.023
(0.011)

0.084
(0.011)

0.084
(0.011)

-0.414
(0.012)

-0.366
(0.012)

-0.542
(0.012)

-0.497
(0.012)

-0.431
(0.012)

-0.433
(0.012)

-0.374
(0.012)

-0.379
(0.012)

-0.650
(0.007)

-0.634
(0.007)

-0.583
(0.010)

-0.610
(0.009)

-0.629
(0.008)

-0.677
(0.008)

-0.682
(0.008)

-0.761
(0.007)

Appendix Table 4a. Regression Estimates, Math Scores, 1995-99 Combined Cohorts
Variable
Grade 3
Race/ Ethnicity (white omitted)
Black
-0.530*
(0.004)
Hispanic
-0.102*
(0.011)
Asian
0.071*
(0.013)
Am. Indian
-0.299*
(0.015)
Multiracial
-0.145*
(0.016)
Male
-0.012*
(0.003)
-0.068*
Age in years,
(0.003)
May of grade 3

Grade 4

Grade 5

Grade 6

Grade 7

Grade 8

-0.528*
(0.004)
-0.025*
(0.011)
0.186*
(0.013)
-0.296*
(0.015)
-0.139*
(0.016)
-0.010*
(0.003)
-0.123*
(0.003)

-0.503*
(0.004)
0.009
(0.011)
0.239*
(0.013)
-0.285*
(0.015)
-0.119*
(0.017)
-0.015*
(0.003)
-0.156*
(0.003)

-0.478*
(0.004)
0.020
(0.011)
0.273*
(0.013)
-0.262*
(0.015)
-0.133*
(0.016)
-0.015*
(0.003)
-0.202*
(0.003)

-0.486*
(0.004)
0.055*
(0.011)
0.318*
(0.013)
-0.262*
(0.015)
-0.116*
(0.016)
-0.031*
(0.003)
-0.187*
(0.003)

-0.454*
(0.004)
0.101*
(0.011)
0.384*
(0.013)
-0.237*
(0.015)
-0.091*
(0.016)
-0.026*
(0.003)
-0.218*
(0.003)

Subsidized lunch

-0.181*
(0.004)

-0.191*
(0.004)

-0.194*
(0.004)

-0.206*
(0.004)

-0.205*
(0.004)

-0.203*
(0.004)

-1.048*
(0.007)
-0.559*
HS, no college
(0.004)
degree
Year of Cohort (1995 omitted)
1996
-0.006
(0.005)
1997
0.001
(0.005)
1998
0.008
(0.005)
1999
0.013*
(0.005)
N
345,482
0.257
R2

-1.107*
(0.007)
-0.601*
(0.004)

-1.130*
(0.007)
-0.632*
(0.004)

-1.068*
(0.007)
-0.634*
(0.004)

-1.150*
(0.007)
-0.676*
(0.004)

-1.149*
(0.007)
-0.665*
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.005)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.005)
345,482
0.276

-0.004
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
345,482
0.280

0.000
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
0.005
(0.005)
345,482
0.297

-0.007
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.001
(0.005)
0.047*
(0.005)
345,482
0.307

-0.012*
(0.005)
-0.017*
(0.005)
0.011*
(0.005)
0.028*
(0.005)
345,482
0.300

Parental education
No HS degree

Note: Equations estimated with school fixed effects, standard errors in parentheses; * denotes
significance at the 5% level.
7/18/07

Appendix Table 4b. Regression Estimates, Reading Scores, 1995-99 Combined Cohorts
Variable
Grade 3
Race/ Ethnicity (white omitted)
Black
-0.446*
(0.004)
Hispanic
-0.127*
(0.011)
Asian
-0.079*
(0.013)
Am. Indian
-0.291*
(0.015)
Multiracial
-0.095*
(0.017)
Male
-0.166*
(0.003)
-0.113*
Age in years,
(0.003)
May of grade 3
Subsidized lunch
-0.203*
(0.004)
Parental education
No HS degree
-1.077*
(0.007)
-0.572*
HS, no college
(0.004)
degree
Year of Cohort (1995 omitted)
1996
-0.001
(0.005)
1997
0.010*
(0.005)
1998
0.016*
(0.005)
1999
0.025*
(0.005)
N
343,423
0.256
R2

Grade 4

Grade 5

Grade 6

Grade 7

Grade 8

-0.470*
(0.004)
-0.064*
(0.011)
-0.022
(0.013)
-0.285*
(0.015)
-0.090*
(0.017)
-0.151*
(0.003)
-0.137*
(0.003)
-0.210*
(0.004)

-0.478*
(0.004)
0.011
(0.011)
0.040*
(0.013)
-0.281*
(0.016)
-0.066*
(0.017)
-0.139*
(0.003)
-0.148*
(0.004)
-0.208*
(0.004)

-0.440*
(0.004)
0.023*
(0.011)
0.050*
(0.013)
-0.261*
(0.015)
-0.060*
(0.016)
-0.146*
(0.003)
-0.177*
(0.003)
-0.222*
(0.003)

-0.460*
(0.004)
0.084*
(0.011)
0.110*
(0.013)
-0.251*
(0.015)
-0.061*
(0.017)
-0.163*
(0.003)
-0.160*
(0.003)
-0.215*
(0.004)

-0.465*
(0.004)
0.084*
(0.011)
0.120*
(0.013)
-0.238*
(0.015)
-0.054*
(0.016)
-0.165*
(0.003)
-0.183*
(0.003)
-0.218*
(0.004)

-1.101*
(0.007)
-0.593*
(0.004)

-1.156*
(0.007)
-0.601*
(0.004)

-1.061*
(0.006)
-0.588*
(0.004)

-1.147*
(0.007)
-0.593*
(0.004)

-1.141*
(0.007)
-0.590*
(0.004)

0.000
(0.005)
0.007
(0.005)
0.004
(0.005)
0.016*
(0.005)
343,423
0.277

-0.009
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.014*
(0.005)
-0.015*
(0.005)
343,423
0.280

-0.005
(0.005)
0.008
(0.005)
0.014*
(0.005)
0.010*
(0.005)
343,423
0.291

-0.020*
(0.005)
-0.011*
(0.005)
-0.011*
(0.005)
0.043*
(0.005)
343,423
0.288

-0.012*
(0.005)
-0.021*
(0.005)
0.029*
(0.005)
0.046*
(0.005)
343,423
0.297

Note: Equations estimated with school fixed effects, standard errors in parentheses; * denotes
significance at the 5% level.
7/18/07

Appendix Table 5. Sample Sizes and Mean Values for Selected Variables, by Race/Ethnicity,
1999 Cohort
White

Black

Hispanic

Asian

49,617

24,498

2,025

1,163

1,191

912

Math

0.320

-0.463

-0.206

0.368

-0.179

0.072

Reading

0.307

-0.407

-0.297

0.179

-0.262

0.116

Male

0.510

0.487

0.521

0.506

0.490

0.493

Age May of grade 3

9.21

9.24

9.32

9.17

9.24

9.17

College

0.355

0.118

0.089

0.408

0.126

0.240

HS, no college degree

0.591

0.809

0.488

0.440

0.777

0.708

No HS degree

0.053

0.073

0.422

0.153

0.097

0.052

Subsidized lunch

0.265

0.757

0.764

0.459

0.761

0.536

Ever exceptional

0.168

0.173

0.146

0.093

0.154

0.148

Ever limited English

0.002

0.002

0.489

0.301

0.005

0.013

Largest Five

0.233

0.343

0.300

0.513

0.103

0.320

Urban coastal

0.085

0.133

0.080

0.037

0.016

0.126

Urban piedmont

0.090

0.123

0.130

0.108

0.021

0.130

Urban mountain

0.094

0.044

0.049

0.116

0.015

0.090

Rural coastal

0.058

0.079

0.056

0.006

0.006

0.041

Rural piedmont

0.238

0.241

0.271

0.081

0.791

0.206

0.037

0.114

0.139

0.048

0.087

N

Am.Indian Multiracial

Normalized grade 3 score

Parental Education

District Group

Rural mountain
0.201
Sample: See Appendix Table 2 note.
7/19/07

Appendix Table 6. Linear Trends over Time in Achievement Gaps, Grades 3 and 8, 1995 to
1999 Cohorts
3rd Grade

8th Grade

Math

Reading

Math

Reading

Black

0.008*
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.009*
(0.002)

0.014*
(0.002)

Hispanic

0.006
(0.008)

-0.021*
(0.008)

0.026*
(0.008)

-0.009
(0.008)

Asian

0.011
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.009)

0.020*
(0.009)

-0.010
(0.009)

Amer. Indian

0.040*
0.027*
0.002
0.024*
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Note: Table shows the coefficients of interaction terms between race/ethnicity indicators and a
linear time trend. Other variables include race/ethnicity indicators, linear time trend, age, and
indicators for gender, subsidized lunch, parental education, district type, region, and school
fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses; * denotes significance at the 5% level.
Source: North Carolina Education Research Center; authors' calculations.
7/30/07

