                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PAY, REFERENCE POINTS, AND POLICE PERFORMANCE

                                             Alexandre Mas

                                          Working Paper 12202
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12202


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




I am indebted to Orley Ashenfelter and Gordon Dahl for providing the data on arbitration cases. I am also
grateful to George Akerlof, David Card, Hank Farber, Alan Krueger, Jonathan Leonard, David Levine,
Enrico Moretti, Mathew Rabin, Rebecca Rainof, Cecilia Rouse, Jesse Rothstein, and seminar participants
at Humboldt University, Nuffield College, Hebrew University, Universitat Pompeau Fabra, University of
California–Berkeley, University of California–Davis, Stanford Graduate School of Business, London School
of Economics, National Bureau of Economic Research, and University of Illinois – Urbana Champaign, and
the Princeton labor lunch for helpful suggestions. Financial support was provided by Fellowship for
Woodrow Wilson Scholars and the Industrial Relations Section of Princeton University. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Alexandre Mas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pay, Reference Points, and Police Performance
Alexandre Mas
NBER Working Paper No. 12202
April 2006
JEL No. J0, J5, D0, H7

                                           ABSTRACT

Several theories suggest that pay raises below a reference point will reduce job performance. Final
offer arbitration for police unions provides a unique opportunity to examine these theories, as the
police officers either receive their requested wage or receive a lower one. In the months after New
Jersey police officers lose in arbitration, arrest rates and average sentence length decline and crime
reports rise relative to when they win. These declines are larger when the awarded wage is further
from the police union's demand. The findings support the idea that considerations of fairness,
disappointment, and, more generally, reference points affect workplace behavior.

Alexandre Mas
Haas School of Business, #1900
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
amas@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                    I. Introduction

          While much of our understanding of labor markets derives from the idea that workers

respond to incentives, an important theoretical literature stresses psychological and non-market

factors as determinants of employee performance.1 There is growing evidence that employees are

less satisfied not just with low pay, but with pay below a reference or “fair” wage.2 Although there is

provocative evidence from laboratory experiments (e.g. Fehr and Gachter [2000]), there is little field

evidence about whether these deviations also reduce productivity.                    This paper assesses the

relationship between pay raises, anticipated pay raises, and employee performance in an actual labor

market.

          Final offer arbitration of wage disputes provides an attractive real-world laboratory to

investigate how on-the-job performance of labor market participants responds to changes in

compensation relative to a reference point. In final offer arbitration (FOA), disputing parties submit

offers to an arbitrator who is constrained to choose one of the disputant’s offers in a binding

settlement. Final offer arbitration is commonly employed in public sector unions. I employ a dataset

containing information on final offer arbitration cases involving compensation disputes between New

Jersey police bargaining units and municipalities in the years between 1978 and 1996.                       After

matching the arbitration data to monthly measures of police effectiveness by jurisdiction, I test

whether police performance depends on the arbitration outcome and, when arbitrators rule against the

union, the size of the loss incurred.

          There are several reasons why arbitration systems are attractive for this study. First, because

there is often divergence between what the union asked for and what they actually received, I can

assess the effect of deviations of awarded pay from pay demands on productivity.                         Second,

arbitration rulings have a surprise component, as the arbitrator’s preferred award may be unknown.

In fact, the equilibrium outcome in standard theories of final offer arbitration—for example Farber

1
  A prominent example is the fair wage-effort hypothesis of Akerlof and Yellen [1990].
2
  Adams [1965] is a classic study on equity theory that experimentally links higher pay with higher effort. More
recently, surveys of employers suggest that deviations from reference wages affect worker morale and that managers
[1980]—is for the arbitrator to select the winning party at random. This is because the offers the

disputing parties submit to the arbitrator serve as sufficient statistics for information relevant to

police compensation.         Consistent with this prediction, I cannot reject that cities in which the

arbitrator ruled against the unit have the same municipal level characteristics as cities where the

arbitrator ruled in its favor. The empirical strategy employed in this paper, however, is robust to

violations of this condition, as it allows for differences in pre-arbitration levels of police

effectiveness and for permanent unobserved heterogeneity of bargaining units and their employers.

         Police performance declines sharply when officers lose arbitrations. The per capita number

of crimes cleared (solved) by arrest are 12 percent higher in the months following arbitration when

arbitrators ruled in favor of the police officers, relative to when arbitrators ruled for the municipal

employer.      Felony arrests in cities where police unions lost are also associated with lower

incarceration probabilities and shorter jail sentences, even after conditioning on detailed charged

crime categories, suggesting that police may reduce their cooperation with prosecutors following

arbitration losses. Additionally, I show that union losses are associated with a 5.5 percent increase in

reported crime rates in the months following arbitration decisions.

         The degree to which an arbitration decision is considered a win or a loss may depend on

employee expectations upon entering arbitration.                   Numerous laboratory experiments provide

evidence that utility depends not only on actual outcomes, but also on what could have occurred in a

different state of the world [Bateman et al. 1997; Mellers, Schwartz and Ritov 1999; Thaler 1980].

This idea has been posited in numerous paper from the theoretical literature [Gul 1991; Kahneman

and Tversky 1979; Koszegi and Rabin 2005]. While the experimental literature offers important

evidence that effort depends on a worker’s pay relative to a reference point, there are few studies

addressing this question using market data.3



are reluctant to lower wages [Bewley 1999; Blinder and Choi 1990; Kaufman 1984; Agell and Lunborg 1995].
Brown et al. [2005] present survey and experimental evidence that relative pay matters for employee satisfaction.
3
  Two studies addressing this question are Cappelli and Chauvin [1991] and Verhoogen et al. [2003]. Both studies
use variation in local labor market conditions in the location of plants within firms to test whether plants located in
areas with better economic conditions experience lower dismissal rates. Both studies find a moderate relationship



                                                           2
        I find that police performance depends on the awarded pay raise relative to expectations. The

change in performance of police officers following an arbitration loss depends not only on the

amount of the pay raise, but on the counter-offer that was demanded but never implemented as well.

Therefore, comparisons of pay raises to counterfactuals influence police effort when they lose. By

contrast, counterfactual comparisons are not relevant when police win in arbitration, signifying that

these workers are prone to a form of loss aversion. On the whole, these results highlight the

importance of managing and, in particular, lowering employee expectations prior to manipulating

wage policy in organizations.

                        II. Conceptual Framework of Final-Offer Arbitration

        Before proceeding, it is helpful to review the context surrounding the arbitration cases under

analysis, as well as to outline a conceptual framework of final offer arbitration. Between 1978 and

1996 the default procedure for dispute resolution between police bargaining units and their

employers in New Jersey was final offer arbitration.4 Beginning in 1968, public sector employees in

New Jersey were allowed to engage in collective bargaining but were not allowed to strike in cases

where negotiations failed. As a result, many negotiations were drawn out, often resolved well-after

the date of the contract. To remedy this problem, arbitration was legislated in 1977 specifying the

procedure by which such impasses would be resolved. The New Jersey Fire and Police Arbitration

Act mandated that collective bargaining must be initiated 120 days prior to the contract expiration

date, and, if an agreement was not reached 60 days before that date, parties must begin arbitration

proceedings. Between 1976 and 1996, approximately nine percent of contract expirations of police

officers resulted in arbitration over salary demands.

        Salient questions in the theoretical analysis of FOA are whether parties in dispute can reach

an agreement before arbitration, what the determinants of the final offers are if the parties cannot

reach an agreement, and how the arbitrator rules given the final offers. In traditional theoretical



between local labor market conditions and the extent of dismissals and absenteeism. Rizzo and Zeckhauser [2003]
find that target incomes are a good predictor of future hourly earnings of physicians, but not of hours worked.
4
  Ashenfelter and Dahl [2005] and Lester [1984] review public sector dispute resolution procedures in New Jersey.



                                                        3
models of FOA, the arbitrator rules in favor of the party whose offer is nearest to his or her preferred

award. Farber’s [1980] insight is that from the point of view of the disputants, the arbitrator’s

preferred award is stochastic. Therefore, the parties in dispute will make their decision under

uncertainty and choose offers that maximize their expected utility. To make the model concrete, I

present the basic setup of Farber’s [1980] model of final offer arbitration.5 While this model may not

be a literal description of reality, it provides a useful framework for thinking about the problem

negotiating parties face in arbitration.

         Denote ra as the arbitrator’s preferred pay raise, re as the employer’s proposed pay raise, ru

as the union’s proposed pay raise, and w as the wage from the previous contract. A simple decision

rule for the arbitrator is to select the employer’s offer if | ra − re |≤| ra − ru | . While disputing parties

do not observe ra , they do know its distribution, which by the arbitrator exchangeability condition

has a common distribution for all arbitrators.6 The “facts” of the case enter into the model through

the mean, µ , of ra . If the police are relatively productive and they deserve a sizable pay raise, then

µ will be large, but how large depends on how the population of arbitrators value performance.

Under the assumption that the arbitrator rules in favor of the party whose offer is closest to his or her

preferred award, disputing parties select offers that will maximize their expected utility, given the

offer of the opposing party, by trading off the probability of winning in arbitration and the resulting

payoff. Denoting P as the probability that the arbitrator rules in favor of the employer, the expected

utility for the employer and union respectively is:

         EU( re , ru )=P*U( (1 + re ) ∗ w )+(1-P)*U( (1 + ru ) ∗ w ),

         EV( re , ru )=P*V( (1 + re ) ∗ w )+(1-P)*V( (1 + ru ) ∗ w ).




5
  Another classic model of FOA, developed by Gibbons [1988], in which the arbitrator learns from the proposed
offers, will lead to similar intuitions.
6
  Ashenfelter [1987] notes that since, generally, parties must each agree on the arbitrator in FOA, if arbitrators value
work they will ensure that their decisions are unpredictable but drawn from the same distribution as other arbitrators.
This feature of the theory of FOA is called arbitrator exchangeability.



                                                           4
        The solution concept for this model is Nash equilibrium, whereby both parties choose offers

such that neither party can achieve higher expected utility by changing it. Three predictions of the

model are that:

        (i) If disputing parties are equally risk-averse, the winner in arbitration is determined by a
            coin toss.

        (ii) If parties exhibit constant absolute risk aversion, the arbitrator will be more likely to rule
             in favor of the more risk-averse party. However, the probability of an employer win is
             fixed, and is therefore invariant to the facts of the case.7
        (iii) The offer spread ( ru - re ) is a function of σ , the uncertainty about the arbitrator’s
              preferred award.

        Prediction (i) can be understood by recognizing that information from the case that the

arbitrator uses to make a decision is taken into account in the disputants’ final offers. The arbitrator

selects an offer based on forecast error that is uncorrelated to the facts of the case. If the union is

more risk-averse than the employer, then prediction (ii) implies that while we may not observe an

equal proportion of wins for police and employers in the data, cities where police won and lost in

arbitration should not be systematically different. In Section IV, I offer evidence that arbitrator

rulings are in fact orthogonal to the facts of the case. Prediction (iii) implies that as the arbitrator’s

preferred award becomes more unpredictable, the offer spread increases.

        The model is silent as to why disputes ever reach arbitration. If parties know the distribution

of the arbitrator’s preferred award then they should settle at the mean of the award distribution.

However, if disputants have divergent beliefs regarding the population distribution of arbitrator

awards or experience mental rigidity in negotiations, then there may be an incentive to enter into

arbitration proceedings. Under these scenarios, there may be variation in the likelihood that the

employer is selected, depending on the size of the offers. For example, the model described above

can be easily modified to allow parties to observe the true µ with measurement error. Parties will

submit offers that are too high or too low than would be otherwise optimal, depending on the error

realization. In this case, the probability that the arbitrator rules in favor of the employer will depend




                                                      5
on measurement error. As I will discuss later, there is evidence that higher average offers are

associated with higher probabilities of employer selection, suggesting that parties vary in the

conservativeness of their offers. But because there is no relationship between the arbitration outcome

and past performance, it appears that the factors leading parties to submit more or less realistic offers

are not systematically related to historical measures of police performance.

                                                  III. Data Sources

           Ideally, performance by police would be proxied by variables that are thought to

unambiguously impact public welfare, for example, response times or complaints filed against police

officers. Unfortunately, these measures are not systematically available for police departments from

the period analyzed in this paper. Instead, the main measure of police performance used in this paper

is the number of crimes cleared by arrest per 100,000 residents in a municipality. Clearances refer to

the number of crimes that have been “solved” by the arrest of one or more individuals.8 In general, I

will use the term “clearance rate” to denote the number of crimes cleared by arrest in a month per

100,000 capita. Police officers have discretion over the number of arrests they make through a

number of mechanisms including overtime work, absenteeism (the “Blue Flu”), or simply through

the share of the working day spent actively policing.

           Arrests represent costly effort for the police officers involved, due to the energy expended

both in the act of arrest and in the subsequent paperwork. However, under some circumstances,

arrests could be welfare reducing, for example, if police arrest residents randomly or, perhaps, target

minorities in a discriminatory fashion. Nevertheless, a greater number of arrests may signal a more

active police presence in communities and, in fact, police departments often base their own internal

evaluations on this measure. I will also consider measures of performance that may be more closely

aligned to public welfare, in particular, crime rates and the sentencing outcomes of arrestees. These

measures will not be at the core of my analysis because of sporadic data availability in the case of

sentencing and the extent of noise in the case of the crime rate.

7
    Prediction (ii) follows from equation (8) of Farber [1980].




                                                             6
         Three sources of data are used in this paper. Information about arbitration cases and rulings

comes from New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission (PERC) documents at the New

Jersey Department of Labor and was used in Ashenfelter and Dahl [2005]. The data describe FOA

cases between cities and police unions in New Jersey between 1978 and 1995 and include

information on the offers submitted to the arbitrator (which are expressed as percent changes on the

previous contract’s wage) and information on whether the arbitrator ruled in favor of the municipal

employer or bargaining unit. I match arbitration cases to monthly clearance and crime data from the

FBI Uniform Crime Reporting System (UCR) data files for 1976 through 1996. Some of the cases

are dropped from the analysis because they lie too close to one another, resulting in overlapping

event-study windows. The Data Appendix explains the sample selection criteria in more detail. The

resulting data set contains 383 arbitration cases from 255 different cities over salary disputes.

         I also use data from the Offender Based Transaction Statistics (OBTS). These data track

individuals arrested for felony crimes through the courts and, if convicted, the sentence. The data

allow me to test whether arrestees have differential probabilities of conviction and incarceration, as

well as sentence length, depending on the outcome of arbitration. A disadvantage to the OBTS data

is that they are available for only a limited number of years.

                               IV. Sampling Scheme and Empirical Strategy

         The models considered in this paper are identified off of the staggered timing of the

arbitration rulings. Arbitration cases are staggered by year and month allowing me to estimate the

effect of arbitration rulings on outcomes after controlling for year × month, as well as arbitration

case-specific heterogeneity. For each arbitration case I construct an arbitration window of length

(N1, N2), which consists of the arbitration month, the N1 months preceding arbitration and the N2

months following arbitration. Initially, the analysis only includes cities that experienced arbitration

and, for these cities, only months that are contained in the arbitration window. I then consider

specifications with an augmented sample, consisting of the initial sample and a comparison group of

8
 Clearances will differ from the number of arrests if an individual is arrested for multiple crimes or if multiple
arrests clear one crime, although these two measures are highly correlated.



                                                           7
cities that never underwent arbitration, in order to facilitate the estimation of state-wide time patterns

in clearances and crime.

        Because there are cities with multiple arbitration cases, I drop a number of cases, or months

within cases, when the arbitration windows overlap. The Data Appendix describes the rules used to

determine inclusion into the study. In general, there is a tradeoff between the length of the arbitration

window and the number of arbitration cases that are used, but the findings are robust to the use of

different lengths of the arbitration window.

        A city in which the arbitrator ruled in favor of the police bargaining unit will be denoted as a

“Union” city. Likewise, a city in which the arbitrator ruled in favor of the municipal employer will

be denoted as an “Employer” city. In the simplest estimator, I compare the average difference in

clearances in Union and Employer cities prior to arbitration to the average difference in clearances

after arbitration. This difference-in-difference estimator measures the impact of arbitration rulings

on performance in Union cities relative to Employer cities. In richer models, I control for time and

arbitration window dummies and also allow for the additional comparison group of non-arbitrating

municipalities to help estimate the time effects.

        Table I reports means of the cell-level dataset that is used in this analysis. The first column

presents summary statistics for the full sample, the second column summarizes the pre-arbitration

period for cities in which the police union won in arbitration, and the third column provides pre-

arbitration information on cities in which the police union lost in arbitration. Because cities tend to

be small, there are relatively few monthly crimes and clearances.9 Cities experience an average of 65

violent crime clearances per 100,000 residents per month, amounting to approximately 14 violent

crime clearances per month. Because of the presence of zeros in the data, especially in narrow

categories of crime, I chose to analyze per capita levels, rather than percentage changes or logs.

        Column (1) shows that the employers only won 34 percent of their cases. Therefore, it does

not appear that arbitrators are indifferent between the offers of the two parties. However, it is


9
 The cities under analysis have an average population of 21,345 (median of 12,331). On average, bargaining units
consist of 43 police officers, or about 87 percent of the police force in a given municipality.



                                                        8
possible that union negotiators are more risk-averse than city negotiators and therefore submit more

conservative offers. Column (4) presents the difference in means between Union and Employer

cities in the pre-arbitration period. Consistent with prediction (ii) of the theory of FOA described

above, the means do not reveal much of a difference in crime rates, per capita clearances, or other

characteristics of union win and union loss municipalities in the pre-arbitration period suggesting no

obvious relationship between the arbitrator decision and information available to the arbitrator at the

time of arbitration. However, there is a relationship between the size of the offers and the probability

of an employer win. This relationship suggests that, conditional on the facts of the case, parties may

submit offers of varying sizes, perhaps due to heterogeneity in risk-aversion or divergent beliefs. On

average, larger offers lead to a higher probability of employer selection. But the degree to which

offers are out-of-line with the arbitrator’s preferred award is uncorrelated with city characteristics

prior to arbitration.

                          V. The Effect of Arbitration Rulings on Clearance Rates

V. A. Graphical Evidence

           In order to determine how arbitration outcomes affect the number of crimes cleared by arrest,

I begin by comparing the average number of clearances in the months prior to arbitration to the

number of clearances in the months after arbitration for Union and Employer cities. I present these

averages in Figure I for the grand total of clearances using a relatively long (23,23) month arbitration

window, which has the disadvantage of excluding many arbitration rulings, but allows one to

examine both the persistence of effects and pre-arbitration trends over a relatively long time span.10

The plot suggests that prior to arbitration Union and Employer cities had similar monthly clearance

rates, but that after arbitration the clearance rates in these two types of cities diverged, with police

forces in Union cities clearing more crimes by arrest. This clearance rate differential appears to

emerge around four months after arbitration, peaking at seven months, and persisting for

approximately 22 months. Visual inspections of Figure I reveals that Union and Employer cities do


10
     The sample means, as in most estimates in this paper, are weighted by population of the jurisdiction in 1976.



                                                            9
not appear to have differential trends in per capita clearances prior to arbitration, something one

would expect to see if the arbitrator incorporated trends in clearance rates as part of his or her

decision rule even after conditioning on the final offers of the disputing parties.11

         By adding arbitration window and time (month × year) fixed-effects, I allow for arbitrary

unobserved heterogeneity across arbitration windows—to hold constant permanent differences in

clearance rates in cities around the time of arbitration—and I allow for a general time pattern in

clearances in the state over the sample period. In order to facilitate the estimate of the time effects, I

include a comparison group of 197 cities that never underwent arbitration with police unions. These

additional cities are included in the sample for the entire 1976-1996 period. The sample therefore

consists of cities that underwent arbitration in months within the arbitration window and cities that

did not undergo arbitration for all months in the 1976 to 1996 interval.

         Figure II is the regression-adjusted version of Figure I. To construct the figure, I estimate:

(1)      y tτbc = α + ψ FE + δ τ ∗ UnionWins b + β τ ∗ EmployerWins b + ε tτbc , τ = -23, . . . , 23 ,

         ψ FE =η t + γ b + ν c ,

where y tτbc denotes clearances per 100,000 capita in time period t (month × year), time since

arbitration τ , arbitration window b, and city c. The term ψ FE denotes the collection of fixed-

effects included in the model, consisting of arbitration window fixed-effects ( γ b ), month × year

fixed-effects (η t ), and city fixed-effects (ν c ). Note that the arbitration window fixed-effects absorb

the city fixed-effects in cities that experienced arbitration, as they are specific to the time period

around the arbitration date. Because of the inclusion of the arbitration window fixed-effects, it is not

possible to identify parameters β τ and δ τ for each of the months relative to arbitration. Therefore,

β 0 and δ 0 are excluded from the model, and the remaining coefficients should be interpreted




11
  Formally, I cannot reject that union win and union loss cities have the same pre-arbitration trends in clearances at
conventional levels of significance.



                                                          10
                                                                            )       )
relative to clearances in the arbitration month. The estimated coefficients β τ and δ τ ( τ = -23, . . .,

23) are plotted against event-time in Figure II.

        Figure II confirms that the pattern observed in Figure I is unaffected by regression-

adjustments. As with the raw means, there does not appear to be a difference in the trend of monthly

clearance rates in the pre-arbitration period, but there is a marked divergence between the union win

and union loss municipalities in clearances after arbitration.

        I conduct inference by estimating the cumulative effect of arbitration rulings on clearance

rates over each of the post-arbitration months. Using shortened (12,23) windows, in order to allow

for more arbitration cases in the analysis, I fit the following model to the data:

(2)     y tτbc = α + ψ FE + ξτ + θτ ∗ UnionLoses b + ε tτbc , τ = 1, . . . ,23 .12

The estimate θˆτ is the estimated gap in per capita clearances between Union and Employer cities in

month τ after arbitration, relative to the average gap in clearances between Union and Employer

cities during the entire pre-arbitration period. A negative value of θˆτ means that the gap in the

clearance rate between Union and Employer cities in the τ th month after arbitration is wider than the

average gap in the clearance rate between these two groups during the entire pre-arbitration period,

holding other things constant. For each post-arbitration date I cumulatively add the difference-in-

difference estimates θˆτ to obtain the total unexplained gap in the number of clearances between

Union and Employer cities j months after arbitration:


        ωˆ j = ∑τ =1θˆτ , j = 1, . . . , 23.
                  j




The estimate ω̂ j is the cumulative difference-in-difference estimate of the effect of winning versus

losing arbitration rulings on clearances j months after arbitration.

        The plot of ω̂ j along with a 90 percent confidence interval is presented in Figure III.

Because there is autocorrelation in monthly clearances within municipalities, standard errors are




                                                       11
clustered within the arbitration windows. In Figure III, the Union/Employer clearance rate gap is

significantly larger following arbitration than in the months before arbitration. The plotted ω̂ j points

are negative and downward sloping. The decline in clearances in Employer municipalities relative to

Union municipalities begins after the second month, although I cannot reject that ω̂ j is significantly

different than zero at the 10 percent level until four months after arbitration.13 The post-arbitration

difference in clearances between Employer and Union communities appears to persist for

approximately one year and the cumulative difference totals to more than 225 crimes cleared by

arrest per 100,000 capita.

V. B. Regression estimates

         Table II reports parametric regression estimates corresponding to the (12,12) arbitration

window. Column (1) reports the change in the clearance rate from the pre- to the post-arbitration

period for Union and Employer cities. As this model is regression-unadjusted, the estimates can be

interpreted as simple differences in means. The estimates in column (1) imply that when arbitrators

ruled in favor of the union, police forces obtained on average 4.99 more monthly clearances per

100,000 capita after arbitration than before arbitration. A union loss is associated with a reduction of

6.79 monthly clearances per 100,000 capita. In column (2) the sample is weighted by population in

the jurisdiction in 1976. As is evident, weighting does not have a substantial effect on the magnitude

of the estimates.

         Column (3) presents estimates from a model that controls for time effects as well as

arbitration window and city fixed-effects. As in the statistical models that were used to construct

Figures 2 and 3, I incorporate a comparison group of 197 cities that never underwent arbitration in

order to facilitate the estimation of the time effects. Adding the comparison group and controlling

for fixed-effects does not change the basic conclusions from the regression-unadjusted specifications:

that police wins are associated with increases in clearances after arbitration, while police losses are

12
  Estimates are robust to the use of alternative arbitration windows.
13
  One reason that it takes a few months for this difference to emerge may be that it takes time to develop cases
leading to arrest.



                                                         12
associated with declines. Note that because there are no arbitration cases that lead to no decision, it

is not possible to separately identify the effect of winning in arbitration, losing in arbitration, and

simply finishing arbitration, irrespective of the outcome. But while there may be a post-arbitration

effect on clearances irrespective of the arbitration outcome, it is still possible to identify the effect of

a police win relative to a police loss. The fourth row of Table II corresponds to the change in the

Union/Employer clearance rate differential between the post-arbitration and pre-arbitration periods.

In column (3) this change is estimated as 15.71 clearances per 100,000 capita with a t-ratio of 4.19.

This estimate implies that the difference in the number of monthly clearances per 100,000 capita

between Union and Employer cities widened by 12 percent after arbitration.

        The post-arbitration Union/Employer differentials in clearances are present and roughly of

the same magnitude for both violent and property crimes (see Table II, columns (4)-(9)). Table III

presents estimates of post-arbitration clearance rate differentials by specific crime type. To the

extent that officers may exercise discretion on whom to arrest, they do not appear to alter

enforcement in murder and rape cases following arbitration rulings. However, arbitration rulings

have a large effect on clearances of assault and robbery crimes as well as all categories of

property crimes.

                       VI. The Effect of Arbitration Rulings on Crime Rates

        Table IV shows that the changes in post-arbitration clearance rates are not being driven by

changing crime rates. In fact, clearances and crime rates move in the opposite direction after

arbitration. Column (6) shows that post-arbitration months in Employer cities are associated with

19.86 additional monthly property crimes per 100,000 capita (t-ratio = 1.78), whereas union

arbitration wins are not associated with a significant change in the property crime rate following

arbitration. There appears to be no relationship, however, between the arbitration decision and the

violent crime rate. Some caution is warranted in interpreting the estimates for the reported crime

outcome, since they are measured somewhat imprecisely.               While the difference-in-difference

estimate of the effect of a union arbitration win relative to a union arbitration loss is fairly large,




                                                    13
estimated as -15.46 in column (6), it is imprecise, having a standard error of 13.96. Nevertheless, the

point estimates suggest the effect of an arbitration loss on the number of crimes cleared by arrest will

in fact be larger in magnitude than the estimates reported in Table II, as, mechanically, police make

more clearances when crime rates are higher.

          To better assess the relationship between arbitration outcome and the per capita crime rate in

the months after arbitration, I construct figures plotting the cumulative effect of arbitration rulings on

reported crime over event time. A cumulative plot of post-arbitration crime rates for Union cities

relative to Employer cities, analogous to Figure III, shows that Employer cities experienced elevated

crime rates in the post-arbitration months relative to Union cities. However, the confidence interval

is very wide and the cumulative estimates are never significantly different than zero. Recalling Table

IV, however, there is a significant change in the crime rate in Employer cities after arbitration.

Therefore, it is instructive to make fewer demands on the data and simply plot the cumulative

difference in Employer city crime rates at each post-arbitration month relative to the average crime

rate in Employer cities during the entire pre-arbitration period. To construct this figure, I estimate:

(3)       y mtτb = α + ψ FE + ξτ ∗ UnionWin b + θτ ∗ EmployerWin b + ε mtτb , τ = 1,...23 .

For each post-arbitration date I calculate the cumulative excess number of crimes reports up to that

date in Employer municipalities relative to the average crime rate during the entire pre-arbitration

period:


          ωˆ j = ∑k =1θˆk , j = 1,….,23.
                   j




Estimates of ω̂ j are plotted in Figure IV for total crime reports. Inspection of Figure IV shows that

there were more than 600 excess crime reports per 100,000 capita in Employer cities in the 23

months after arbitration. Crime reports appear to rise 5 months after arbitration and are statistically

distinguishable from zero at the 10 percent level of significance during months 6 through 16.

          The estimates on the crime outcome are additionally interesting from the perspective of the

economics and crime literature. A longstanding question is the effect is of increased police presence




                                                    14
on crime. While the point estimates are somewhat imprecise, they suggest that the elasticity of crime

with respect to clearances is approximately -0.3, assuming that arbitration rulings affect crime only

through changes in police presence. This elasticity is in line with the OLS estimates on the elasticity

of crime with respect to police as reported in Levitt (1997) and McCrary (2002). The increase in

crime observed after police arbitration losses may occur either through criminals’ response to the

reduced presence of police, or through a containment channel—more clearances result in fewer free

potential criminals.

         The estimate on reported crime due to a losing arbitration outcome can also be used to bound

how much the employer (taxpayers) are willing to pay in order to reduce crime. A back-of-the-

envelope calculation implies that the willingness to pay to prevent a single crime is bounded above at

$487, which is a very low quantity.14 To put this figure into perspective, assume, as before, that the

elasticity of crime with respect to police officers is -0.3. In a typical town in the sample, hiring one

additional police officer at $50,000 per year would result in a decline of 9 crimes, amounting to

$5,560 per crime prevented. It may be that the willingness to pay to reduce crime is low because

most of the excess crimes reported following arbitration losses are property crimes and may be

relatively minor in nature. It could also be that city managers failed to recognize the social costs

associated with police arbitration losses. If this is the case, then the ratio of the true willingness to

pay to prevent crime and the one implied by the calculation above may be considered a measure of

the ignorance of employer negotiators.

         While there were statistically significant increases in reported crime in Employer cities after

arbitration, as stressed earlier, these change are not statistically distinguishable from the change in

the crime rate occurring from the pre- to the post-arbitration period in Union cities, which is

negligible but estimated with large standard errors. The noisiness that is inherent in the crime



14
  We can suppose that a risk-neutral employer compares the expected payoff from entering into arbitration to the
expected payoff from settling with the union. Consider the case of a typical town in the sample, which has a
population of 21,345 and 50 police officers with salaries of $50,000 per year. Using a probability of a union
arbitration win of 0.66 if the employer does not settle with the union, it reveals that it is unwilling to pay more than 2
× wage bill × (union offer – employer offer), or $75,000, in order to prevent 154 crimes from occurring.



                                                           15
outcome complicates inference and leads to estimates that are measured imprecisely in some cases.

Therefore, I will focus primarily on clearances as the outcome of interest in the subsequent analysis.


                 VII. The Effect of Arbitration Rulings on Sentencing Outcomes

        In this section I ask how arbitration affects defendant outcomes through the courts, focusing

in particular on the probability of conviction and incarceration and on the sentencing of arrestees.

These measures are informative of how the “quality” of policing may have changed after arbitration.

I will consider whether the elevated number of clearances following police arbitration wins is the

result of police targeting a different mix of crimes depending on the arbitration ruling and whether

sentencing outcomes of arrestees depends on the arbitration outcome because police collect less

evidence or present lower quality evidence to the prosecutor following losses.

        Unfortunately, the UCR data does not contain information on the final disposition of the

arrestee, specifically, whether the arrest resulted in a conviction and, if so, the sentence. Instead I use

information from administrative data on information of arrestees from the point of arrest through

final disposition drawn from the Offender Based Transaction Statistics (OBTS). This series was

produced by the Bureau of Justice Statistics with the intention of tracking individuals from the point

of entry into the criminal justice through final disposition. By matching arrested individuals in the

OBTS to agencies in the arbitration data files, I can test whether conviction rates, incarceration rates,

and sentencing depends on the arbitration outcome at the time of arrest.

        The OBTS files include New Jersey for the period 1987-1990, although identifiers for

arresting agency and month are only available for 1989 and 1990. Cases in the OBTS are reported

by date of final disposition. Data in the 1989 and 1990 files contain individuals who reached their

final disposition in these two years. Therefore, for this section I limit the arbitration cases under

analysis to those for which the first and last month of a (12,12) arbitration window occur between

1987 and 1990. This exclusion results in the use of 40 arbitration cases in the analysis. I match each

individual to the municipality where he or she was arrested and retain individuals who were arrested

in the 12 months before or in the 12 months after an arbitration ruling. Ultimately, I compare




                                                    16
sentencing outcomes of individuals who were arrested for felonies in Union and Employer cities

between 1987 and 1990 and obtained final disposition between 1989 and 1990 in municipalities that

experienced arbitration between 1988 and 1989. Because the data files are organized by date of

disposition, I am necessarily missing defendants who were involved in prolonged trials and whose

cases may have been relatively serious. This may present a problem when comparing the pre- to

post-arbitration periods, since individuals who appear in the dataset and were arrested post-

arbitration will have had their cases disposed relatively quickly as compared to individuals arrested

in the pre-arbitration period. However, it is still possible to compare post-arbitration outcomes in

Union and Employer cities.

        The OBTS analysis, while limited by the relatively small number of arbitration cases that can

be used, suggests that the differences in policing activity observed in the post-arbitration period are

substantive. Panel A of Table V displays estimates from linear probability models for the probability

of conviction (columns 1 and 2) and incarceration (columns 3 and 4). All models in the table include

controls for demographic information of the defendants, year and season effects, year of final

disposition dummies, and arbitration window dummies.

        The difference-in-difference estimates on conviction probabilities in columns (1) and (2)

show that the probability of conviction for individuals arrested in Union cities did not change from

the pre- to the post-arbitration period relative to Employer cities. These estimates suggest that the

rising number of arrests in Union municipalities following arbitration is not the result of police

arresting the innocent. Defendants who were arrested after an arbitration decision were no less likely

to be convicted if the arbitrator ruled in favor of the police relative to when the arbitrator ruled

against the police.

        The estimates in column (3) of Panel A indicate that defendants arrested following union

wins were more likely to be incarcerated as compared to defendants arrested after union losses. In

column (3), the probability of incarceration increased by 0.076 points in Union cities relative to

Employer cities in the 12 months after arbitration relative to the 12 months before arbitration. This

estimate has a t-ratio of 3.55 and corresponds to approximately a 22 percent increase in the



                                                  17
incarceration probability in Union cities from the pre- to the post-arbitration period relative to the

change in the incarceration probability in Employer cities.            The effect of arbitration on the

incarceration outcome is large and suggests that there were important differences in policing

strategies depending on the arbitration outcome in the cities in this sample. One reason that there

could be such a large increase in the probability of incarceration is that police in Employer cities

shifted their arrests towards less-serious offenders. However, when conditioning on charged offense

categories in column (4), the difference-in-difference estimate of a union win versus a union loss

declines by only 0.022 points. It appears that defendants in Union cities have a higher incarceration

probability for a given crime charged suggesting that, perhaps, police collected less evidence, or

provided less evidence to prosecutors, following arbitration losses.

                             VIII. Employment, Overtime and Turnover

        The observed changes in clearance and crime rates after arbitration are not the result of

changes in the number of police. Table VI shows that employment at Union cities did not change

significantly relative to employment in Employer cities in the year after arbitration, relative to the

year before. In this table I make pre- and post-arbitration comparisons of the employment of police

officers and civilian personnel in cities that experienced FOA.           The difference in Union and

Employer employment is virtually unchanged in the year after arbitration relative to the year before

arbitration. The difference-in-difference is estimated as 0.07 with a standard error of 3.56 in column

(2). Interestingly, column (5) suggests that there were 5.5 additional civilian personnel per 100,000

capita after arbitration in Employer departments, with a corresponding t-ratio of 1.90, although the

difference-in-difference, -5.66, is estimated quite imprecisely with a standard error of 4.19. The

interaction of the arbitration outcomes with an indicator that takes on the value of one if the

population of the city at the time of arbitration is at or above the 75th percentile of the population

distribution in the sample reveal no differences in post-arbitration employment of police officers or

of civilian personnel even in large cities.

        It is possible, though, that, in response arbitration rulings, police officers change their labor

supply decision at the intensive margin, for example through changing overtime hours. In fact, this


                                                   18
may be a mechanism through which the observed changes in performance measures from the pre- to

post-arbitration period may occur. However, basic economic theory would not predict that these

changes in overtime hours supplied by officers are the rational response to changing prices. If the

labor demand curve is downward sloping, then the increase in wages associated with a union win

would lead the municipal employer to cut overtime hours, resulting in fewer clearances, in contrast to

what actually occurs. Additionally, all of the arbitration cases involved nominal pay raises, and most

involved real pay raises. If the patterns seen in the data were the result of a change in the labor

supply of police officers at the intensive margin in response to the changes in the wage, then it would

have to be the case that, on average, the substitution effect dominates the income effect when police

win in arbitration, but the income effect dominates when police lose. Such behavior would be

unusual.

         Two additional mechanisms that may account for post-arbitration changes in productivity

are increased turnover and adverse selection of officers following union losses.15 There are

several reasons why these mechanisms fail to explain the patterns in clearance rates seen in the

data.    First, the turnover rate of police officers is typically low, as compared to other

occupations; typical officers have 10 years of seniority [Aamodt 2004]. Second, collective

bargaining agreements would not permit a city to substitute higher for lower skilled officers. If

the increase in clearances following police wins is coming from new and relatively skilled

recruits, these recruits would have to fill existing vacancies. But, as already mentioned, there is

no evidence that employment levels changed after arbitration.                         Finally, police are highly

responsive to arbitration rulings even though the gaps between the disputing party’s offers are

often not large, averaging around 1.5 percent. The pronounced response to arbitration rulings



15
   The higher pay that is associated with an arbitration win may lead to reduced turnover, as in Salop [1979], and as
a result, higher productivity. In the adverse selection case, arbitration losses may result in a situation where better
members of police departments leave and are replaced by less skilled officers, as in Weiss [1980]. However,
McCrary [2003] finds no evidence that the introduction affirmative action quotas in police departments led to
increases in crime, even though the quotas meant hiring candidates with test scores below what would have been
acceptable prior to their introduction.



                                                          19
with relatively small spreads suggests that psychological factors may have influenced the

quantity of effort supplied by the officers following arbitration. I now turn to this question.

                       IX. Reference Point Comparisons and Police Performance

        In Bewley’s [1999] study, managers report that morale is hurt when pay raises are lower than

expectations. The consequences of low morale can be significant, resulting in a mood that is not

conducive to work and work environments where employees are unwilling to make sacrifices for the

organization.       Employee reactions to lower than expected pay may represent a response to a

perceived insult, or simply disappointment. Under both of these scenarios, productivity depends on

changes in pay relative to a reference level. A central goal of this study is to examine whether, in

fact, the degree to which workers reduce effort following arbitration depends on the size of the loss

that is incurred.

IX. A. Clearances depend on the comparison of awarded pay to pay demands

        As mentioned in the Introduction, determining whether productivity depends on pay raises in

relation to a reference point is typically challenging because reference points are unobserved. A

natural reference point candidate is the “fair wage,” or what other police officers earn in similar

circumstances. Such a wage may be difficult to calculate because, to do so, one must have the same

information on police performance and city characteristics that was available to the parties at the time

of arbitration, or some notion of the right comparison city. However, because information on each

party’s offer in arbitration is available, this calculation is unnecessary in this case. Unions engage in

arbitration precisely because, from their point of view, the employer’s offer is not the fair offer.

Therefore, in the case of a union loss, the gap between the union’s demand and the award (the

employer’s offer) is a measure of the degree of the loss. A simple test of whether comparisons of

pay to reference points affect police performance is to determine whether reductions in clearances

following arbitration become more pronounced as the gap between the union demand and the

arbitrator award widens. Such a finding would suggest that counterfactuals, which have no material

effect on the police officers, affect workplace behavior.




                                                   20
          A convenient way to implement the test is to plot the relationship between post-arbitration

changes in performance and the deviation of the award from the average of the offers. This way, one

can see how performance responds to both the distance between the union demand and the award, in

the case of a police loss, and the distance between the award and the employer offer, in the case of a

police win.16 In Figure V, I examine this relationship. For each of the 383 arbitration cases, I

calculate the change in the average clearance rate from the 12 months before to the 12 months after

arbitration. I then non-parametrically estimate the expected change in clearances conditional on the

distance of the arbitrator award to the average of the final offers, allowing for a break at zero, using a

local linear smoother. I term this conditional expectation the “effort-response” function.

          The effort-response function provides support for the reference point hypothesis.                                      In

interpreting Figure V it is useful to note that when the award is greater than the average of the final

offers the union has won arbitration, and when the award is lower than the average of the final offers

the employer has won arbitration. The noteworthy feature of this plot is that when police lose in

arbitration there is a pronounced positive relationship between the distance of the award from the

average of the final offers and the change in clearances following arbitration. This relationship

indicates that police effort following arbitration depends on the gap between the pay raise that the

union demanded in negotiations and the actual award.

          Theories of reference-dependent preferences emphasize that losses resonate more than gains

[Kahneman and Tversky 1979]. If the observed positively sloped effort-response function occurring

when police lose has a psychological explanation, as would be the case if comparisons of awards to

reference points lead police to reduce performance due to considerations of fairness or

disappointment, then we should expect this function to flatten when the award meets or exceeds the

reference point, in other words, when police win. Indeed, the figure shows that as the difference

between the award and the average of the offers crosses the zero threshold, there is a marked jump in

the effort-response function, but the slope of the curve flattens considerably.

16
   Another way to think about this approach, from the theoretical perspective, is that the arbitrator forms a preferred (fair) offer
by determining what other police forces would earn in similar cities. In expectation, the average of the parties equilibrium offers




                                                                21
          Column (1) of Table VII confirms that the degree of loss is strongly related to the change in

post-arbitration clearances in a parametric model with covariates. This column presents estimates

from a parsimonious parameterization of the effort-response function:

(4)        y mtτb = α + ψ FE + δ 1 post τ + δ 2 (post τ × LOSS SIZE b ) + ε mtτcb ,

where LOSS SIZE = (union demand – arbitrator award). The estimate on the coefficient on LOSS

SIZE is -10.31, with a t-ratio of 6.49, signifying that the gap between the award and the union

demand has a very strong relationship to the change in the post-arbitration clearance rate.17 This

relationship implies that if two unions each receive a 5 percent raise, but one asked for 15 percent

while the other asked for 6 percent then, ceteris paribus, the union that demanded the smaller amount

will clear approximately 90 more crimes per 100,000 capita each month following arbitration than

the union that demanded a larger raise.

          The flat portion of the effort-response function in Figure V, when the award exceeds the

average of the offers, suggests that the size of the award alone does not drive post-arbitration

productivity. Formally, I make this inference by regressing the per capita clearance rate on a post-

arbitration dummy and a post-arbitration dummy interacted with the size of the award. The second

and third columns of Table VII show that the estimated coefficient on this interaction is small in

magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Police receiving larger pay raises are not

exerting more effort than those receiving smaller pay raises following arbitration. The mechanism

underlying the post-arbitration effects is clearly more complicated than a simple effort/wage

relationship. At first blush, this conclusion may be considered to be at odds with the results showing

that there are positive productivity effects arising from union wins. In fact, the positive productivity

effect following union wins comes about from the jump in the effort-response function at the point

where the difference in the award and the average of the offers is zero. This discontinuous jump in


is the arbitrator’s preferred award.
17
  In New Jersey, the spread in offers has declined over time and, consequently, the results can also be interpreted as
capturing a downward trend in the magnitude of post-arbitration productivity declines in Employer cities across
arbitration years. While it is not possible to completely discount this possibility, I have experimented with the
inclusion of interacting post arbitration × Employer Win and post arbitration × Union Win with time trends, which
do not qualitatively change the results of Table VII.



                                                         22
the effort-response function, which I will term the “Vince Lombardi” effect, suggests that losing

arbitration affects productivity, even when the stakes are trivially small and may be indicative of a

“warm glow” that comes from winning arbitration or a cloud that comes from losing.18

           In order to estimate the Lombardi effect, I fit a model that allows post-arbitration

productivity to depend on a cubic term in the size of the loss and an indicator for whether there as a

police win:

(5)         y mtτb = α + ψ FE + ρ1 post τ + ρ 2 post τ × UnionWin b + (post τ × p(LOSS SIZE b )) + ε mtτcb ,

where p(LOSS SIZEb) denotes a cubic polynomial in LOSS SIZE. The coefficient ρ 2 determines

the change in performance when the loss size is zero and the police win in arbitration, relative to

when the loss size is zero and the police lose in arbitration. If ρ 2 is positive, then winning in

arbitration increases clearances even if the difference between the offers is trivially small. In column

(4) of Table VII, the Lombardi effect is estimated as 13.38, with a t-ratio of 2.52. This estimate

suggests that police incorporate reference points which are based on categories (win versus loss) as

well as pay. However, this result must be interpreted with some care. As noted earlier, because there

are no arbitration cases that lead to no-decision, it is not possible to disentangle the effect of an

arbitration win, arbitration loss, and simply finishing arbitration. Therefore, while the Lombardi

effect shows that winning is important, it should be interpreted as the productivity response of a win

in relation to a loss. For example, it could be that losing in arbitration leads to productivity declines,

wining arbitration does not lead to productivity gains, while just finishing arbitration leads to gains in

productivity. In this case, the Lombardi effect reflects the productivity decline associated with a

small loss.

IX. B. Expectation-Based Counterfactuals

           There is considerable support in the psychology literature for the idea that comparisons to

expectation-based counterfactuals matter for emotional responses to outcomes and decisions.19 The

18
     Professional football coach Vince Lombardi is attributed to have said that “winning isn’t everything, it’s the only




                                                            23
pain or pleasure following an outcome depends on the utility of the outcome, comparisons of actual

to counterfactual outcomes, and the surprise associated with the actual outcome. For example, if the

employees propose a pay raise that has no chance of selection, then they may not react as adversely

as in the case that the proposed pay raise has a positive probability of selection. A structured way to

account for both anticipation and the gap between the award and the union demand is to model police

performance as depending on the difference between the award and the rationally expected award,

where the expected award depends on the probabilities of winning and the offers presented. This

specification is in line with the modeling approach of Koszegi and Rabin’s [2005] who argue that

reference points are best thought of as rational expectations. Taking this line of thought seriously, I

can use variation in the probability of employer wins across arbitration cases to test whether

deviations in the arbitrator award from the expected award can account for differences in post-

arbitration relative to pre-arbitration clearance rates, even after controlling for the distance between

the union demand and the arbitrator award.

         Divergent beliefs, political economy, differences in degrees of risk-aversion across parties,

changes in arbitrator behavior over time, and mental rigidity in negotiations are all reasons that may

lead parties to submit offers with varying probabilities of selection.          If parties vary in the

conservativeness of their offers, then the probability of winning will vary across cases as well. If this

is the case, then the mean of the final-offers can be used to predict the probability of an employer

win, as noted by Ashenfelter and Bloom [1984]. Conditional on the facts of the case, the higher the

average of the offers, the higher is the probability of employer selection. Following Ashenfelter and

Bloom’s [1984] and Ashenfelter and Dahl’s [2005] approach, if one assumes that the arbitrator’s

preferred award is normally distributed, then the probability of employer selection is a probit

function depending of the average of the offers. Therefore, the starting point for this analysis is to

estimate the predicted probability of employer arbitration wins using a probit model, using as an

explanatory variable the average of the final offers. Using these predicted probabilities, I calculate


thing.”
19
   For example, see Mellers et al. [1999].



                                                   24
the expected award for each arbitration case: expected awardb = p̂b employer offerb+ (1 − pˆ b ) union

offerb, where p̂b is the predicted probability of an employer win in arbitration case b. I then

construct the difference between the expected award and the arbitrator award.

        For ease of exposition, in the context of a union loss I will call the gap between the union

demand and the award the “loss size,” and the gap between the expected offer and the award the

“deviation from expectation.” The finding presented in column (5) of Table VII is that, in cases of

union losses, when both the loss size and the deviation from expectation are included in the model

(after being interacted with a post-arbitration dummy), the deviation from expectation explains

substantially more of the variation in the magnitude of the post-arbitration declines in clearances than

the loss size. In fact, loss size has no significant relationship to clearances after controlling for the

deviation from the expected award. The reason that the coefficient on the loss size is large in column

(1), but is virtually zero in column (5), is that the loss size and the deviation from the expected award

are highly correlated. The deviation from the expected award captures both the notion that some

awards are more anticipated than others and the size of the loss. The effect of a union arbitration loss

on clearances is greater both when the union offer is far from the employer offer and when there is

greater anticipation of a union win. If the union submits an offer that is very large but has a low

probability of being selected, then the productivity response will be limited.20               These findings

validate the idea that effort depends on the degree to which pay raises fall below expectations, in this

case rational expectations.      By contrast, when the pay raise exceeds expectations, there is no

statistically distinguishable effect on the performance of police officers, as seen in column (6). The

lack of a relationship in this case signifies that loss aversion is an important determinant of

workplace performance.




20
   Another way to understand this finding is that the degree to which a loss affects performance is effectively
mediated by the size of the offer. Large losses, which occur when the gap between the union demand and the award
is large, do not hurt as much when the average of the offers is sizable relative to when the average is smaller.



                                                      25
IX. C. Adaptation and Dynamics

        An important aspect of the findings that remains to be discussed concerns the productivity

dynamics following arbitration. Figure I shows that the productivity effects arising from arbitration

decisions are persistent, peaking at seven months following arbitration, and appearing to reach a new

steady-state after about a year. It is useful to interpret these dynamics though the lens of the theory

of the “hedonic treadmill,” which holds that subjective well-being (SWB) adjusts to current

circumstances [Brickman and Campbell (1971)]. This proposition implies that life events induce

transitory deviations of SWB from baseline levels. How quickly SWB returns to baseline following

an event depends on the kind of event considered and the research design of the study. Studies of

lottery winners [Brickman et al. 1978] and people with severe spinal cord injuries [Silver 1982] show

that adaptation to these extreme life-events occurs within a short time-frame, typically within a year.

By contrast, a more recent literature has found that repeated spells of unemployment [Lucas et al.

2004] and changes in martial status [Lucas et al. 2003] appear to have long-lasting effects on life

satisfaction. Nevertheless, it may be considered puzzling that people adapt to some major life events

relatively quickly, but the reduced performance of police officers following an arbitration loss

persists for over a year. One important difference between the context of this study and the ones

reviewed above is that, in this study, police reactions to adverse or positive events may have been

augmented by social interactions. The literature on group polarization suggests that members of

group discussions advocate more extreme positions than individuals who do not participate in group

discussion. Additionally, if there are strong feedback effects in the transmission of job satisfaction

across individuals due to social interactions, one-time shocks to morale may, in theory, be highly

persistent.

                                           X. Conclusion

        Arbitration systems offer a rich setting to study how workers respond to relative changes in

compensation. The advantage of the approach taken in this paper is multifold. First, information on

both the enacted offers and the counter-offers allow me to explore how deviations from reference




                                                  26
payoffs affect productivity.    Second, theoretical models of final-offer arbitration suggest that

arbitration rulings are orthogonal to the facts of the case because the information that is relevant to

compensation is already incorporated into the final offers. In addition, the statistical models are

flexible and the parameters of interest are identified even if the arbitrator draws from the information

set available to him or her at the time of arbitration. Lastly, high frequency data on clearances allows

me to capture dynamics in performance that may not be detected using more coarse time intervals.

        It is well known that final-offer arbitration awards are low quality because they lie

outside the range of negotiated settlements. This study shows that final-offer arbitration can

have additional inefficiencies arising from the behavioral response of participants to unfavorable

outcomes. Ichniowski [1982] finds that arbitration helps reduce the propensity for police to strike,

which suggests that police departments in contract disputes not subject to compulsory arbitration

could, in principle, experience productivity losses that are even more sizable than the ones presented

in this paper.

        The findings in this paper suggest several avenues for future work. First, additional work

needs to be done to determine whether productivity responses to arbitration are exacerbated by

the fact that the arbitration rulings in this paper represent group level outcomes. That is, are the

effects of falling below a reference point amplified when the resulting disappointment affects an

entire group of workers? Second, models of final offer arbitration can be written to take into

account the effect of differential rulings on productivity. For example, a question that arises is

whether employers manage expectations of workers to minimize the behavioral costs arising

from unfavorable payoffs. In some cases, it may be optimal for employers engaged in final offer

arbitration to increase expected productivity by making offers that arbitrators are unlikely to

select. Such behavior could be one reason why employer win rates are fairly low in this study.

Lastly, future studies should consider whether the behavioral responses associated with

differential arbitration outcomes, as outlined in this study, represent a general phenomenon




                                                  27
relating to allocative mechanisms that clearly demarcate winners from losers, for example

negotiations that involve a single and discrete high-stakes issue.


Data Appendix

NJ PERC:

       The data provide information on FOA cases that took place in New Jersey between 1978

and 1995 and include information on the offers submitted to the arbitrator, which are expressed

as percent changes on the previous contract’s wage, and information on whether the arbitrator

ruled in favor of the municipal employer or police bargaining unit.

FBI UCR:

       I match arbitration to monthly clearance and crime data from the FBI Uniform Crime

Reporting System (UCR) data files obtained from the Inter-University Consortium for Political

and Social Research (ICPSR) for 1975 through 1996. The data files include reports by police

departments on felony crimes and clearances. Datasets were matched on the name of the

municipality. This merge was complicated because reporting of municipal names was not

uniform in the NJ PERC data file and the UCR files and because there are multiple cities in New

Jersey with the same name. For example, New Jersey has five Washington Townships and a

Washington Borough. In such cases I used additional information, like county and census

population size, to match the cities. Several municipalities that did undergo arbitration are

dropped from the analysis because they lie too close to one another, resulting in overlapping

event-study windows. The exact number depends on the length of the arbitration window and

the rules used to determine eligibility for inclusion in cases with overlapping windows is

described below. There are an additional 104 arbitration cases on non-compensation disputes

that are not used in the main analysis. One arbitration case is dropped because the city never




                                                 28
reported to the FBI in the period of arbitration. After these exclusions, 383 arbitration cases

remain.

        As described in the text, I include a comparison group consisting of municipalities that

never underwent arbitration. There are 211 municipalities that never arbitrated with police

unions between 1978 and 1995. In order to preserve a balanced panel for the comparison group,

I only include cities that missed reporting to the FBI in at most 10 percent of months. This filter

results in the use of 197 municipalities in the comparison group. The results are robust to

different selection rules.

Selection of cases with overlapping windows:

        I employ the following selection rules when arbitration windows overlap:

        (i)     Exclude an arbitration window if the arbitration date falls on the post-arbitration

                period of another case (in the same city).

        (ii)    If the arbitration date in case A falls on the pre-arbitration window of case B, then

                only exclude months in A’s window that overlap with the post-arbitration months

                of case B. By the previous rule, case B is excluded.

        (iii)   If the post-arbitration months in A overlap with the pre-arbitration months in B,

                then keep A and exclude B.

        One may be concerned that in dropping only part of an arbitration window, I allow for

the possibility of composition bias since some arbitration windows will be truncated. However,

dropping incomplete bargaining windows does not qualitatively change the estimates, nor do

specifications that control for arbitration window fixed-effects, which control for permanent

differences in cities around the time of arbitration.


OBTS Datafile:

        File consists of individuals who were arrested for felonies between 1987 and 1990 and

obtained final disposition between 1989 and 1990 in municipalities that experienced arbitration



                                                  29
between 1988 and 1989. There are 40 arbitration cases used in this analysis. For the sentence

outcome, 13 offenders who received the death penalty were dropped from the sample. If the

same offender appears more than once in the data, only the first offense is used. Offenders with

a missing offense code or conviction code are dropped from the sample. Sentence is the

maximum length of the jail sentence imposed for an offense expressed in fractions of a year.

OBTS are available from ICPSR.



University of California, Berkeley



References

Aamodt, Michael, “Law Enforcement Selection: Research Summaries,” (Washington, DC:
     Police Executive Research Forum, 2004).

Adams, J. Stacy, “Inequity in Social Exchange,” in L. Berkowitz, ed., Advances in Experimental
      Social Psychology, Volume 2 (New York, NY: Academic Press, 1965).

Agell, Jonas and Per Lundborg, “Theories of Pay and Unemployment: Survey Evidence from
        Swedish Manufacturing Firms,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics XCVII (1995),
        1027-1039.

Akerlof, George and Jenet Yellen, “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics CV (1990): 255-283.
Ashenfelter, Orley, “Arbitrator Behavior,” American Economic Review LXXVII (1987),
      342-346.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Bloom, “Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory and Evidence,”
      American Economic Review LXXIV (1984), 111-124.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Gordon Dahl, “Strategic Bargaining Behavior, Self-Serving Biases, and
      the Role of Expert Agents: An Empirical Study of Final-Offer Arbitration,” Industrial
      Relations Section, Princeton University, February 2005.

Bateman, Ian; Alistair Munroe; Bruce Rhodes; Chris Starmer and Robert Sugden, “Does Part-
      Whole Bias Exist? An Experimental Investigation,” Economic Journal CVII (1997),
      322-332.




                                              30
Bewley, Truman, Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
      University Press, 1999.

Blinder, Alan and Don Choi, “A Shred of Evidence on Theories of Wage Stickiness,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics CV (1990), 1003-1015.

Brickman, Philip and Don Campbell, “Hedonic Relativism and Planning the Good Society,” in
      M.H. Appley (Ed.), Adaptation-level theory, New York: Academic Press, 1971, 287-305.

Brickman, Philip; Dan Coates and Ronnie Janoff-Bulman, “Lottery Winners and Accident
      Victims: Is Happiness Relative?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology XXXVI
      (1978), 917-927.

Brown, Gordon D. A.; Jonathan Gardner; Andrew Oswald and Jing Qian, “Does Wage Rank
      Affect Employees' Wellbeing?” (2005). IZA Discussion Paper No. 1505.

Cappelli, Peter and Keith Chauvin, “An Inter-Plant Test of Efficiency Wage Arguments,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics LXXIII (1991), 769-787.

Fehr, Ernst and Gächter, Simon, “Fairness and Retaliation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives
       LXXIII (2000), 159-182.

Farber, Henry, “An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration,” Journal of Conflict Resolution XXIV
        (1980), 683-705.

Gibbons, Robert, “Learning in Equilibrium Models of Arbitration,” American Economic Review
      LXXVIII (1988), 896-912.

Gul, Faruk, “A Theory of Disappointment Aversion,” Econometrica LIX (1991), 667-686.

Ichniowski, Casey, “Arbitration and Police Bargaining: Prescriptions for the Blue Flu,”
       Industrial Relations XXI (1982), 149-166.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”
     Econometrica XLVII (1979), 263-291.

Kaufman, Roger, “On Wage Stickiness in Britain’s Competitive Sector,” British Journal of
      Industrial Relations, XXII (1984), 101-112.

Koszegi, Botand and Mathew Rabin, “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences,” The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forthcoming.

Lester, Richard, Labor Arbitration in State and Local Government, Industrial Relations Section,
        Princeton University, 1984.




                                               31
Levitt, Steven, “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on
        Crime,” American Economic Review LXXXVII (1997), 270-290.

Lucas, Richard; Andrew Clark; Yannis Georgellis and Ed Diener, “Reexamining Adaptation and
       the Set Point Model of Happiness: Reactions to Changes in Marital Status,” Journal of
       Personality and Social Psychology LXXXIV (2003), 527-539.

Lucas, Richard; Andrew Clark; Yannis Georgellis and Ed Diener, “Unemployment Alters the Set
       Point for Life Satisfaction,” Psychological Science XV (2004), 8-13.

McCrary, Justin, “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on
      Crime: Comment,” American Economic Review XCII (2002), 1236-1243.

McCrary, Justin, “The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and Quality of
      Police,” University of Michigan. 2003.

Mellers, Barbara; Schwartz, Alan and Ilana Ritov, “Emotion-Based Choice,” Journal of
       Experimental Psychology: General CXXVIII (1999), 332-345.

Rizzo, John and Richard Zeckhauser, “Reference Incomes, Loss Aversion, and Physician
       Behavior,” The Review of Economics and Statistics LXXXV (2003), 909-922.

Salop, Steven, C., “A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment,” American Economic
       Review LXIX (1979), 117-125.

Silver, Ruth, “Coping with an Undesirable Life Event: A Study of Early Reactions to Physical
        Disability,” Northwestern University, (1982).

Thaler, Richard, “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Behavior and
        Organization I (1980), 36-60.

Verhoogen, Eric; Stephen Burks and Jeffrey Carpenter, “Fairness and Freight-Handlers: Local
      Labor Market Conditions, Wage Fairness Perceptions, and Employee Performance in a
      Trucking Firm,” Columbia University, (2003).

Weiss, Andrew, “Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,” Journal of
       Political Economy LXXXVIII (1980), 526-538.




                                               32
                                                 Table I
                   Sample characteristics in the -12 to +12 month event time window
                                           (1)                 (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                                                                                            Pre-arbitration:
                                                        Pre-arbitration:         Pre-arbitration:           Employer win-
                                     Full-sample        Employer wins            Employer loses             Employer loss
Arbitrator rules for employer            0.344
Final Offer: Employer                     6.11                 6.44                     5.94                       0.50
                                         [1.65]               [1.54]                   [1.68]                     (0.18)
Final Offer: Union                        7.65                 7.87                     7.54                       0.32
                                         [1.71]               [2.03]                   [1.51]                     (0.18)
Population                               21,345              22,893                   20,534                      2,358
                                        [33,463]            [34,561]                 [32,915]                    (3,598)
Contract length                           2.09                 2.09                     2.09                      0.007
                                         [0.66]               [0.64]                   [0.66]                    (0.071)
Size of bargaining unit                  42.58                41.36                    43.22                      -1.86
                                        [97.34]              [53.33]                 [113.84]                    (15.66)
Arbitration year                         85.56                85.85                    85.41                      0.436
                                         [4.75]               [5.10]                   [4.56]                    (0.510)
Clearances                               120.31              122.28                   118.57                       3.71
per 100,000 capita                      [106.65]            [108.76]                 [104.35]                     (9.46)
Violent crime clearances                 64.79                65.29                    63.16                       2.14
per 100,000 capita                      [71.28]              [72.64]                  [66.79]                     (6.11)
Property crime clearances                55.51                56.99                    55.42                       1.57
per 100,000 capita                      [58.72]              [58.61]                  [61.43]                     (4.92)
Crime reports                            444.03              453.06                   439.75                      13.30
per 100,000 capita                      [364.23]            [411.99]                 [309.80]                    (35.92)
Violent crime reports                     95.49               95.31                    92.90                       2.41
per 100,000 capita                      [103.16]            [101.78]                  [98.61]                     (9.44)
Property crime reports                   348.45              357.65                   346.72                      10.93
per 100,000 capita                      [292.10]            [335.62]                 [242.84]                    (28.71)
Number of arbitration cases               383                  132                      251

     Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard deviation are in brackets. In the full sample, observations are municipality ×
month cells for the 12 months before and the 12 months after arbitration. The offers are percentage changes from wages in the
previous contract. t-tests involving time-invariant city characteristics in column (4) are conducted on month only. For other
characteristics, namely clearance and crime rates, t-tests are conducted by regressing the characteristic on a employer win
indicator on all pre-arbitration months while employing robust standard errors that are clustered within the arbitration window.
The full-sample in column (1) contains 9,538 observations. There are 210 arbitration cases missing information on number of
police officers in unit. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal clearance and
crime rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
                                                 Table II
                 Event study estimates of the effect of arbitration rulings on clearances;
                                  -12 to +12 month event time window
                                    All clearances              Violent crime clearances            Property crime clearances
                             (1)          (2)      (3)           (4)       (5)      (6)              (7)       (8)      (9)
Constant                   118.57      141.25                   63.16       75.10                   55.42       66.15
                           (5.12)      (9.94)                   (3.13)      (6.86)                  (2.88)      (4.55)
Post-arbitration            -6.79        -8.48       -9.75       -2.54       -3.10       -3.77       -4.26       -5.39       -4.45
× Employer win             (2.62)       (2.20)      (2.70)      (1.75)      (1.35)      (1.78)      (1.62)      (2.25)      (1.87)
Post-arbitration            4.99         7.92        5.96        4.17        5.62        5.31       0.819        2.31        2.19
× Union win                (2.09)       (2.91)      (2.65)      (1.53)      (1.95)      (1.42)      (1.24)      (1.58)      (1.37)
Row 3 – Row 2              11.78        16.40       15.71        6.71        8.71        9.08        5.08        7.69        6.40
                           (3.35)       (3.65)      (3.75)      (2.32)      (2.37)      (2.26)      (2.04)      (2.75)      (2.30)
Employer Win                3.71        -2.81                    2.14        -5.73                   1.57        2.92
(Yes = 1)                  (9.46)      (14.92)                  (6.11)      (9.53)                  (4.93)      (7.51)

Fixed-effects?                                       Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes

Weighted sample?                         Yes         Yes                     Yes         Yes                     Yes         Yes

Augmented sample?                                    Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes

Mean of the                120.31       120.31   130.82         64.79       64.79       72.15       55.51       55.51        58.63
Dependent variable        [106.65]     [106.65] [370.58]       [71.28]     [71.28]    [294.78]     [58.72]     [58.72]     [180.55]

Sample Size                9,538        9,538      59,137      9,538       9,538       59,135       9,538       9,538       59,136
R2                         0.0008       0.005       0.63       0.0007      0.0078       0.59        0.001      0.0015        0.55

      Standard errors, clustered on the intersection of arbitration window and city, are in parentheses. Standard deviations are in
brackets. The dependant variable is clearances per 100,000 capita. When indicated, the sample is weighted by population size in
1976. Observations are municipality × month cells. There are 383 arbitration cases under analysis. The samples in models (1), (2),
(4), (5), (7), and (8) consist of municipalities that underwent arbitration, limited to months that are in the arbitration window—12
months after and 12 months before arbitration. The remaining models augment that sample with data on 197 municipalities that
never underwent arbitration with police departments over wage disputes in the sample period. These additional municipalities are
included for all months between 1976 and 1996. The employer-win main-effect is absorbed by the arbitration window dummies and
is therefore omitted from models (3), (6), and (9). “Fixed-effects” consist of month × year effects (252), arbitration window effects
(383), and city effects (452). All models include a constant. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to
monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
                                           Table III
  Event study estimates of the effect of arbitration rulings on clearances by specific crime
                      category; -12 to +12 month event time window
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)(6)        (7)
                                                                                             Motor
                                                                                             vehicle
                                     Murder       Rape     Assault Robbery Burglary           theft    Larceny
                                    clearances clearances clearances clearances clearances clearances clearances
Post-arbitration                       -0.042       -0.075        -4.82       -0.376       -1.25        -0.156        -3.04
× Employer win                        (0.064)      (0.091)       (1.41)      (0.194)      (0.589)      (0.156)       (1.53)
Post-arbitration                      -0.011        -0.043        2.67         1.16        0.551        0.271         1.37
× Union win                           (0.057)      (0.132)       (1.51)      (0.536)      (0.527)      (0.237)       (1.20)

Row 2 – Row 1                          0.030        0.033        7.48         1.53         1.80         0.428         4.41
                                      (0.087)      (0.160)      (2.03)       (0.582)      (0.778)      (0.278)       (1.92)

Mean of the Dependant                 0.184         1.15        68.83         1.98        13.74         3.85         41.05
Variable                              [3.33]       [26.53]     [288.31]      [30.69]     [110.82]      [56.25]      [123.58]

Sample Size                           59,137       59,135       59,137       59,137       59,136       59,137       59,137
R2                                     0.11         0.18         0.56         0.65         0.20         0.13         0.60

      Standard errors, clustered on the intersection of arbitration window and city, are in parentheses. Standard deviations are in
brackets. Observations are municipality × month cells. The sample is weighted by population size in 1976. There are 383
arbitration cases under analysis. The sample is municipalities that underwent arbitration, limited to months that are within the
arbitration window, augmented with 197 municipalities that never underwent arbitration. Municipalities that never underwent
arbitration are included for all months between 1976 and 1996. All models include month × year effects (252), arbitration window
effects (383), and city effects (452). All models include a constant. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases
matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
                                                Table IV
                   Event study estimates of the effect of arbitration rulings on crime;
                                 -12 to +12 month event time window
                                     All crime                     Violent crime                     Property crime
                             (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
Constant                   612.18                             150.26                             461.81
                           (63.98)                            (23.23)                            (42.00)
Post-arbitration            26.86            24.68             7.75              4.87             19.19            19.86
× Employer win             (25.29)          (14.68)           (7.85)            (4.70)           (18.17)          (11.19)
Post-arbitration            7.64             6.68              7.07              2.49             0.170             4.40
× Union win                (16.24)          (11.42)           (5.46)            (4.46)           (11.68)           (7.87)
Row 3 – Row 2              -19.21           -18.01            -0.68              -2.38            -19.02           -15.46
                           (30.06)          (19.12)           (9.56)            (6.63)           (21.60)          (13.96)
Employer Win                -31.81                             -20.43                             -11.35
(Yes = 1)                  (84.42)                            (27.57)                            (59.50)


Fixed-effects?                                Yes                                Yes                                Yes

Mean of the                444.03           519.42             95.49            98.26            348.45           421.28
dependent variable        [364.23]         [2037.4]          [103.16]         [363.76]          [292.10]         [1865.8]

Sample size                 9,528           59,060             9,529           59,085             9,537           59,119
R2                          0.001            0.54              0.007            0.76             0.0003            0.42

      Standard errors, clustered on the intersection of arbitration window and city, are in parentheses. Standard deviations are in
brackets. Observations are municipality × month cells. The dependent variables are crime reports per 100,000 capita. The sample is
weighted by population size in 1976. There are 383 arbitration cases under analysis. The sample is municipalities that underwent
arbitration, limited to months that are within the arbitration window, augmented with 197 municipalities that never underwent
arbitration. Municipalities that never underwent arbitration are included for all months between 1976 and 1996. “Fixed-effects”
consist of month × year effects (252), arbitration window effects (383), and city effects (452). All models include a constant.
Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from
FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
                                                    Table V
                                 Arbitration decisions and sentencing outcomes
                                              Panel A: Sentencing
                                OLS: Conviction (Yes = 1)                          OLS: Incarceration (Yes = 1)
                                (1)                     (2)                       (3)                          (4)
Post-arbitration              0.0190                  0.0186                    -0.0115                      -0.0009
× Employer win               (0.0606)                (0.0328)                  (0.0405)                     (0.0378)
Post-arbitration              0.0161                  0.0080                     0.0645                       0.0535
× Union win                  (0.0273)                (0.0238)                  (0.0295)                     (0.0261)
Row 2 – Row 1                -0.0028                 -0.0106                    0.0760                       0.0543
                             (0.0599)                (0.0368)                  (0.0215)                     (0.0226)
Charge dummies?                                         Yes                                                   Yes
Mean of the                    0.791                   0.791                     0.318                       0.318
dependent variable            [0.407]                 [0.407]                   [0.466]                     [0.466]
N                              6,685                   6,685                     6,685                       6,685
R2                             0.041                   0.135                     0.050                       0.111
                                 Panel B: Outcomes conditional on conviction
                                   Incarceration (Yes = 1)                                     Sentence
                                 (1)                  (2)                         (3)                          (4)
Post-arbitration              -0.0321               -0.0156                     -0.1866                      0.0878
× Employer win               (0.0430)              (0.0435)                    (0.1629)                     (0.1704)
Post-arbitration               0.0771               0.0722                      0.6382                       0.4964
× Union win                  (0.0291)              (0.0254)                    (0.2234)                     (0.1844)
Row 2 – Row 1                 0.1092                0.0878                      0.8249                       0.4086
                             (0.0250)              (0.0264)                    (0.1589)                     (0.1277)
Charge dummies?                                         Yes                                                   Yes
Mean of the                    0.402                   0.402                     1.658                       1.658
dependent variable            [0.490]                 [0.490]                   [3.861]                     [3.861]
Sample Size                    5,289                   5,289                     5,162                       5,162
R2                             0.054                   0.128                     0.031                       0.334

     Standard errors, clustered on arbitration window, are in parentheses. Standard deviations are in brackets. Observations are
individuals arrested for felonies between 1987 and 1990, obtained final disposition between 1989 and 1990, in municipalities that
experienced arbitration between 1988 and 1989. There are 40 arbitration cases used in this analysis. There are 85 charge
dummies, which indicate the crime for which the defendant was charged. All models include a constant, year and month of arrest
dummies, year of final disposition dummies, and arbitration window dummies. For the sentence outcome, 13 offenders who
received the death penalty were dropped from the sample. If the same offender appears more than once in the data, only the first
offense is used. Offenders with a missing offense code or conviction code are dropped from the sample. Sentence is the
maximum length of the jail sentence imposed for an offense expressed in fractions of a year. Conditional on conviction, the
average sentence is 1.66 years (std. dev. = 3.86). Conditional on incarceration, the average sentence is 4.28 years (st. dev. =
5.22). Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration data matched to arrestees from the Offender Based Transaction
Statistics.
                                           Table VI
  Event study estimates of the effect of arbitration rulings on the number of police officers
                        and civilian personnel employed at agencies


                                                Law enforcement officers                         Civilian personnel
Explanatory Variables                              per 100,000 capita                            per 100,000 capita
                                               (1)           (2)        (3)                   (4)         (5)       (6)

Post Arbitration × Employer Win               2.50             0.76           3.16           6.31          5.50         2.97
                                             (7.46)           (2.78)         (3.49)         (4.27)        (2.90)       (3.25)

Post Arbitration × Union win                  -0.87           0.826          -0.66           0.16         -0.16         -0.20
                                             (6.78)           (2.82)         (2.67)         (2.54)        (1.75)       (2.44)

Row 2 – Row 1                                 -3.37            0.07                         -6.15         -5.66         -3.17
                                             (5.90)           (3.56)                        (2.88)        (4.19)       (3.56)

Employer Win (Yes = 1)                       -1.14                                           3.30
                                            (24.85)                                         (8.39)

Log Population                               17.15                                           1.32
                                             (6.43)                                         (1.35)

Pop 75th %tile × Post-                                                        -4.06                                     0.01
Arbitration × Employer Win                                                   (5.24)                                    (2.51)

Pop 75th %tile × Post-                                                        2.31                                      4.24
Arbitration × Union Win                                                      (3.82)                                    (6.45)

Year Dummies {19}                             Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes

Arbitration Window                                              Yes           Yes                          Yes          Yes
Dummies {338}

Mean of the Dependant                        260.78           260.78        260.78           42.77         42.77       42.77
Variable                                    [107.79]         [107.79]      [107.79]         [37.57]       [37.57]     [37.57]

N                                             676              676            676            676           676          676
R2                                            0.18             0.99          0.995           0.11          0.96        0.963
Notes: Standard errors clustered on arbitration windows are in parentheses. Standard deviations in brackets. Number of groups in
braces. Observations are municipality × year cells corresponding to the year before and the year after arbitration, excluding the
year of arbitration. For a given municipality, an arbitration case that occurred within two years of another arbitration case is
excluded from the sample. Sample is weighted by 1970 population. All models estimated with a constant. Author’s calculation
based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly employment levels at the jurisdiction level found in FBI Uniform Crime
Report Law Enforcement Officer Killed and Assaulted data files.
                                          Table VII
     Heterogeneous effects of arbitration decisions on clearances by loss size, award, and
           deviation from the expected offer; -12 to +12 month event time window
                                                           (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                                                   Police lose Police win
Post-Arbitration                                           5.72     -8.17     12.99       -7.42        4.97            7.30
                                                          (2.31)   (9.58)     (8.45)     (4.76)       (3.14)          (4.17)
Post-Arbitration × Award                                            1.23      -1.00
                                                                   (1.16)     (0.98)
Post-Arbitration × Loss size                              -10.31              -10.93                   -0.20
                                                          (1.59)              (1.89)                  (4.54)
Post-Arbitration × Union win                                                             13.38
                                                                                         (5.32)
Post-Arbitration × (expected award-award)                                                             -17.72           2.82
                                                                                                      (7.94)          (4.13)
Post-Arbitration × p(loss size)^                                                        Included

Sample Size                                               59,137 59,137      59,137      59,137       52,857          55,879
 2
R                                                          0.63     0.63       0.63       0.63         0.60            0.62

     Standard errors, clustered on the intersection of arbitration window and city, are in parentheses. Standard deviations are in
brackets. Observations are municipality × month cells. The sample is weighted by population size in 1976. The dependant
variable is clearances per 100,000 capita. Loss size is defined as the union demand (percent increase on previous wage) less the
arbitrator award. Amongst cities that underwent arbitration, the mean loss size is 0.489 with a standard deviation of 0.953. The
expected award is the mathematical expectation of the award given the union and employer offers and the predicted probability
of an employer win. The predicted probability of an employer win is estimated with a probit model using as predictors year of
arbitration dummies, the average of the final offers, log population, and the length of the contract. See text for details. The
samples in models (1)-(4) consist of the 12 months before to the 12 months after arbitration, for jurisdictions that underwent
arbitration, as well as all jurisdictions that never underwent arbitration for all months between 1976 and 1996. The sample in
model (5) consists of cities where the union lost in arbitration and the comparison group of non-arbitrating cities. The sample in
model (6) consists of cities where the union won in arbitration and the comparison group of non-arbitrating cities. All models
include month × year effects (252), arbitration window effects (383), and city effects (452). Author’s calculation based on NJ
PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports.

^ p(loss size) denotes a cubic polynomial in loss size.
                                   180                                                        Arbitration month
                                                     Arbitrator ruled for employer
                                   170
                                                     Arbitrator ruled for union
   Clearances per 100,000 capita




                                   160

                                   150

                                   140

                                   130

                                   120

                                   110

                                   100
                                         -23 -21 -19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9   -7   -5   -3   -1   1   3   5   7   9   11 13 15 17 19 21 23

                                                                           Months since arbitration


                                                                   Figure I
                                   Month-by-month comparison of Union and Employer city average clearance rates
      Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction
level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. Sample is weighted by 1976 population. Data span the years 1976 through 1996 for
arbitration cases occurring between 1978 and 1996.
                                    25
                                                                                           Arbitration month
                                    20             Arbitrator for employer
                                                   Arbitrator ruled for union
                                    15
    Clearances per 100,000 capita




                                    10

                                     5

                                     0
                                          -23 -21 -19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1       3   5      7   9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
                                     -5

                                    -10

                                    -15

                                    -20

                                    -25
                                                                             Months since arbitration



                                         Figure II
 Regression-adjusted event study estimates of the effect of arbitration rulings on per capita
                                        clearances
     Regression-adjusted estimates based on a regression of clearances per 100,000 capita on event-time dummies interacted with
indicators for whether the arbitrator ruled in favor of the union or against the union. Estimates on the interacted event-time
dummies are plotted relative to the omitted month of arbitration for Union and Employer cities. Regression model includes
controls for year × month of arbitration dummies, arbitration window fixed-effects, and city fixed-effects for the group of cities
that never underwent arbitration. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal
clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. Sample is weighted by population in the jurisdiction in
1976. Data span the years 1976 through 1996 for arbitration cases occurring between 1978 and 1996.
                                     50

                                      0
                                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
                                     -50
    Clearances per 100,000 capita




                                    -100

                                    -150

                                    -200

                                    -250

                                    -300

                                    -350

                                    -400

                                    -450
                                                                           Months since arbitration



                                        Figure III
   Regression-adjusted estimates of the cumulative difference in clearances between
Employer and Union cities in post arbitration months relative to the entire pre-arbitration
                                         period

     Regression-adjusted estimates based on a regression of clearances per 100,000 capita on post-arbitration event-time
dummies and on post-arbitration event-time dummies interacted with indicators for whether the arbitrator ruled against the union.
Estimates on the interacted post-arbitration event-time dummies are cumulated and plotted. Regression model includes controls
for year × month of arbitration dummies, arbitration window fixed-effects, and city fixed-effects for cities that never underwent
arbitration. The dotted lines are the 90 percent confidence interval. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases
matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. Sample is weighted by
population in 1976. Data span the years 1976 through 1996 for arbitration cases occurring between 1978 and 1996.
                                       1600

                                       1400
    Crime reports per 100,000 capita




                                       1200

                                       1000

                                       800

                                       600

                                       400

                                       200

                                         0
                                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
                                       -200
                                                                              Months since arbitration



                                                                         Figure IV
                                       Regression-adjusted estimates of the cumulative effect of union losses on crime
     Regression-adjusted estimates based on a regression of crimes per 100,000 capita on event-time dummies for the post-
arbitration months interacted with indicators for whether the arbitrator ruled in favor of the union or against the union. Post-
arbitration event-time dummies interacted with an employer win dummy are cumulated and plotted. Regression model includes
controls for year and month of arbitration dummies as well as arbitration window fixed-effects. Cities that never underwent
arbitration are also included and are each assigned a fixed-effect. The dotted lines are the 90 percent confidence interval.
Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration cases matched to monthly municipal crime rates at the jurisdiction level from
FBI Uniform Crime Reports. Sample is weighted by population in 1976. Data span the years 1976 through 1996 for arbitration
cases occurring between 1978 and 1996.
       E[Change in Clearances | Award - Average Offer]
     -40           -20             0             20




                                                         -2.5   -2   -1.5   -1     -.5     0     .5      1   1.5   2   2.5
                                                                                 Award - Average Offer



                                        Figure V
  Estimated expected change in clearances conditional on the deviation of the award from
                                 the average of the offers
     Local-linear estimates of the expected change in clearances conditional on the gap between the arbitrator award and the
average of the final offers for 383 arbitration cases from the 12 months prior to arbitration to the 12 months after arbitration.
Dotted-line is the 90 percent confidence band. Sample is weighted by population in the jurisdiction in 1976. Data span the years
1976 through 1996 for arbitration cases occurring between 1978 and 1996. Author’s calculation based on NJ PERC arbitration
cases matched to monthly municipal clearance rates at the jurisdiction level from FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
