                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE EFFECTS OF STATE MEDICAID POLICIES ON
                   THE DYNAMIC SAVINGS PATTERNS OF THE ELDERLY

                                              Lara Gardner
                                             Donna Gilleskie

                                          Working Paper 12208
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12208


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Lara Gardner and Donna Gilleskie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Effects of State Medicaid Policies on the Dynamic Savings Patterns of the Elderly
Lara Gardner and Donna Gilleskie
NBER Working Paper No. 12208
April 2006
JEL No. I1, I3

                                            ABSTRACT

States have considerable flexibility in determining Medicaid policies such as financial eligibility
criteria, subsidies for home- and community-based services, and reimbursements rates to skilled
nursing facilities, among other things. An understanding of how differences in Medicaid programs
across states and time affect the elderlys' demand for Medicaid coverage of long-term care is
necessary for evaluating future changes in the Medicaid program structure. We use data from the
1993, 1995, 1998, and 2000 waves of the Asset and Health Dynamics of the Elderly and variation
in state Medicaid policies over time to estimate our dynamic framework capturing the sequential
asset and gift decisions that determine eligibility for Medicaid. We also model the long-term care
decisions of married and single individuals conditional on endogenous insurance coverage and health
transitions. To control for the impact of unobserved heterogeneity in all outcomes, the structural
equations of the empirical model are estimated jointly, allowing for correlation in the error structure
across equations and over time. In this paper we focus on the asset and gifting decisions of the
elderly over time. We find that many of the Medicaid policy variables that differ across states have
a significant but small effect on the savings decisions of the elderly, with single elderly individuals
exhibiting more response than married elderly individuals.

Lara Gardner
Florida Atlantic University
The College of Business
Fleming West 137
Boca Raton, FL 33431-0991
lbryant@fau.edu

Donna Gilleskie
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
CB #3305, 6B Gardner Hall
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
and NBER
donna_gilleskie@unc.edu
                                                                                                                2


                                               I. Introduction

    At the beginning of the 21st century an elderly person who anticipates the need for long-term

care faces average annual costs of $35,000 to $100,000 to live in a skilled nursing facility, and

between $7,500 and $33,444 to receive home- and community-based services. 1 Long-term care

(LTC) services are likely to be the largest catastrophic expenses facing the elderly because most

LTC services are not covered by Medicare or private insurance. 2 Elderly individuals and their

families spent almost $42 billion on LTC services in 2000 while Medicaid LTC expenses

amounted to $44 billion. Medicaid is available only to individuals with income and assets below

state-specific limits, and in some states, to those with medical expenses that reduce wealth below

a qualifying limit.

    While Medicaid is available to many low-income elderly, it is increasingly becoming an option

for the middle-class elderly due to the high costs of long-term care and increased longevity.

Economic theory predicts that an asset-based, means-tested insurance program with a deductible

equal to one’s wealth creates strong incentives for elderly individuals who anticipate the need for

expensive LTC to transfer their assets in order to become eligible for Medicaid (Hubbard, et al.,

1994; Sloan, et al., 1996). Such a transfer also allows the elderly to protect their bequeathable

wealth.    Some eligible individuals, however, do not apply for Medicaid due to a lack of

information and/or understanding of the Medicaid application process, or because of a stigma

associated with receiving Medicaid payments. In fact, if an elderly person is welfare averse, she

may accumulate wealth instead of transferring assets, perhaps by increasing savings and

lowering consumption. By accumulating wealth she can pay for future medical expenses from

1
  These cost estimates are based on the MetLife Mature Market Institute Survey 2002 found at
http://cgi.money.cnn.com/tools/elder_care/elder_care_cost_finder.html. Louisiana has the lowest and New York,
the highest cost.
2
  Very few employer-provided health insurance plans cover long-term care. Although private LTC insurance
policies exist, they are very expensive and held by few elderly individuals.
                                                                                                   3

private savings for a longer period of time and avoid dependence on Medicaid.

 This paper investigates the influences of health and the variation in state Medicaid policies on

the savings patterns, insurance coverage, and long-term care decisions of elderly persons who

anticipate the need for long-term care.      States have considerable flexibility in determining

policies that affect the attractiveness of receiving Medicaid coverage for long-term care (Norton,

2000; U.S. General Accounting Office, 1990). Although states must adhere to federal guidelines

when designing a Medicaid program, there are large variations in Medicaid policies across states.

  Medicaid policies are explained in Section II. In Section III we develop a dynamic stochastic

model that provides a framework for understanding the savings and insurance decisions and

long-term care arrangements of elderly individuals with uncertain health paths. We hypothesize

that the rules for eligibility, reimbursement to providers, supply restrictions and the generosity of

home-care programs significantly influence savings behavior and the decision to enroll in

Medicaid. Specific questions of interest include: 1) Do Medicaid policies have a clear impact on

the savings patterns of elderly individuals? Are people spending down or saving when they

perceive the need for care? 2) What are the effects of Medicaid policies on the probability of

enrolling in Medicaid?

 To answer these questions we estimate a dynamic empirical model, detailed in Section IV, that

captures the simultaneity and endogeneity of decision making about insurance, long-term care,

and asset allocations over time. The empirical model uses data from the 1993, 1995, 1998, and

2000 waves of the Assets and Health Dynamics of the Elderly. We also conduct simulations of

behavior using the estimated parameters of the model to allow us to explore the effects of

Medicaid policy changes on the choice variables. The data are described in Section V, and in

Section VI the estimation and simulation results are analyzed. Section VII concludes.
                                                                                               4

                                       II. Background

 In February 2006 President Bush signed the Deficit Reduction Act, which changed the asset

transfer rules for Medicaid coverage of long-term care.            The new rules reflect the

Administration’s strong belief that middle-class and wealthy seniors are transferring assets to

relatives to impoverish themselves, and then qualifying for Medicaid to pick up their nursing

home bills. Prior to the Act a person had to wait three years after transferring assets to become

eligible for Medicaid. Now states can look for asset transfers over the prior five years, and the

ineligibility period does not start until one applies for Medicaid. Also, whereas the primary

home was not counted towards Medicaid eligibility, under the new law if you have more than

$500,000 in home equity, you cannot qualify for Medicaid coverage. And, if you are single and

have Medicaid long-term care coverage, the government will supplant your children or other

loved ones as the secondary beneficiary. The Bush administration expects to generate $100

million in annual savings with these measures.

 Policy-makers’ beliefs that the elderly are transferring assets to qualify for Medicaid is

reinforced by recent theoretical work that suggests that Medicaid nursing home coverage could

have large negative effects on the personal savings of the elderly who anticipate the need of

nursing home care (Hoerger, Picone, and Sloan, 1996; Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1995;

Norton, 1995). Studies have also found that there is little enforcement of restrictions on the

transfer of assets, and, in fact, there exists a network of professionals to help the elderly

successfully shield their assets from Medicaid (Moses, 1990; Sloan and Shayne, 1993).

 However, there is little empirical evidence on the extent to which the elderly actually do

transfer assets for Medicaid eligibility. The view that many elderly people become Medicaid

recipients after staying in a nursing home is inconsistent with the empirical evidence that

comparatively few persons switch to Medicaid after being admitted (Spence and Weiner, 1990;
                                                                                                              5

Liu, Doty, and Manton, 1990). Using data from two different samples of the elderly, Norton

(1995) found the actual time of spend-down was much longer than a predicted time of spend-

down absent of behavioral effects, indicating that the elderly try to avoid Medicaid eligibility.

    Policy-makers are still debating proposals for altering the public financing of long-term care

because of the high costs of LTC and the projected large growth in the number of elderly. Over

the next three decades the number of elderly is projected to more than double, rising from 35

million in 2000 to more than 70 million in 2030 (Tilly, et al., 2001). This is likely to result in a

significant increase in the demand for LTC despite recent declines in disability rates among the

elderly. 3 The aim of recent policy proposals is to help contain costs while still helping those in

need of assistance. Traditionally, the strategies used by states to control Medicaid costs have

been to tighten eligibility rules, lower payments to providers, limit supply of services, and

eliminate coverage of services. Yet further reductions in eligibility, reimbursement, and service

coverage could result in many elderly persons not receiving the care they need.                              An

understanding of how changes in Medicaid rules will influence utilization and costs is therefore

crucial to the effectiveness of proposals for changes in public financing of LTC. Awareness of

how current differences in Medicaid programs across states affect the demand for and supply of

LTC, via eligibility and take up of Medicaid, will lead to better predictions of the effects of

future changes in the Medicaid program structure.

                                  A. Long-Term Care Coverage Options

    Unlike Medicare, which is a federally administered program, Medicaid is directed by each state

under broad federal guidelines. States determine eligibility requirements, available services,

reimbursement rates to providers, and restrictions on construction of nursing homes. Lack of

Medicaid coverage can impose substantial financial burdens on low- to middle-income aged
3
 The Urban Institute predicts that the number of persons age 85 and older receiving home care services and
institutional care will rise from 7.4 million in 2000 to 15 million in 2050 (Tilly, et al., 2001).
                                                                                                                       6

persons because Medicare and most private supplemental insurance plans do not cover long-term

care. Medicare covers up to a maximum of 100 days of care in a skilled nursing facility, and

only for persons who have had a prior hospital stay that lasted at least three days. The high costs

of obtaining private insurance for long-term care make it unavailable to most elderly, and there

are often barriers to coverage such as limits due to preexisting conditions.

                                              B. Medicaid Benefits

    There are two mandatory benefits that must be covered by all states and two optional services.

Nursing home care and home health care are the two mandatory benefits. 4 Medicaid influences

the demand for these types of care by establishing eligibility policies that determine the prices of

care, and by limiting access to care. States also have the option of providing Medicaid coverage

for home- and community-based services and/or personal care services. Financial eligibility

requirements for Medicaid programs are discussed in Section III.

    The home- and community-based services (HCBS) waiver program is the primary mechanism

for providing Medicaid funded, community-based, long-term care services. In response to

criticism of Medicaid’s institutional bias, the program provides federally-matched funding and

allows state to “waive” certain Medicaid statutory requirements so that they can expand HCBS

and reduce the use of institutional care. Since the primary goal of the HCBS Waiver is to offer

alternatives to institutionalization, HCBS may only be offered to persons who meet the

institutional level-of-care criteria. 5 This requirement was established in response to concerns

that long-term care expenditures might increase if many individuals who would not otherwise

use nursing home care would use HCBS. From 1992 to 1999, Medicaid expenditures on HCBS

4
  Federal regulations require that home health services include nursing services, home health aides, medical
supplies, medical equipment, and appliances suitable for use in the home. States have the option of providing
additional therapeutic services under home health, including physical therapy. An individual is not required to meet
a state’s nursing facility level-of-care criteria in order to receive home health benefits.
5
  Services covered under waiver programs usually include: case management, homemaker, home health aide,
personal care, adult day health, habilitation, and respite care.
                                                                                                                    7

Waivers for the aged and disable increased 270% (based on HCBS data). 6 In 2000 all states had

at least one waiver program for the aged.

    States also have a very high level of discretion to determine who will receive the other optional

benefit, personal care services. 7 The only federal rule is that the state must make the service

equally available to all recipients who satisfy the service criteria that have been set. In 2000, 27

states covered personal care services under their Medicaid state plans.

                                   II. The Dynamic Behavioral Model

                                           A. Overview and Timing

    In the beginning of each period an elderly individual (age 65 or older) observes her health state

and assets from the previous period. Given her Medicaid eligibility, an individual chooses either

to be insured by Medicare health insurance only, to supplement it with private insurance with or

without long-term care coverage, or to enroll in Medicaid. Health in the current period is then

realized and the individual decides on her long-term care arrangement and asset allocations. The

per-period decisions depend on endogenous previous decisions or realizations, observed

exogenous characteristics, and relevant policy variables. Hence the framework captures the

dynamic optimization behavior of individuals over time.

                                         B. The Per-Period Decisions

    All individuals are assumed to be covered by both Part A and Part B of Medicare. 8 Because

Medicare covers short stays in a nursing home following a hospital stay but does not provide

residence in a nursing home and only covers limited home health care, an elderly individual may


6
   See http://www.hcbs.org/hcbs_data.htm
7
   Since the mid-1970s, states have had the option to offer personal care services under the Medicaid state plan.
Personal care services may span provision of assistance not only with Activities of Daily Living (ADLs), but also
with Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs), such as personal hygiene, light housework, laundry, meal
preparation, transportation, grocery shopping, using the telephone, medication management, and money
management.
8
  In fact, 95% of the sample in this analysis are enrolled in the optional Part B.
                                                                                                             8

choose to supplement this government-provided health insurance. Each individual has the option

to hold no additional insurance (i=0), to purchase private insurance that does not cover long-term

care (i=1), or to purchase private insurance that does cover long-term care (i=2). Conditional on

her assets, she may also be eligible for Medicaid (i=3), which does cover long-term care

arrangements. (Medicaid eligibility is discussed in detail in sub-section F.) The individual’s

health insurance choice determines her financial out-of-pocket responsibility for subsequent

medical care consumption. The indicator d ti = 1 if insurance alternative i is chosen in period t

                                                                               ( )
                                                                              I Atu−1
and   d ti   = 0 , otherwise. Alternatives are mutually exclusive such that    ∑d
                                                                               i =0
                                                                                        i
                                                                                        t   = 1, ∀t = 1,...T ,


where I is the insurance choice set available to an individual in period t. This choice set depends

on her unprotected assets entering the period, Atu−1 , which determine Medicaid eligibility.

 Having chosen health insurance, the individual then realizes her current health state.

Conditional on her health insurance, health, and previous assets, she decides upon her long-term

care arrangement and allocation of current period assets. The LTC options are no care (k=0),

informal home care (k=1), formal home care (k=2), or nursing home care (k=3), where d tk = 1

indicates that arrangement k is chosen in period t; d tk = 0 otherwise. Alternatives are mutually

                         3
exclusive such that     ∑d
                        i =0
                               t
                                k
                                    = 1, ∀t = 1,...T .


 An individual chooses the amount of her assets to hold in the form of “countable assets,” which

are used to determine if an individual meets the Medicaid asset limit. Although what is included

in countable, or unprotected assets, Atu , varies slightly across states, in most cases it includes all

wealth except the value of the primary home, transportation, and some life insurance.

 An individual also chooses how much of her assets to give away as “gifts.” This “gifts”
                                                                                                                    9

decision, Atg , is modeled in order to capture attempts by the individual to transfer wealth to

become eligible for Medicaid. The variable includes gifts given to friends and relatives, money

given to charity, and home improvements. Thus, “gifts” are exempt from Medicaid eligibility,

and cannot be liquidated by the individual for consumption expenditures. This framework

allows previous assets and their return, (1 + rt )Atu−1 , as well as other current period income, to be

allocated in period t between consumption (Ct ) , savings (Atu ) , and gifts (Atg ) . 9

                                                  C. Uncertainty

  The per-period decisions depend on the history of the individual up to the current period. This

history defines the state at which an individual enters a new period; that is, the information that

she has at the beginning of the period. The endogenous state variables include health ht −1 ,

insurance status d ti−1 , LTC arrangement d tk−1 , and countable assets Atu−1 in the previous period. 10

A vector of demographic characteristics that are assumed to be exogenous, X t , including age,

gender, race, ethnicity, education, marital status, and an indicator for a change in marital status

from married to single, is also known at the beginning of the period. We also assume that the

                                          (                    )
individual knows all prices, Pt = rt , pti , ptm , ptn , Ot , which are defined below. Individuals are

    9
      Although a home is generally not counted towards Medicaid eligibility, the home is technically subject to
transfer prohibitions; a person entering a nursing home is allowed to transfer his/her home only to a spouse, minor or
disabled child, or in some circumstances, sibling or adult child. Previous research suggests that most elderly persons
hold the majority of their savings in the form of housing (Venti and Wise, 1991). Housing assets are not used to
determine Medicaid eligibility before Feb. 2006. Other types of savings that are protected from Medicaid include
life insurance, burial plot, and car value up to some small amount. Of these protected assets, housing value
comprises the largest proportion. For the purpose of this analysis, variations in housing value is taken as given.
That is, the model does not explicitly allow for the individual’s decision to sell (or buy) a home and housing wealth
is not included in the measurement of assets. Previous research documents that persons 65 and over simply do not
move very often (Venti and Wise 1989a, 1989b). In the AHEAD data, 75% of the sample own a home at the start of
the survey (1993). Of these, less than 4% (who are still alive in 2000) sold their homes.
       10
          The length of time an individual has received a particular type of LTC could also influence the physical and
emotional transaction costs involved in switching to a new long-term care arrangement. For example, the search
costs of finding a provider of formal home care or institutional care, or the comfort established with an informal
provider, may inhibit the search for formal and/or institutional care. Or, if an individual has received any type of
care over a significant period of time she may develop a dependence on care and therefore be unwilling (or unable)
to function without such help. Because the data set used for the empirical analysis does not provide this information
prior to the initial survey, we do not formally include duration in a particular LTC arrangement as a state variable.
                                                                                                  10

also aware of Medicaid policies in their state, Qts . The state vector entering period t is denoted

  zt = (ht −1 , d ti−1 , d tk−1 , Atu−1 , X t Pt , Qts ) .

  Health evolves each period and is stochastic. The period t health state is denoted ht , taking on

values 0 to H, where increasing values indicate worsening health. For simplicity of exposition,

let ht = 0 indicate good health, ht = 1 indicate bad health, and ht = 2 indicate death. Conditional

on survival to period t, the probability of health state h in period t is

  π th = p (ht = h | ht −1, d tk−1 , d ti , X t , μ )                                            (1)

and is modeled as a time-varying Markov probability of transitioning from one health state to

another health state that depends on individual demographic factors and decisions made in the

previous period. The probability of death at the end of period t (i.e., of not surviving to period

t+1), γ t +1 , is defined similarly as

  γ t +1 = p (ht +1 = 2 | d ti , ht , d tk , X t ) .                                             (2)

  The type of long-term care a person received in the previous period, d tk−1 , may impact current

period health. If an elderly individual needs help with bathing, walking, eating or other ADLs,

she may hurt herself by not receiving the required care. For example, she may fall while trying

to walk or trying to enter/exit a bathtub alone. A care provider can also help an elderly person to

properly take medications, which would influence health.             The dependence of the health

probability on the insurance choice, d ti , is intended to capture the effect of other endogenous

medical care inputs which are affected by insurance coverage.

  There is also a random shock to health that is unobserved at the beginning of the period. The

shock to health occurs after the insurance decision, so in each period t the choice of insurance is

based on expectations of health shocks in the period. After the health state has been observed,
                                                                                                          11

the LTC arrangement and assets decisions are made and the individual then updates expectations

of future health shocks and observes transitions in the state variables. Conditional on these

transitions and updated expectations, the individual repeats the decision process in the next

period, if she survives.

                                 D. Per-Period Utility and Budget Constraint

  An individual derives utility directly from the choice of long-term care arrangement, gifts, and

consumption, conditional on the insurance choice. Utility is a function of these observables and

an error term that is health and choice specific: U h (C t , d tk , Atg , X t , ε thkgu ) , where consumption

Ct is determined in the budget constraint below. She first chooses health insurance which

potentially reduces income, or cash on hand, Yt c . That is,


                                   ( )
  Yt c = Yt + (1 + rt )Atu−1 − pti d ti                                                                  (3)

                                                                                      ( )
where Yt is earned and non-earned income, rt is the interest rate, and pti d ti is the price (or

premium) associated with insurance choice i. She then allocates this cash on hand to her chosen

long-term care arrangement (whose prices depend on insurance status) and savings, gifts, and

consumption. Her budget is also reduced by exogenous out-of-pocket medical expenses (Ot )

that are determined by health status and health insurance coverage. The budget constraint is

             ( )                  ( )                (       )
  Yt c = ptm d ti × d tk = 2 + ptn d ti × d tk =3 + Ot d ti , ht + Atu + Atg + C t                       (4)

where ptm and ptn are the individual’s costs of home care and nursing home care at time t,

respectively. These prices are a function of the parameters of the insurance plan i. The gifts

constraint is Atg ≥ 0.

                                          E. The Optimization Problem

  To reiterate, an individual chooses insurance at the beginning of the period, based on health
                                                                                                                                   12

and other events in the previous period. Health in the current period is then realized and the

individual makes the LTC choice and asset allocations. Utility is a function of these variables,

consumption, and an error term that is specific to the health, long-term care arrangement, and

asset decisions.

  Conditional on the choice of health insurance and the health state realization, the objective of

an individual is to choose the type of long-term care arrangement and asset allocation so as to

maximize her expected present discounted value (EPDV) of lifetime utility, subject to her budget

constraint. The value of choosing long-term care arrangement k and asset allocation u and g in

period t, conditional on health insurance d ti and health in period t, ht , is

             (                 )              (                         )
  V kgu z t , ε thkgu | d ti , ht = U h Ct , d tk , Atg , X t , ε thkgu + β [γ t +1 B(z t +1 ) + (1 − γ t +1 )W ( z t +1 )] , ∀t   (5)

where β is the discount factor and γ t +1 is the probability of survival to period t+1. If the

individual dies, she receives the value of death which may be a function of her assets, B(zt ) .
This formulation allows for a bequest motive among the elderly. If she survives, her future value
of lifetime utility, W (z t ), captures the subsequent insurance decision, health transitions, and

long-term care, gifts and assets decisions. More specifically, the maximal value of lifetime
utility in period t, conditional on insurance and health, is


     (               )          [                     (                     )
  V z t | d ti , ht = E t −1 max kgu V kgu z t , ε tkgu | d ti , ht , ∀k , g , u ,             ]         ∀t
                                                                                                                                   (6)


where E []
         ⋅ is the expectations operator over the distribution of ε tkgu . The value of choosing

health insurance option i at the beginning of the period is

         (       )       (         )              (          )
                                       H
  W i z t , ε ti = U i ht −1 , ε ti + ∑ π thV z t | d ti , ht ,       ∀t                                                           (7)
                                       h =0



where U i (⋅) represents preferences for insurance and π th represents health transition

probabilities. Finally, the maximal value of lifetime utility at the beginning of period t is
                                                                                                  13



                  [           (       )      ]
  W ( z t ) = Et −1 max i W i z t , ε ti , ∀i ,                 ∀t.
                                                                                                 (8)


The insurance decision represented by W (z t ) embeds the availability of Medicaid as an

insurance option. The individual’s choices in previous periods interact with the Medicaid policy

variables to determine eligibility.

 The effects of the Medicaid policy variables and other exogenous variables on the outcomes of

interest are difficult to derive because they depend (importantly) on the history of the many

(discrete and continuous) choices. In Section VI, we describe results from a series of simulations

that predict an individual’s per-period decisions under various Medicaid policy changes. By

evaluating changes in the outcomes of interest under various Medicaid policy scenarios, we

recover the unconditional impact of Medicaid policies on the outcomes of interest.

                                             F. Eligibility for Medicaid

 A person living in state s must meet either the categorically needy or medically needy income

and asset limits to be eligible for Medicaid. These state-determined asset limits may be different

for the categorically needy and the medically needy programs. Also, the financial eligibility

requirements for the mandatory services, nursing home and home care, are identical, but the

financial eligibility requirements for the HCBS Waivers can be the same or different from the

financial eligibility requirements for the mandatory services.

 To be eligible for a state’s categorically needy program, income must be below the income
                                                 cat
limit for the categorically needy, Y t , s (for state s in time t) and assets must be below the state

                 u ,cat
asset limit, At ,s . Therefore, eligibility for Medicaid in a state that does not have a medically

                                              u ,cat                  cat
needy program requires that Atu ≤ At , s               and Yt ≤ Y t , s in state s.

 However, if an elderly person has income or assets that exceed the categorically needy limits,
                                                                                                                    14

she may still qualify for Medicaid if the state has a medically needy program. 11 Eligibility for

Medicaid in a state that does have a medically needy program also requires that assets are below

                                                u , med
the program’s asset limit, Atu ≤ At ,s                    , but the income requirements are more complicated. A

medically needy program allows the individual to deduct medical expenses from income to

determine eligibility for Medicaid. Medical expenses are covered by Medicaid at time t if

       [                                 ]
Yt − Ot (⋅) + ptm d tk = 2 + ptn d tk =3 ≤ Y t , s
                                               u , med
                                                         , where ptm , ptn , Ot are out-of-pocket medical expenses

related to formal home care, nursing home care, and other medical expenses, respectively. If a

state does not have a medically needy program, individuals with income above the categorically

needy income threshold are ineligible for Medicaid even if they do not have enough income to

pay the cost of long-term care. 12

     In addition to the financial eligibility requirements, to be eligible for HCBS elderly individuals

must meet institutional level-of-care criteria. 13                    This is a statutory requirement added by

Congress in part to address concern about the cost of expanding HCBS: states must demonstrate

that they are providing waiver services only to people who are eligible for institutional

placement.

     Although the financial eligibility requirements for HCBS Waivers are important in determining

the use of HCBS, studies have suggested that Medicaid policies that most influence the demand

for home care under HCBS waiver coverage are the number of persons a state covers under a

waiver and the amount of income and assets a person or couple may retain while receiving
11
   Asset and income limits for both the categorically needy and the medically needy programs in each state are
detailed in Appendix Table A1.
12
   States that do not have a medically needy program are required to allow elderly persons to establish a Miller Trust,
which is designed for those whose income is over the income limit, but who do not receive enough monthly income
to pay for nursing care costs. Although this is available, few elderly use this option (Taylor, Sloan, and Norton,
1999).
13
   Level-of-care criteria explicitly describe the type and level of functional limitations or needs an individual must
have in order to be admitted to an institutional setting. These criteria usually include measures of need for
assistance with Activities of Daily Living (dressing, eating, bathing, toileting, walking, in/out of bed) and for other
services, including nursing and medically related services.
                                                                                                                 15

HCBS coverage. In every state, once eligibility for HCBS Waivers is determined, the state then

calculates how much income and assets the individual may retain based on the state’s maximum

limits. These ‘maintenance needs allowances (MNAs)’ vary significantly across states. States’

MNAs are shown in the first column of Appendix Table A2.

                                         IV. The Empirical Specification

                                              A. Equation System

  An individual maximizes lifetime utility subject to the budget constraints and borrowing

constraints. The individual’s observed decisions are expected to be the ones that jointly provide

the greatest EPDV of lifetime utility (equations 5 and 7 from Section III). From (7) and the

assumption that ε ti enters additively and has an Extreme Value distribution, W ( z t ) is the
                                                                                                       i




                                                             That is, W (z t ) = W i (z t , ε ti ) − ε ti .
                                                                             i
deterministic component of the value function.                                                                These

assumptions yield a multinomial logit probability of each insurance option where

                            ( zt )
                        i

                  eW
  p (d = 1) =
      i
      t          3
                                     .                                                                          (9)
                ∑e      W ( zt )
                              i



                i '=0



W (z t ) can be approximated by an n th order Taylor series expansion of its argument z t . In
  i




order to consider permanent and time-varying heterogeneity that may influence the insurance

decision as well as other decisions and health transitions in the model, we decompose the error

term ε ti into three components. More specifically, ε ti = ρ1i μ + ω1iυ t + u ti              where μ and υ t

represent permanent and time-varying individual unobservables, respectively, and ρ1i and ω1i

are factor loadings on the heterogeneity terms. Also, uti is the remaining i.i.d. Extreme Value

distributed error.

  If people are modifying their behavior to satisfy eligibility criteria, as the model suggests, then
                                                                                                                          16

ignoring the endogeneity of eligibility may bias results. Thus, it is more appropriate to model the

decision to participate in Medicaid in each period only for persons who are eligible for

Medicaid. 14 All persons who choose not to enroll in Medicaid would choose among the other

insurance options only. Thus, we estimate insurance probabilities for i = 0, 1, 2 as in Equation

(4), conditional on not enrolling in Medicaid. W ( z t ) is approximated as
                                                                           i




     W ( z t ) ≈ α 0i + α 1i ht −1 + α 2i Atu−1 + α 3i Qts + α 4i X t + α 5i Et + ρ1i μ + ω1iυ t
           i
                                                                                                                        (10)

where ht −1 and Atu−1 are endogenous lagged health and assets, Qts is a vector of Medicaid policy

variables that influence the expected financial benefits of eligibility and access to care in state s,

X t is a vector of demographic variables assumed to be exogenous: marital status, age, gender,

race, education, an indicator for a change in marital status, and number of children, and E t is an

indicator for Medicaid eligibility based on assets at the end of the current period. Unobserved

permanent and time-varying individual heterogeneity is captured by μ and υ t . The probability

of enrolling in Medicaid, estimated on all individuals due to data limitations on accurate

measurement of eligibility, is


       (                  )
     p d ti =3 = 1 | μ , υ t =
                                       (
                                   exp α 03 + α 13 ht −1 + α 23 Atu−1 + α 33 Qts + α 43 X t + ρ 2 μ + ω 2υ t   )        (11)
                                           (
                                 1 + exp α 03 + α 13 ht −1 + α 23 A u
                                                                   t −1   + α 33 Q + α 43 X t + ρ 2 μ + ω 2υ t
                                                                                  t
                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                   )
     Unobserved heterogeneity is likely to influence insurance decisions as well as decisions

regarding long-term care arrangement, gifts, and savings.                                     Similarly, it may affect health

transitions. For example, an individual who is highly risk averse will be more likely to buy long-


14
  Because of the two or three year lag between waves in the AHEAD data, basing eligibility for Medicaid on lagged
asset levels is potentially incorrect. That is, some individuals spend down their assets between waves and hence
become eligible during the two or three year gap. Individuals in the sample report receiving Medicaid coverage at
time t, when asset levels in t-1 are above the Medicaid eligibility limit. Hence, we include all individuals in the
equation capturing the Medicaid participation decision. Those who did not enroll in Medicaid face the other three
insurance options. We include a dummy variable indicating Medicaid eligibility (according to lagged assets) in the
multinomial insurance equation.
                                                                                                                     17

term care insurance and to save more. Or an individual may have unobserved knowledge of her

genetic disposition that influences her decisions. If someone anticipates failing health, she may

also expect to be unable to manage her personal finances in the future, and to need significant

long-term care. Thus she may give gifts to her children to acquire informal care and/or as a way

of qualifying for Medicaid to cover long-term care expenses.                                     Hence, health insurance

probabilities are estimated jointly with health, survival and long-term care probabilities, and gift

and asset levels.

     Although health is described in the behavioral model as being dichotomous, the data provide

enough information to model health as a continuous variable. The health variable used in this

analysis is an index constructed from a raw score of the total difficulty with Activities of Daily

Living (ADLs) and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs): one point for a difficulty

with an IADL and two points for a difficulty with an ADL. The raw score is converted to an

index by taking the log of values created by the formula: 10*(respondent’s score)/(highest score–

lowest score). 15 Thus, conditional on being alive in period t, an individual’s health is defined as

     ht = β 0 + β 1ht −1 + β 2 d ti−1 + β 3d tk−1 + β 4 X t + ρ 3 μ + ω3υ t + ε th                                  (12)

where ε th is an independent and identically distributed error term. The insurance choice and

long-term care arrangement in the previous period are endogenous explanatory variables. The

probability of not surviving to period t+1 is


     p(ht +1 = H | μ , υ t ) =
                                        (
                                   exp δ 0 + δ 1 ht + δ 2 d ti + δ 3 d tk + δ 0 X t + ρ 4 μ + ω 4υ t)
                                            (
                                 1 + exp δ 0 + δ 1 ht + δ 2 d ti + δ 3 d tk + δ 0 X t + ρ 4 μ + ω 4υ t   )          (13)


     Conditional on insurance and health, the individual chooses a long-term care arrangement. The

probability that in individual chooses LTC alternative k is



15
 This index is from McClellan (1998).
                                                                                                                                                18


                           exp⎛⎜ϕ + ϕ h + ϕ d i + ϕ Au + ϕ A + ϕ Q s + ϕ X + ρ 5k μ + ω 5k υ ⎞⎟
                                                                             g
                               ⎝  0 k   1k  t   2  k   t    3 k   t   4 k   t   5k t      6k t                    t ⎠ (14)
  p⎛⎜ d k = 1 | μ , υ ⎞⎟ =                                                                                           .
    ⎝  t             t ⎠       3      ⎛                         u         g        s                              ⎞
                              ∑ exp⎜ ϕ 0k ' + ϕ1k ' ht + ϕ 3k At + ϕ 4k At + ϕ 5k Qt + ϕ 6k X t + ρ 5 μ + ω 5 υ t ⎟
                                                                                                    k'      k'

                            k' = 0    ⎝                                                                           ⎠

The continuous values of the observed assets and gifts variables are given by

  Atu = λu0 + λ1u ht + λu2 d ti + λu3 X t + ρ 6 μ + ω 6υ t + ε tu                                                                              (15)

and

  Atg = λ 0g + λ1g ht + λ 2g d ti + λ3g X t + ρ 7 μ + ω 7υ t + ε tg                                                                            (16)

where ε tu and ε tg are i.i.d. error terms.

                                                           B. Likelihood Function

The likelihood function for individual n reflects the probabilities of the observed insurance

choice, the observed health state conditional on being alive, the observed LTC arrangement,

asset allocation, and death over the four waves of the survey. Tn is the number of periods the

person is alive, or observed in the sample. Conditional on the unobserved heterogeneity, the

contribution to the likelihood function of individual n at time period t is

                                                                                                                                 (         )
                                                                                                                                Ι dnti =3 =0
                                                   (         ) ⎡                                                            ⎤
  Lnt (Θ | μ, υt ) = p(d          = 1| μ, υt )                × ⎢(1− p(d           = 1| μ, υt ))× ∏ p(d = 1| μ, υt )
                                                    i =3                                               2
                           i =3                  Ι dnt   =1                  i=3                             i
                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                      dnt
                           nt                                                nt                              nt             ⎥
                                                                ⎣                                     i =0                  ⎦
                            (                   ) (                         )             (                  )
                                                                                    3
  × f (hnt | μ , υ t ) × u Antu | μ , υ t × g Antg | μ , υ t × ∏ p d ntk = 1 | μ , υ t
                                                                                                              d ntk

                                                                                   k =0
                                                                                                                                               (17)


  × (1 − p ( ht +1 = H | μ , υ t ) )
                                        Ι ( hnt +1 < H )
                                                           p (ht +1 = H | μ , υ t ) Ι (hnt +1 = H )

where Θ is the vector of parameters to be estimated, Θ = (α , β , δ , ϕ , λ , ρ ) , f (⋅), u (⋅), and g (⋅) are

continuous density functions, d nti = 1 if individual n is on insurance plan i at time t, and d ntk = 1 if

individual n chooses long-term care alternative k in period t.

  Significant correlation in unobservable individual traits and preferences across the decision
                                                                                                        19

variables and health presents itself as correlation among the errors in each equation, causing

coefficients on endogenous explanatory variables to be biased if the correlation is unaccounted

for. We approximate the unknown distribution of the heterogeneity with a discrete step function

and “integrate out” with a weighted sum of probabilities. This discrete factor method, developed

by Heckman and Singer (1984) and later extended to simultaneous systems by Mroz and Guilkey

(1992) and Mroz (1999), imposes no distributional assumptions on the unobservables. Instead, it

approximates the distribution of the heterogeneity by a finite number of mass points and

probability weights that are estimated jointly with the other parameters of the model.

 The analysis uses a panel data set collected on the same individuals from the AHEAD in 1993,

1995, 1998, and 2000. Since information on the state variables that explain observed decision

variables in 1993 are unavailable, the 1993 information will serve as initial conditions (t = 0 ).

Initial conditions for health, insurance choice, LTC arrangement, and assets must be modeled

since the period t decisions depend on these values. These initial conditions are modeled as

reduced form equations and depend on the unobserved permanent heterogeneity μ .                        Let

Ι c (R, ϑc , ρ 0 c μ ) represent the probability of observing the value of the cth initial condition, where

R is a vector of explanatory variables, including valid exclusion restrictions, ϑc is the parameter

vector, and ρ 0 c is the factor loading on μ . Thus, the likelihood function for each individual n

unconditional on the unobserved error components μ and υ t is

                     A
                          ⎧C                         Tn
                                                          ⎡B                       ⎤⎫
        Ln (Θ,θ ) = ∑ θ a ⎨∏ Ι c (R, ϑc , ρ 0 c μ a )∏ ⎢∑ θ b Lnt (Θ | μ a , υ bt )⎥ ⎬                (18)
                    a =1  ⎩ c =1                     t =1 ⎣ b =1                   ⎦⎭

where θ a is the vector of probabilities on the A points of support of the heterogeneity

distribution for the permanent unobservable, and θ b is the vector of probabilities in the B points
                                                                                                                     20

of support of the distribution of the time-varying heterogeneity.16 The likelihood function for a

sample of size N is

                        N
           Ln (Θ, θ ) = ∏ Ln (Θ, θ ) .                                                                            (19)
                       n =1


                                            V. Description of Data

     The data for this project are from the 1993, 1995, 1998, and 2000 waves of the Assets and

Health Dynamics of the Elderly (AHEAD). The AHEAD survey is a national panel survey

composed of households in which the head of household is at least 70 years of age. We observe

three transitions, from 1993 to 1995, 1995 to 1998, and 1998 to 2000. The initial survey data, in

1993, are treated as initial conditions.

     Included in the analysis are individuals who: 1) provide a core interview all four waves; or 2)

provided a core interview in periods when alive and surviving relatives answer the exit survey in

the year the individual dies. 17 Observations that do not meet criteria 1) or 2) are dropped so that

a continuous panel of observations can be constructed. Out of 8,449 persons, there are 7,004 that

meet these criteria. Also dropped are the 162 persons under age 65 and 35 persons who are

missing health data in all waves. After these deletions there are 6,807 persons, for a total of

25,011 person-period observations.

                                             A. Individual Variables

     Summary statistics for decision variables, by health category, are shown in Table 1. Additional

information on the sample, not shown in the table, reveals that in 1995 12.0% of the sample is

16
   There is no determinant method for choosing the number of points of support for each type of unobserved
heterogeneity. The final specification is chosen by observing the change in estimates and the likelihood function
value as more points of support are added. The final specification for this model has one permanent and one time-
varying factor, where the permanent factor has four points of support and the time-varying factor has three points of
support. Identification issues are discussed in Appendix A.
17
  If an individual dies between waves, the AHEAD sample design provides for exit interviews with a surviving
spouse, child, or other informant. Of the 6,807 persons included in this analysis, there is a 22% rate of attrition due
to death from 1993 to 2000.
                                                                                                               21

enrolled on Medicaid, while these numbers rise to 12.8% and 14.3% in 1998 and 2000,

respectively. The percent of persons receiving each type of long-term care is very similar among

those with no insurance and private insurance. That is, in 1998 the percent of people receiving

paid home care without insurance, with private insurance without long-term care coverage and

with private insurance with long-term care coverage is 10.0%, 8.6%, and 9.6%, respectively; and

the percent of people living in a nursing home in the same insurance categories is 5.3%, 6.0%,

and 4.5%. Yet, of persons enrolled on Medicaid, 15.5% are receiving paid home care and 27.4%

are living in a nursing home. 18

     AHEAD asks detailed questions on the type and quantity of long-term care. Individuals who

were in a nursing home in the first wave were not included in the survey. However, at

subsequent waves, Wave 1 respondents who are institutionalized continue to be interviewed.

Overall, 5.6% of the sample lives in a nursing home in 1995, 11.5% in 1998, and 13.5% in 2000.

     The asset variables in the AHEAD are collected at the household level. However, one can

distinguish assets of the elderly couple (person) in the household from the assets of other

household members. Our measure of unprotected assets is the sum of stocks, bonds, savings

accounts, business assets, checking and CD accounts, trusts, IRAs, value of secondary real

estate, and other assets, minus all debts. In the empirical model, any person reporting negative

assets is assigned a value of zero assets. Our gifts measures include gifts made to children,

grand-children, friends and others in the preceding year and gifts to charity. We model both the

probability of any assets (and any gifts) and the level of assets (or gifts), if any.

                                     B. Eligibility Policy Variables

     The policy variables used in estimation are defined in Table 2. We differentiate between


18
  Individuals are coded as having received formal or informal care in the community only if they received care at
least twice a week (on average). Formal care is paid and informal care is unpaid. A person is also coded as having
received informal care if she received help with three or more ADLS on a regular basis.
                                                                                                                       22

policy variables that determine eligibility for Medicaid and those that affect availability and

quality of Medicaid services for the elderly in a state. Our measure of the generosity of

Medicaid’s eligibility rules for nursing home care follows Gruber’s (Currie, 1996; Gruber, 1999)

measure in his work on single women and children. We model the impact of Medicaid’s

eligibility criteria for nursing home care by determining the amount of expected nursing home

expenditures that would be covered by the Medicaid program for a given household, in a given

state and time period. Specifically, for each person, we determine a likelihood of being eligible

for nursing home care that is a function of the legislative environment in a state and year but not

related to the demographics of that state (NH Eligibility). 19 Then we proxy the benefits of

eligibility by the average cost of nursing home care in a state and year. The final measure (NH

Generosity) is the probability of nursing home eligibility multiplied by the expected spending on

care for two years (based on the fact that there are two years between the AHEAD survey

waves). This measure of eligibility dollars will vary across households due to differences in state

eligibility rules that differ by household characteristics, and the average costs of care in the state.

     We use two variables to capture the theory that persons who hold assets that are closer to the

asset limit may be more (or less) willing to dispose of assets in order to become eligible for

Medicaid. These are the log amount of assets that one would have to spend/transfer or otherwise

dispose of in period t − 1 in order to be eligible for Medicaid nursing home coverage in period t

(NH $ Loss), and the log amount of assets calculated similarly for Medicaid HCBS coverage

(HCBS $ Loss).

     Within each state the asset limit depends on marital status. If an individual is single the asset


19
   For each year we categorize the entire sample by the four education categories in Table 1. Then we compute the
eligibility of all persons for each state’s rules in that year. The average eligibility is then measured in each marital
status/education/age/state/cell to get a cell-specific eligibility measure. Thus for each year there is an average
eligibility by state, marital status, education level and age category. These averages are then assigned to the whole
sample. There are four age categories used for this procedure: 70-76, 76-81, 81-85, and over 85.
                                                                                                    23

limit is the standard limit for singles shown in Appendix Table A1. However, if the elderly

individual who is applying for Medicaid is married, he/she may transfer a specified amount of

assets to the spouse (if the spouse is not also applying for Medicaid). After transferring assets to

his/her spouse, the elderly individual who is applying for Medicaid may not have assets higher

than the asset limit for single individuals. For example, if the asset limit for a single individual is

$2,000, and the maximum spousal protection limit is $87,000, the asset limit for the spouse

applying for care is $2,000 + $87,000, since the non-Medicaid spouse can retain up to $87,000.

 An important policy issue in a state’s provision of HCBS is to ensure that a Medicaid recipient

and spouse, if present, have enough wealth to live on after their contribution (if any) to home

care. If single, the policy variables that determine the amount of wealth one can retain while

receiving Medicaid coverage are the asset limit for HCBS eligibility and an income

‘maintenance needs allowance (MNA).’ For example, suppose that the MNAt ,s in state s at time

t is $400 and the income limit is $1,200. Also, the price of home- and community-based care per

month is $800.        A person who has an income of $1,100 per month must spend $700

($1100 − MNA ) .
               t ,s   After the individual has paid $700, Medicaid will cover the rest of the cost of

care, which is $100 (i.e., $800 - $700).

 If married, the elderly individual receiving Medicaid HCBS coverage may keep up to the asset

limit and MNAt ,s , and the spouse may keep up to the maximum protected spousal income and up

to the maximum spousal protection asset limit; these limits are shown in Appendix Table A2.

Our policy variable, the ‘HCBS $ Allowable’ was constructed in the same manner as Medicaid

NH eligibility for nursing home care: the residual wealth is computed for each person for each

state’s policies in each year. Then the average residual wealth for each marital status/education/

age/state/cell is assigned to the entire sample for their specific state of residence. HCBS $ Loss
                                                                                                                      24

is analogous to NH $ Loss and is the amount of income and assets an individual would have to

lose to become eligible for Medicaid HCBS.

                                        C. Supply-Side Policy Variables

     States also influence the availability and quality of nursing home care by setting

reimbursement rates to providers and by enforcing Certificate of Need (CON) restrictions and/or

moratoriums that restrict the construction of nursing home beds at the state level. 20 The number

of nursing home beds per 1000 persons age 65 and over captures the effect of any limitation on

supply of nursing home beds (Beds/1000 Elderly). In 1998 the number of beds per 1000 elderly

ranged from 20 in West Virginia to 79 in Indiana, as seen in Appendix Table A3.

     Appendix Table A3 also lists the Medicaid and out-of-pocket payment rates to nursing homes

in 1998, across states. As discussed in previous literature, Medicaid reimburses nursing facilities

at a rate below the private-pay and Medicare payment rate to help lower Medicaid costs of

nursing home care (Wiener, 1996; Gertler, 1992). This discrepancy could lead to access and

quality problems for Medicaid patients. Empirical evidence has suggested that as the payment

differential between private pay and Medicaid patients widens, access problems worsen for

Medicaid beneficiaries (Ettner, 1993; Hoerger et al, 1996).

     We define a measure of the difference between out-of-pocket costs and Medicaid payment

rates for nursing home care (NH Revenue Loss).                       This nursing home revenue loss is an

individual-specific measure of the difference between the revenues a nursing home would

receive if a person never qualified for nursing home care, and the nursing home’s projected


20
  The premise of Certificate of Need or moratorium restrictions as a method of cost-control is based on Roemer’s
Law, which holds that the availability of open-ended, third-party reimbursement allows demand for health care
services to expand to meet whatever supply is available (Wiener et al., 1998). Thus, if a nursing home bed is built,
there is a significant probability that it will be filled by a Medicaid patient, which will lead to higher program costs.
Research evidence also suggests a significantly positive relationship between nursing home use and the ratio of
number of nursing home beds to the elderly population (Hoerger et al., 1996; Greene and Ondrich, 1990; Liu et al.,
1991; Greene et al., 1993).
                                                                                                                    25

revenues if a person becomes eligible for nursing home care during a stay (one wave of the

AHEAD data covers two years). This measure of revenue loss takes into account when the

person would become eligible, predicted probabilities that a person will be alive in each period

from a hazard analysis, and Medicaid’s nursing home reimbursement rates in the state. 21

     The financial eligibility requirements for mandatory home health services and the personal care

option are identical to those for nursing home care, so we model the generosity of a state’s

expenditures on these two services as the ratio of total spending on home health and personal

care to the total amount of spending on nursing home care (HH + Personal $/NH$).

     The HCBS waiver program is the primary mechanism for providing Medicaid funded,

community-based, long-term care services. States’ determination of the number of persons to

cover under a waiver is an important factor in the availability of home care services. To

approximate the availability of HCBS Waiver programs for the elderly, we use the average

HCBS expenditure per eligible elderly person in the state (HCBS $/Elig. Elderly). We proxy

eligibility with receipt of Supplementary Security Income.

     Although Medicare only covers short stays in a nursing home and limited home health

services, there is one aspect of Medicare coverage of home health that is important in the context

of this study. 22 In October 1997 there was a substantial change in Medicare’s reimbursement

policy which has been associated with a large decline in the provision of home care (McKnight,

2002).      The reimbursement policy change involved the imposition of average per-patient

reimbursement caps to home health care agencies. 23 This policy change could give home health

21
   There also may be a perception by individuals that they could not get into a nursing home under Medicaid
coverage. This measure assumes no spend-down or saving behavior by the individual.
22
   Medicare covers care in a skilled nursing facility for up to 100 days, and only for persons who need a skilled level
of care and who have had a prior hospital stay that lasted at least 3 days. Although Medicare does not require a co-
payment for the first 20 days in a nursing home, after the first 20 days the co-payments ($97 a day in 2000) are not
very different from the out-of-pocket cost of care in many facilities.
23
   In particular, caps were constructed as a weighted average of the historical costs per home care user in each
agency and the mean historical costs per home care user in each agency’s census division.
                                                                                                   26

agencies an incentive to reduce per-patient costs. To control for the effects of this change in

Medicare reimbursement to home health care agencies, we include the change in Medicare’s

average payment per patient from the previous period, by state, interacted with a dummy variable

indicating the post-policy period (Medicare $ Change). Thus, for 1995 this variable is zero.

Medicare payment information is from the National Association for Home Care and Hospice

Organization. 24

                                                       VI. Results

     Tables 3a – 3c show selected coefficient estimates from the heterogeneity model. 25 Due to the

underlying dynamics of the model, interpretation of these point estimates is difficult but signs

and significance provide some information about the effects of each variable. To provide a

better understanding of the effects of variables we also present the impacts of simulated changes

in state Medicaid policy variables from 1995 to 2000 in Table 5.

     There are many questions that could be explored with this model. In this paper, our discussion

focuses on the original objectives posed in the introduction: What are the primary determinants

of asset levels and choice of insurance; and what is the relative importance of Medicaid policies

in the dynamic decision-making related to these outcomes.

                                                       A. Medicaid

     According to the results in Tables 3a–3c, persons who are enrolled in Medicaid are more likely

to be enrolled in Medicaid the following period, relative to those with no supplemental

insurance, are more likely to be receiving formal home care or nursing home care than no care,

are less likely to have assets or give gifts, and have lower assets, if any. All results are

significant within a reasonable level, and consistent with previous literature and the theory in



24
     http://www.nahc.org/NAHC/LegReg/Crisis/crisishh.html
25
     Results for all coefficient estimates are available from the authors upon request.
                                                                                                             27

Section III. 26 The effects of Medicaid policy variables on Medicaid enrollment and other choice

variables are discussed below.

                                                     B. Assets

     Assets from the previous period affect the insurance, long-term care, and asset and gift

equations quadratically. Overall the signs of the estimates are as expected: lag assets are

negatively related to Medicaid enrollment; negatively related to receiving informal home care or

nursing home care; and positively related to asset and gift levels. Lag assets have no significant

effect on formal home care. In Table 3b, lower asset levels are significantly related to receiving

Medicaid coverage or having worse health, as are the following demographic characteristics (not

shown): female, Hispanic, non-white, single, lower education levels, and higher numbers of

children.

                                      C. Medicaid Eligibility Policies

                                    Medicaid Nursing Home Generosity

     NH Generosity has a positive effect on the probability of Medicaid enrollment, significant at

the one percent level. In Table 3b, this generosity also has a significantly positive effect on the

probability of holding positive assets and continuous asset levels, and an insignificant effect on

gifts. These results could be interpreted as follows: Higher values of NH Generosity result from

a combination of more generous Medicaid eligibility rules and higher costs of nursing home

care. In states that have more generous eligibility rules relative to other states, people are

allowed to qualify for Medicaid while holding higher asset levels. Thus, persons in states with

more generous eligibility rules may choose to hold as high of assets as allowed under Medicaid

coverage. In other words, these results may suggest that if persons are allowed to hold more



26
 Not shown is that persons who are Hispanic, non-white, older, or single are more likely to be enrolled in
Medicaid; these results are also consistent with previous literature.
                                                                                                                    28

wealth under Medicaid coverage, they will choose to do so. 27

                                              HCBS Dollars Allowable

     The average dollar amount of income and assets one may retain while receiving Medicaid

HCBS coverage is insignificantly related to the probability of Medicaid enrollment. This

supports previous arguments discussed in Section II that the availability of HCBS coverage

within a state, rather than the HCBS financial eligibility rules, may be more relevant to the

Medicaid enrollment decision. Although the retained wealth allowable under HCBS coverage is

significantly positively related to the probability of holding positive assets, it is significantly

negatively related to continuous asset levels. Whereas Medicaid nursing home generosity

encouraged people to hold more assets, Medicaid home care generosity has a negative

relationship with assets. This indicates that spend-down behavior for HCBS eligibility could be

present – as people are allowed to hold more wealth under HCBS coverage, that coverage is

more appealing and people spend down to improve their chances of eligibility.

                                                Dollar Loss Variables

     The nursing home and HCBS dollar losses are constructed as the difference between lag assets

and the Medicaid asset limits for nursing home care and HCBS, respectively. Our theory

suggests that persons whose assets were closer to the eligibility limits in the previous period

would be more likely to be enrolled in Medicaid in the current period. However, both dollar loss

measures are insignificantly related to the probability of Medicaid enrollment. This does not

suggest that spend down behavior may not be occurring, but that those persons currently enrolled

in Medicaid held a wide range of assets in the previous period. This may also be a reflection of

the two to three year gap in the data between last period’s observable assets and current period

enrollment in Medicaid.

27
     We thank the seminar participants at University of Canterbury for drawing our attention to this possibility.
                                                                                                                        29

     The individual-specific dollar loss necessary for Medicaid eligibility for nursing home care,

based on assets in the previous period, is significantly positively related to asset levels and

negatively to gifts. In contrast, the dollar loss necessary for Medicaid HCBS eligibility is

significantly negatively related to asset levels and positively related to gifts. An example may

help to interpret the meaning of these coefficients. Consider two single individuals living in two

different states. Both have assets of $15,000 in period t. 28 The person in state a faces an asset

limit of $10,000 while the person in state b faces an asset limit of $2,000. Assume both are

eligible based on income eligibility and level-of-care requirements. The person in state a faces a

dollar loss of $5,000 in order to obtain Medicaid eligibility, while the person in state b faces a

$13,000 dollar loss in order to obtain Medicaid eligibility. If we view these asset limits as the

resource standards for nursing home coverage, then the person in state a, who has less assets to

lose in order to qualify for Medicaid, will hold less assets in the current period (since there is a

positive relationship between nursing home dollar loss and asset levels). This suggests that

persons who have less assets to lose in order to obtain Medicaid coverage of nursing home care

in period t, will choose to hold less assets in period t+1; in other words, persons who face

relatively higher asset limits may lower assets in order to qualify for Medicaid.

     On the other hand, if we view these asset limits as resource standards for HCBS coverage, then

the person in state a is more likely to hold higher assets in the current period. This could be

interpreted as saying that people who are closer to obtaining Medicaid eligibility (dollar loss for

obtaining eligibility is lower), will hold higher asset levels.

     Why would the individual-specific measure of dollar loss necessary for HCBS coverage have a

negative effect on asset levels when the average measures of HCBS generosity have the opposite

effects? Perhaps the answer is related to the fact that in many states the elderly are on waiting
28
  Note that both lag assets and lag assets squared are included in the estimation, thus controlling for assets in the
previous period.
                                                                                                     30

lists for HCBS coverage. That is, their state of residence has an HCBS waiver program for the

aged, but it only covers a limited number of persons and when that limit is met, remaining

applicants must wait for eligibility. Thus, on average, states that have more generous eligibility

and residual wealth rules will see elderly lower asset levels, given the negative coefficient on

average HCBS generosity within a state in the asset equation; but individually, an elderly person

will not want to lower assets to the low levels necessary for Medicaid HCBS eligibility until that

coverage is available. In fact, the summary statistics in Table 1 show that the percentage of

people in our sample reporting poor health increases with time, but the percent with Medicaid

remains fairly constant.

                               D. Medicaid Supply-Side Variables

                                          Nursing Home

 In Table 3a, the number of beds per elderly within a state is significantly positively related to

Medicaid enrollment and the probability of living in a nursing home (relative to no care); and

significantly negatively related to asset levels. Greater nursing home revenue losses, indicating

lower Medicaid reimbursement rates relative to private pay costs, are significantly negatively

related to the probability of receiving Medicaid coverage, as expected, but have an insignificant

effect on the probability of nursing home care and are significantly negatively related to asset

and gift levels. Theory indicates that as the nursing home revenue loss decreases, the probability

of Medicaid enrollment would increase, as the estimates increase. As this occurs individuals

should lower asset levels, perhaps by increasing gift levels, in order to receive Medicaid

coverage. Although gift levels do increase as the revenue loss decreases, why assets increase is

unclear.

                           Home- and Community-Based Services (HCBS)
                                                                                                                  31

     Both of the supply variables for Medicaid home care, the ratio of spending on home care to

nursing home care and HCBS spending per eligible elderly, have a significantly positive

relationship with Medicaid enrollment, as predicted. Although the long-term care ratio has a

significantly positive relationship with the receipt of paid home care and significantly negative

relationships with asset and gifts levels, the average HCBS spending is insignificantly related to

these both receipt of paid home care and asset levels.

                                                E. Simulations

     Given our estimated dynamic structural model we conduct several simulations in order to

investigate the impacts of the policy variables on behavior over time. The simulation procedure

involves random assignment of permanent heterogeneity at the beginning of 1995 and she retains

this assignment all subsequent periods.               We also randomly draw from the time-varying

heterogeneity distribution at the beginning of 1995, 1998, and 2000 for each person. Based on

the point estimates in each equation, each individual’s observed explanatory variables, and the

random draws from the i.i.d. error distributions, as well as the unobserved permanent and time-

varying individual heterogeneity distributions, predictions are made for the 1995 values of

Medicaid, insurance, health, long-term care, assets, gifts, and deceased outcomes sequentially,

accounting for current period realizations that influence subsequent current period choices (i.e.,

current period health affects current period long-term care utilization). Using these simulated

outcomes, we then recalculate each individual’s Medicaid eligibility status29 and, depending on

the policy simulation, policy variables for 1998. We also update the endogenous right-hand side

variables for 1998 based on the simulated outcomes from 1995. The same procedure is followed

from 1998 to 2000. We perform 50 replications of each individual observed in our sample in

1995. Outcomes are averaged over all person replications alive in the year of interest.
29
  The Medicaid eligibility status must be re-calculated because a dummy variable equal to one if Medicaid eligible is
included in the insurance equation.
                                                                                                                      32

     Before discussing the results of changes in policy variables, we present how accurately the

model predicts the observed outcomes. In Table 4, we show the observed averages from the

data, simulated behavior obtained with the above method without updating the right-hand side

variables (i.e., using observed values of all right-hand side variables), simulated behavior when

right-hand side variables are updated (i.e., using simulated values of all right-hand side

variables), and simulations by mass point. 30 The model fits the observed outcomes quite well.

For dichotomous variables most of the updated simulations are within two percentage points of

the observed outcomes; and for the continuous variables, all updated simulations are within 0.6

(log) of the observed outcomes.

     Table 5a provides baseline behavior obtained using the estimated model and updating all

explanatory endogenous variables (the table reports Medicaid enrollment and assets and gifts

only). This simulated behavior is categorized by individuals’ observed marital status and asset

category in 1993. The discrete asset categorization corresponds roughly to the 10th, 35th, and 70th

percentiles of the asset distribution of married individuals (i.e., cutoffs of $0, $15,000, and

$150,000) and the 20th, 50th, and 80th percentiles of the asset distribution of singles (i.e., cutoffs

of $0, $10,000, and $100,000). The pattern of results is identical to that found in the observed

data: single persons are more likely to have Medicaid coverage than married persons, they are

less likely to save and gift, and their asset holdings are smaller. Average asset levels of all

individuals increase over time in each category. 31 However, the probability of positive assets

falls. 32

30
  Right-hand side variables that must be updated are the endogenous right-hand side variables, Medicaid eligibility
status, and the difference between lag assets and the Medicaid asset limits. Predictions by mass point do not include
updates of the right-hand side variables.
31
  The latter result is also evident in the observed data, and initially may appear to contract the traditional life-cycle
model prediction that elderly persons decrease assets over time. We do not deflate dollar values in the analysis due
to the fact that asset and income values must be compared to the nominal dollar limits set by each state each year.
However, we examined the real value of assets among those individuals who are alive all years in our data, and asset
levels are a bit more constant between 1998 and 2000, but indicate increases between 1995 and 1998. In addition to
                                                                                                                    33

  We then introduce changes in various Medicaid policies and re-evaluate behavior over time (to

be compared with the baseline). In Table 5b, Medicaid asset and spousal protection limits for

nursing home coverage are doubled in each period (Simulation 1). These institutional changes

alter some of the Medicaid policy variables in our analysis.                       In particular, Medicaid NH

Generosity and Eligibility increase, and the individual-specific dollar loss necessary for

Medicaid eligibility (NH $ Loss) decreases. The average simulated behavioral outcomes are also

categorized by the 1993 marital status and asset category to determine how behavior differs by

these characteristics.

  Medicaid enrollment increases in all years, but the increase is small (between 0.1 and 1.6

percentage points). Single persons have increases in enrollment that are equal to or greater than

married persons in the same asset categories. The increase in enrollment probabilities increases

over time, for all marital status-asset combinations. These relatively small increases in Medicaid

enrollment suggest that other influences, such as welfare aversion and/or bequest motives, create

disincentives for Medicaid participation. The simulated increase in nursing home asset limits

results in higher asset levels and no significant change in gift levels. These results are consistent

with the coefficient estimates in Table 3. Again we theorize that increases in Medicaid nursing

home generosity and decreases in the individual dollar loss required for eligibility lead to

increases in assets because as people are allowed to hold more assets under Medicaid coverage,

they will choose to do so. This theory is reinforced by the fact that although persons in the

‘high’ asset category increase assets by the largest dollar amount, by 1998 and 2000 persons in

the zero and low asset categories have larger percentage increases in assets than those in the

the large increases in stock market value during these years, we believe this result occurs in the full sample because
individuals with the lowest wealth also have the poorest health, on average. Thus as persons who are poorest in
health decease, the average asset levels for the living increase.
32
  We should also note that it has been reported that there is more measurement error in the 1993 AHEAD asset data
than in subsequent waves. Since our categorization is based on 1993 assets, the asset increases over time may
reflect better measurement of assets in later years.
                                                                                                 34

‘high’ category; this result holds for both single and married persons.

  In the next simulation the asset and spousal protection limits for Medicaid coverage of home-

and community-cased services (HCBS) are doubled (Table 8c, Simulation 2). These increases

cause average HCBS $ Allowable to increase and the individual-specific dollar loss necessary

for eligibility to decrease. Although federal law requires spousal protections for nursing home

care, it is an option for HCBS coverage. Thus these simulations are expected to have a larger

impact on the predicted outcomes, since as seen in Appendix Table A2, many states do not have

spousal protection limits under HCBS coverage.

  The results are consistent with the point estimates – the increased generosity of Medicaid

eligibility rules for HCBS coverage leads to decreases in Medicaid enrollment and asset levels in

all categories. However we must recall that the variables increased by this simulation, HCBS $

Allowable and HCBS $ loss, were insignificantly related to both Medicaid enrollment and the

probability of formal care use. Thus only the simulated changes in asset levels should be

considered robust, and these indicate a spend-down behavior to obtain HCBS eligibility when the

eligibility rules are more generous.

 Based on the point estimates in Table 3, the long-term care spending ratio is significantly

related to assets and gifts, and is also significantly positively related to Medicaid enrollment and

the probability of paid home care use is the long-term care spending ratio. We simulated a fifty

percent increase in this ratio for each state (Table 8d, Simulation 3). Medicaid enrollment

increases, although by less than one percentage point in all categories. In 1995, 1998, and 2000

asset levels decrease between 3.3% and 4.9%; 5.1% and 7.2%; and 6.5% and 8.9%, respectively.

                                        VII. Conclusion

 The national budget released by the Bush administration in February 2006 proposes to reduce

Medicaid spending by about $60 billion over the next decade. Included in that plan are measures
                                                                                                   35

expected to reduce assets transfers by the middle- and upper-class elderly who may try to

impoverish themselves in order to receive Medicaid coverage of long-term care. Our goal was to

use existing data on Medicaid and assets to gain an understanding of how differences in

Medicaid rules across states and time influence utilization and costs. Therefore, we undertook a

comprehensive analysis of elderly persons’ insurance, health, long-term care and savings

decisions over time.

   Our results indicate that Medicaid enrollment is significantly related to more generous

eligibility requirements for nursing home care, higher number of beds per elderly within a state,

and smaller differences between Medicaid payment rates to nursing home and the private-pay

costs. In states where people are allowed to qualify for Medicaid nursing home coverage while

holding more wealth, they will choose to hold more assets.

   Our results also indicate that higher levels of state spending on mandatory and personal care,

relative to nursing home care, are positively related to Medicaid enrollment and receipt of formal

home care, and negatively related to assets. Medicaid eligibility rules for HCBS had no effect on

Medicaid enrollment, but were significantly related to lower asset levels, suggesting that people

may spend-down for HCBS coverage.

   Given our estimated dynamic structural model we conducted several simulations in order to

investigate the impacts of the policy variables on behavior over time. Doubling Medicaid

eligibility limits for nursing home coverage increases Medicaid enrollment only slightly. This

increase in Medicaid eligibility generosity results in higher asset levels, but lower probabilities of

any assets, suggesting that people do modify savings behavior in response to Medicaid limits. In

contrast, increases in asset limits for Medicaid coverage of HCBS cause asset levels to decrease,

suggesting a spend-down effect.

 We conclude that the generosities of Medicaid policy structures do influence elderly persons
                                                                                                     36

decisions on whether to enroll in Medicaid for long-term care coverage; including eligibility

policies, HCBS services offered, home care spending, restrictions on construction of nursing

home beds, and reimbursement rates to nursing homes. As the new asset transfer rules in the

Deficit Reduction Act are implemented across all states, elderly persons must be careful of any

asset transfers made up to at least five years before their health deteriorates to where they need

long-term care and perhaps Medicaid coverage.
                                                                                                                            37


Table 1. Descriptive Statistics, by Discrete Health Categorization
                                                                1995                         1998                          2000
Proportion in each                                     Good      Fair    Poor       Good      Fair    Poor        Good     Fair   Poor
Health Category1                                       70.8      16.7    12.5       65.1      17.0    17.8        60.8     18.0   21.2

Endogenous Variables2,3

d ti =3              On Medicaid                         8        16      30           7       14      31           8       16     30

d ti , i = 0,1,2     Supplemental Insurance
                       If not on Medicaid
                     Medicare Only                       25       24      24          30       28      26          31       30     27
                     Private Insurance No LTC            58       55      42          54       52      39          52       48     40
                     Private Insurance with LTC           9        5       4           8        6       4           8        6      3

ht                   Health Index                       0.30     2.92    4.11        0.31     2.97    4.16        0.26     2.92   4.17
    p(ht +1 = H )    Death                              11.0     8.0     8.4         10.2     14.1    25.7        8.1      15.6   34.2


d tk , k = 0,1,2,3   LTC Arrangement
                     No LTC                              92       63      14          89       51      12          91       59     14
                     Unpaid Home Care                     4       27      42           4       29      29           6       17     22
                     Paid Home Care                       1        5      20           1       10      24           2        8     21
                     Nursing Home                         3        5      23           6        9      35           2       16     44

p( Atu > 0)          Any Unprotected Assets              88       82      74          90       85      72          90       82     69
A |A >0
     t
      u
               t
                u
                     Unprotected Assets (000's)         291      157      144        347      244      217         446     289    245
p ( A > 0)t
           g
                     Any Gifts                           53       44       31         55       43       25          54      46     30
Atg | Atg > 0        Gifts (000's)                      9.2      11.6    11.2        68.1     15.0    46.2        16.7     97.2   191.5

Exogenous Variables
Xt             Female                                    60       68      71          60       67      74          62       70     70
               Non-Caucasian                            13       16       21          12       15      20          12      14      20
               Hispanic                                  5        6        6           5        5       8           5       6       7
               No High School Degree                    38       49       61          35       47      60          34      42      56
               High School Graduate                     32       28       22          33       29      24          34      31      24
               Some College                             16       13        9          17       14       9          18      16      11
               College Graduate                         13        9        8          14       10       7          14      11       9
               Single                                   45       57       66          42       55      69          53      64      69
               Age                                      78       81       83          80       82      85          81      84      85
               Number of Children                       2.5      2.6      2.6         2.8      2.8     2.8         2.9     2.8     2.8
1
  Health categorizations: Good: No ADL difficulties and less than 3 IADL difficulties; Fair: Either a) No ADL
  difficulties and difficulty with 3 or more IADLs; or b) difficulty with 1 or 2 ADLs and less than 3 IADL difficulties;
  Poor: Either a) Difficulty with 3 or more ADLs or b) Difficulty with 1 or 2 ADLs and 3 or more IADLs.
2
  Numbers represent percent of the sample in each category in most cases. Means are reported for health index,
  assets if any and gifts if any , and for age and number of children.
3
  Appendix Table A5 lists and defines right-hand side variables constructed from the endogenous variables.
                                                                                                                   38

Table 2. Medicaid Policy Variables

Eligibility Variables:

Enrollee                 Indicator = 1 if individual has Medicaid coverage in the current period.

NH Eligibility           Average probability of eligibility for Medicaid coverage of nursing home care for a marital
                         status/age/education cell.

NH Generosity            The product of average Medicaid eligibility probability within a state for a marital
                         status/age/education cell and the average cost of nursing home care in the state for two years.

                         Individual quantity of assets above eligibility limits for obtaining Medicaid eligibility for nursing
NH $ Loss                home care, based on assets in the previous period and Medicaid eligibility policies in state of
                         residence.

                         Average dollar amount of income and assets one may retain while receiving Medicaid HCBS
HCBS $ Allowable         coverage within a state, for a marital status/age/education cell.

                         Average dollar loss in assets necessary to obtain Medicaid HCBS coverage within a state for a
                         marital status/age/education cell.
HCBS $ Loss


Supply-Side Variables:

Beds/1000 Elderly        Number of Nursing Home beds per 1000 Elderly.

NH Revenue Loss          Amount of lost revenue to a nursing home from accepting the Medicaid payment rate for a patient
                         rather than the private pay rate (over two years).
HH+Personal $ / NH $     State’s ratio of total Medicaid dollars spent on Mandatory Home Care and Optional Personal care
                         to total dollars spent on Nursing Home care.
HCBS $ /Elig. Elderly    Amount of spending on optional home- and community-based waivers for the elderly per eligible
                         elderly. An elderly person is eligible if enrolled in SSI. Not all those eligible are enrolled.
Medicare $ Change        Change in average per-patient Medicare payment to home health agencies as part of the BBA
                         1997; i.e. a value of ‘37’ means the payment dropped by 37%.
                                                                                                             39


Table 3a. Selected Parameter Estimates from the Equation System with Heterogeneity
          Outcome: Medicaid, Health Insurance, and Long-Term Care Arrangement
                                                      Other Insurance             Long-Term Care Arrangement
Explanatory Variables                 Medicaid       Private    Private         Informal    Formal     Nursing
                                                     No LTC     w/ LTC            Care       Care       Home

NH Generosity/10000                     0.072         -0.069         -0.148       -0.004         0.005     0.044
                                       (0.021)        (0.012)       (0.025)      (0.028)        (0.039)   (0.034)
ln(NH $ Loss)                           0.014        -0.030           0.022      -0.017      -0.044       -0.020
                                       (0.020)        (0.018)       (0.037)      (0.015)        (0.021)   (0.019)
HCBS $ Allowable                       -0.041        -0.006           0.031        0.085     -0.079        0.122
                                       (0.067)        (0.040)       (0.071)      (0.068)        (0.074)   (0.078)
ln(HCBS $ Loss)                         0.008        -0.014         -0.048         0.008         0.040     0.006
                                       (0.021)        (0.010)       (0.025)      (0.016)        (0.023)   (0.020)
(Beds/1000 Elderly)/10                  0.034          0.140          0.198      -0.008      -0.013        0.046
                                       (0.022)        (0.014)       (0.025)      (0.021)        (0.029)   (0.023)
NH Revenue Loss/10000                  -0.066        -0.008         -0.030         0.006     -0.012       -0.011
                                       (0.023)        (0.015)       (0.031)      (0.024)        (0.032)   (0.026)
HH + Personal $ / NH $                  0.037          0.045        -0.012       -0.038          0.152     0.013
                                       (0.027)        (0.018)       (0.037)      (0.028)        (0.036)   (0.032)
HCBS $ / Elig. Elderly / 1000           0.064          0.008        -0.022       -0.015          0.008     0.025
                                       (0.028)        (0.018)       (0.035)      (0.031)        (0.038)   (0.030)
Medicare $ Change                       0.102        -0.022           0.034      -0.187      -0.044        0.046
                                       (0.068)        (0.044)       (0.079)      (0.066)        (0.082)   (0.071)
Lag Private Ins. No LTC                -0.899          1.910         1.309
                                       (0.083)        (0.046)       (0.121)
Lag Private Ins. with LTC              -1.435          1.489         3.807
                                       (0.209)        (0.082)       (0.130)
Lag Medicaid                            2.534          0.300          0.952
                                       (0.089)        (0.112)       (0.272)
Lag Health                              0.234          0.045          0.014
                                       (0.019)        (0.014)       (0.028)
Lag Assets                             -0.391          0.423        -1.396       -0.388      -0.181       -0.631
                                       (0.240)        (0.258)       (0.951)      (0.275)        (0.335)   (0.312)
Lag Assets Squared                      0.031        -0.165           0.776       0.179          0.105     0.327
                                       (0.109)        (0.122)       (0.468)      (0.129)        (0.157)   (0.147)
Medicaid Eligibility                                 -0.291         -0.389
                                                      (0.156)       (0.321)
Private Ins. No LTC                                                              -0.035          0.135    -0.071
                                                                                 (0.071)        (0.104)   (0.089)
Private Ins. With LTC                                                            -0.068      -0.276        0.352
                                                                                 (0.146)        (0.233)   (0.164)
Medicaid                                                                          0.079          1.026     1.395
                                                                                 (0.101)        (0.133)   (0.118)
Health                                                                            1.196          1.622     1.247
                                                                                 (0.025)        (0.037)   (0.031)
Health * Health Improved                                                          0.405          0.350     0.481
                                                                                 (0.056)        (0.082)   (0.064)
Health * Health Declined a little                                                 0.039      -0.024       -0.002
                                                                                 (0.031)        (0.037)   (0.035)
Health * Health Declined a lot                                                   -0.096      -0.168       -0.153
                                                                                 (0.023)        (0.029)   (0.027)

Note: Other Health Insurance is relative to Medicare only; LTC arrangement is relative to no care.
                                                                                         40


Table 3b. Selected Parameter Estimates from the Equation System with Heterogeneity
          Outcomes: Probability of Any Assets and Gifts, Continuous Assets and Gifts if any

Explanatory Variables                    Any         Any         Ln(Assets)      Ln(Gifts)
                                        Assets       Gifts         If any         If any

NH Generosity/10000                     0.079       -0.001         0.043          -0.006
                                       (0.030)      (0.026)       (0.011)         (0.013)
ln(NH $ Loss)                           0.026       -0.025         0.021          -0.011
                                       (0.019)      (0.012)       (0.006)         (0.007)
HCBS $ Allowable                        0.113        0.242        -0.069           0.010
                                       (0.059)      (0.060)       (0.025)         (0.028)
ln(HCBS $ Loss)                        -0.026        0.026        -0.029           0.001
                                       (0.020)      (0.012)       (0.006)         (0.008)
(Beds/1000 Elderly)/10                 -0.028        0.126        -0.013          -0.010
                                       (0.023)      (0.016)       (0.009)         (0.010)
NH Revenue Loss/10000                   0.007       -0.170        -0.062          -0.021
                                       (0.025)      (0.023)       (0.010)         (0.012)
HH + Personal $ / NH $                 -0.062        0.023        -0.057          -0.027
                                       (0.028)      (0.024)       (0.012)         (0.014)
HCBS $ / Elig. Elderly / 1000           0.006       -0.001        -0.010          -0.004
                                       (0.032)      (0.025)       (0.012)         (0.014)
Medicare $ Change                       0.054       -0.279         0.005           0.010
                                       (0.061)      (0.054)       (0.025)         (0.028)
Private Ins. No LTC                     0.468        0.466         0.174           0.095
                                       (0.076)      (0.074)       (0.028)         (0.035)
Private Ins. With LTC                   0.602        0.994         0.293           0.133
                                       (0.183)      (0.147)       (0.048)         (0.057)
Medicaid                               -0.761       -1.367        -0.809           0.083
                                       (0.091)      (0.133)       (0.049)         (0.073)
Health                                 -0.186       -0.170        -0.037           0.059
                                       (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.010)         (0.013)
Lag Assets                              0.988        0.990         1.564           0.524
                                       (0.223)      (0.291)       (0.125)         (0.196)
Lag Assets Squared                     -0.330       -0.397        -0.491          -0.226
                                       (0.102)      (0.139)       (0.060)         (0.095)
Health * Health Improved               -0.198       -0.205        -0.080           0.012
                                       (0.058)      (0.070)       (0.034)         (0.045)
Health * Health Declined a little      -0.028        0.032         0.054          -0.012
                                       (0.033)      (0.029)       (0.018)         (0.022)
Health * Health Declined a lot          0.004        0.050         0.043          -0.001
                                       (0.030)      (0.026)       (0.015)         (0.016)
                                                                                       41


Table 3c. Selected Parameter Estimates from the Equation System with Heterogeneity
         Outcomes: Continuous Health Index and Probability of Death
Explanatory Variables                        Level of Health          Prob. Of Death

Lag Private Ins. No LTC                           -0.048
                                                 (0.025)
Lag Private Ins. With LTC                        -0.113
                                                 (0.038)
Lag Medicaid                                       0.121
                                                 (0.037)
Lag Health                                         0.484
                                                 (0.009)
Lag Informal Home Care                           -0.057
                                                 (0.075)
Lag Formal Home Care                               0.282
                                                 (0.214)
Lag Nursing Home Care                              0.653
                                                 (0.129)
Lag Health * Lag Informal Care                     0.126
                                                 (0.024)
Lag Health * Lag Formal Care                       0.123
                                                 (0.056)
Lag Health * Lag NH Care                           0.040
                                                 (0.036)
Private Ins. No LTC                                                       0.154
                                                                         (0.073)
Private Ins. With LTC                                                     0.167
                                                                         (0.135)
Medicaid                                                                  0.053
                                                                         (0.100)
Health                                                                    0.141
                                                                         (0.036)
Informal Home Care                                                        3.770
                                                                         (0.189)
Formal Home Care                                                          3.617
                                                                         (0.328)
Nursing Home                                                              2.498
                                                                         (0.155)
Health * Informal Care                                                   -0.736
                                                                         (0.067)
Health * Formal Care                                                     -0.473
                                                                         (0.093)
Health * NH Care                                                         -0.114
                                                                         (0.053)
Health * Health Improved                                                  0.771
                                                                         (0.053)
Health * Health Declined a little                                         0.051
                                                                         (0.028)
Health * Health Declined a lot                                           -0.042
                                                                         (0.026)
                                                                                                                                   42



Table 4. Observed Data and Model Predictions by Year and by Unobserved Heterogeneity Mass Point
                             Supplemental                                            Positive     Assets,   Positive   Gifts,
    Year       Medicaid        Insurance        Health         Long-Term Care         Assets      if any     Gifts     if any   Deceased
                 Yes      None PN        PY               None    IC    FC Yes         Yes        (Log)       Yes      (Log)      Yes
    1995
Observed         12.0     24.7   55.8    7.5     1.21     77.4   13.1   3.9   5.6     85.3         9.16      48.4      3.74       10.2
Simulated1       11.9     25.1   55.5    7.5     1.21     77.4   13.1   3.9   5.6     85.3         9.15      47.9      3.70       10.1
Simulated2       11.9     25.1   55.5    7.5     1.21     76.7   13.5   3.8   6.0     84.9         9.08      47.0      3.64       14.4
Permanent
Mass Point 1      9.2     20.7   60.9    9.2     0.94     79.1   14.9   4.9   1.1     94.1        11.47      99.9      10.97       8.3
Mass Point 2     11.5     23.9   56.5    8.1     1.10     78.6   13.4   4.2   3.7     89.0        9.93       84.4       7.30       9.4
Mass Point 3     11.7     24.8   55.7    7.7     1.19     77.7   13.2   4.0   5.2     86.2        9.30       55.6       4.22      10.0
Mass Point 4     12.3     26.2   54.5    7.0     1.29     76.3   12.8   3.6   7.3     82.2        8.52       17.4       1.13      10.6
Time-Varying
Mass Point 1     13.7     23.7   55.5    7.0     1.28     80.2   12.4   3.2   4.2     90.9         9.69      61.8      4.50        6.4
Mass Point 2      8.6     27.5   55.4    8.4     1.08     72.4   14.4   5.1   8.0     75.5         8.20      23.1      2.26       16.7
    1998
Observed         12.8     29.2   51.1    7.0     1.45     69.1   12.5   6.9   11.5    85.8         9.31      47.4      3.84       13.6
Simulated1       12.8     29.1   51.1    7.0     1.45     69.0   12.6   7.1   11.4    86.2         9.32      46.7      3.75       13.4
Simulated2       12.7     28.4   48.8   10.1     1.35     70.7   11.5   5.9   11.8    81.9         8.88      43.7      3.52       14.9
Permanent
Mass Point 1     11.6     25.8   53.8    8.8     1.20     71.9   15.8   8.9   3.4     94.8        11.54      99.9      11.20      10.9
Mass Point 2     12.1     28.2   52.0    7.7     1.34     71.0   13.4   7.7   7.9     89.6        10.07      83.2       7.45      12.5
Mass Point 3     12.7     28.8   51.4    7.1     1.43     69.3   12.8   7.2   10.6    86.9         9.45      54.1       4.27      13.3
Mass Point 4     13.3     30.2   50.1    6.5     1.53     67.4   11.7   6.6   14.2    83.2         8.72      16.8       1.14      14.0
Time-Varying
Mass Point 1     14.7     27.7   51.1    6.5     1.52     72.2   12.4   6.3   9.1     91.3         9.81      60.4      4.58        8.9
Mass Point 2      9.3     31.8   51.1    7.8     1.31     63.3   12.9   8.6   15.3    77.1         8.46      22.6      2.27       21.3
                                                                                                                                                               43



Table 4. Observed Data and Model Predictions by Year and by Unobserved Heterogeneity Mass Point -- continued
                                     Supplemental                                                         Positive     Assets,    Positive         Gifts,
       Year          Medicaid          Insurance             Health            Long-Term Care              Assets      if any      Gifts           if any   Deceased
                       Yes        None PN        PY                       None    IC    FC Yes              Yes        (Log)        Yes            (Log)      Yes
    2000
Observed                14.3       30.2    49.0      6.5       1.57       68.9    10.9     6.9    13.5      84.1        9.23        47.5           3.87       14.9
Simulated1              14.2       30.0    49.3      6.4       1.57       68.4    11.1     7.0    13.5      84.3        9.24        46.3           3.75       14.6
Simulated2              14.7       28.3    46.5     10.5       1.52       69.9    9.6      6.8    13.7      77.4        8.59        41.6           3.38       16.1
Permanent
Mass Point 1            12.9       29.2    49.4     8.5        1.32       72.5     12.9    9.8    4.6       93.6        11.48       99.9           11.21      12.0
Mass Point 2            13.6       28.7    50.6     7.1        1.45       70.9     12.1    7.8    9.2       88.1        10.01       82.7            7.42      13.5
Mass Point 3            14.1       29.9    49.5     6.5        1.56       68.8     11.3    7.3    12.7      85.1         9.38       53.6            4.27      14.4
Mass Point 4            14.8       31.0    48.3     6.0        1.65       66.7     10.2    6.1    17.0      81.1         8.63       16.9            1.17      15.2
Time-Varying
Mass Point 1            16.4       28.5    49.1     6.0        1.65       71.8     11.0    6.2    11.0      89.9        9.78        59.9           4.57        9.6
Mass Point 2            10.5       32.7    49.7     7.2        1.44       62.5     11.1    8.5    17.9      74.4        8.30        22.4           2.28       23.3
Estimated Heterogeneity Distribution
                        Estimated                             Transformed                         Estimated                           Transformed
                       Mass Point                              Mass Point                        Prob Weight                          Prob Weight
Permanent
Mass Point 1           0.000         (0.000)                      0.000                      3.465        (0.351)                          0.004
Mass Point 2           0.128         (0.110)                      0.532                      5.067        (0.428)                          0.118
Mass Point 3           1.097         (0.101)                      0.750                      4.385        (0.459)                          0.584
Mass Point 4           1.000         (0.000)                      1.000                        –             –                             0.295
Time-Varying
Mass Point 1           0.000         (0.000)                      0.000                     -0.569        (0.023)                          0.639
Mass Point 2           1.000         (0.000)                      1.000                        –             –                             0.361
1
    Simulated outcomes are based on the model estimates, random error draws, and observed values of all explanatory variables.
2
    Simulated outcomes are based on the model estimates, random error draws, and updated values of the endogenous explanatory variables.
                                                                                                            44

Table 5a. Baseline Simulated Outcomes
          categorized by 1993 observed marital status and asset level
                                       Married                                            Single
                                    Asset Category                                    Asset Category
                        Zero       Low       Medium        High            Zero      Low     Medium         High
1995
Medicaid                   27.2       10.7        2.2           1.1          42.1      24.2         6.1          2.5
Positive Assets             58.2         87.0        95.7        98.3       45.2       76.1       90.9         95.8
Assets                    15,681       41,913     212,983     994,092      8,269     17,493    103,848      525,793
Positive Gifts              30.7         43.5        56.9        70.5       21.1       29.2       44.9         57.7
Gifts                      1,783        3,030       4,452       7,449      1,218      1,626      3,057        5,618
1998
Medicaid                     26.1        11.2         3.6          1.6       41.8      26.5         9.5          4.2
Positive Assets             62.9        83.5         93.1         97.0      45.8       66.3       84.5         91.6
Assets                    50,726     113,048      380,449    1,158,260    21,619     40,893    176,073      580,596
Positive Gifts              27.5        41.5         54.2         66.0      16.9       25.6       40.3         51.5
Gifts                      2,951       3,790        5,765        9,602     1,448      2,089      3,879        6,495
2000
Medicaid                     28.0        13.5         5.6          2.7       43.7      29.7       13.0           7.1
Positive Assets                60.3       78.6       89.2          94.5       42.0      58.2       77.4         86.1
Assets                    119,732      231,265 571,891       1,346,587     41,281     84,066 251,385        623,793
Positive Gifts                 26.5       39.2       50.5          62.5       17.1      24.1       37.5         47.9
Gifts                        3,045       4,126      6,010         9,183      1,594     2,284      3,896       6,377
Asset Categories. Zero: $0; Low: [$1,$10,000] for singles, [$1, $15,000] for marrieds; Medium: [$10,000,$100,000]
                 for singles, [$15,001,$150,000] for marrieds; High: >$100,000 for singles , >$150,000 for marrieds.


Table 5b. Policy Simulation 1: Asset limits for nursing home eligibility are doubled
                               categorized by 1993 observed marital status and asset level
                                          Married                                         Single
                                       Asset Category                                 Asset Category
                          Zero         Low       Medium        High        Zero      Low     Medium         High
1995
Medicaid                     27.8          11.1        2.2         1.1       42.9      24.5        6.3           2.6
Positive Assets              59.1         87.4        95.6        98.4      46.3       76.3       91.3        96.0
Assets                     16,331       43,331     203,047   1,020,061     8,627     17,310    106,833     539,344
Positive Gifts               30.5         43.4        57.6        70.4      21.0       29.5       44.9        57.6
Gifts                       1,768        3,005       4,681       7,434     1,208      1,664      3,047       5,580
1998
Medicaid                     27.0          11.8        3.9         1.7       42.8      27.1        9.8           4.4
Positive Assets              63.9         84.2        93.3        97.2      46.8       66.8       85.1        91.9
Assets                     55,130      120,166     383,930   1,221,860    22,994     41,473    182,474     595,745
Positive Gifts               27.5         41.4        53.8        65.9      16.9       25.4       40.3        51.5
Gifts                       2,928        3,755       5,680       9,532     1,456      2,070      3,861       6,478
2000
Medicaid                     29.4          14.4        6.0         3.0       45.3      31.3       13.8           7.6
Positive Assets              61.6         79.6        89.8        94.9      43.5       59.3       78.4        86.8
Assets                    129,547      250,036     597,453   1,438,140    44,931     88,582    268,230     654,717
Positive Gifts               26.4         39.1        50.3        62.4      17.1       23.9       37.4        47.8
Gifts                       3,019        4,100       5,948       9,142     1,584      2,267      3,866       6,352
                                                                                                       45



Table 5c. Policy Simulation 2: Asset limits for paid home care eligibility are doubled
                               categorized by 1993 observed marital status and asset level
                                         Married                                      Single
                                      Asset Category                              Asset Category
                         Zero        Low       Medium      High       Zero       Low     Medium        High
1995
Medicaid                   27.0         10.6       2.2         1.1       41.6      23.6          5.9          2.4
Positive Assets            59.2        87.7       96.0       98.4        47.2      78.3         91.7      96.3
Assets                   15,282      43,067    209,620    965,119       7,948    17,836       97,286   480,336
Positive Gifts             31.9        44.4       58.0       71.7        23.2      31.2         47.8      61.0
Gifts                     1,858       3,104      4,586      7,626       1,337     1,751        3,289     6,092
1998
Medicaid                   25.3         10.7       3.4         1.5       40.6      25.3          8.9          4.0
Positive Assets            65.5        85.5       94.0        97.4       48.8      69.7         86.4      92.9
Assets                   46,279     106,539    346,738   1,049,395     19,784    37,365      149,147   493,299
Positive Gifts             30.5        44.8       57.1        68.5       19.3      28.9         43.9      55.5
Gifts                     3,161       4,059      6,119      10,094      1,634     2,337        4,265     7,086
2000
Medicaid                   26.2         12.4       5.0         2.5       41.4      27.4         11.9          6.3
Positive Assets            65.6        82.3       91.4        95.7       47.6      64.4         81.8      90.0
Assets                   88,332     183,997    440,803   1,059,193     31,883    60,992      177,076   441,691
Positive Gifts             32.9        45.6       56.5        67.6       22.6      31.2         45.5      56.6
Gifts                     3,549       4,842      6,774      10,060      2,013     2,816        4,794     7,616


Table 5d. Policy Simulation 3: Long-Term Care Spending Ratio Increased 50 Percent
                               categorized by 1993 observed marital status and asset level
                                         Married                                      Single
                                      Asset Category                              Asset Category
                         Zero        Low       Medium      High       Zero      Low     Medium         High
1995
Medicaid                   27.6         10.9       2.3         1.1      42.5      24.5          6.2           2.6
Positive Assets            57.3        86.5       95.5       98.3       44.2      75.4         90.6       95.7
Assets                   14,889      40,214    204,718    961,218      7,820    16,749       99,987    508,002
Positive Gifts             30.8        43.7       57.1       70.6       21.3      29.3         45.1       57.8
Gifts                     1,752       2,988      4,391      7,344      1,198     1,602        3,019      5,539
1998
Medicaid                   26.6         11.5       3.8         1.7      42.6      26.9          9.7           4.3
Positive Assets            61.7        82.9       92.8        96.9      44.4      65.3       83.9         91.3
Assets                   46,802     105,837    357,818   1,098,890    20,057    38,067    165,182      550,301
Positive Gifts             27.4        41.5       54.2        66.1      16.8      25.6       40.3         51.5
Gifts                     2,869       3,711      5,669       9,440     1,412     2,045      3,794        6,365
2000
Medicaid                   28.8         13.9       5.8         2.9      44.7      30.3         13.5           7.3
Positive Assets            59.0        77.7       88.6        94.2      40.5      56.9       76.4         85.4
Assets                  108,564     213,136    530,381   1,259,167    37,335    77,960    231,692      580,821
Positive Gifts             26.3        39.1       50.5        62.5      16.9      24.0       37.4         47.9
Gifts                     2,933       4,037      5,888       8,991     1,514     2,222      3,795        6,233
                                                                                                           46


                                             APPENDIX A

                                              Identification

     Identification in a system of dynamic equations such as this appears difficult to assess
at first glance. However, most of the model is identified using the structure of the
equations imposed by the theoretical model. For example, lagged values of endogenous
outcomes enter almost all equations in the system (except the initial conditions, which
will be discussed separately below). These lagged values serve as exclusion restrictions,
but also contain other lagged values and additional lags by construction. Hence there is a
great deal of variation in these lags and their determinants that serve to identify the
model.
     Because the initial conditions do not contain lagged values (due to lack of data),
separate variables that represent sources of exogenous variation must be included. These
variables should be significant in the initial equations, but, conditional on the lagged
values of the state variables, the variables used as exclusions in the initial equations
should not be significant in the period t>0 equations. 33 The coefficients on the exclusion
restrictions were significantly different from zero and the variables, in most cases, were
not significant in the main equations of the model. Additionally, the model is identified
by the nonlinearities in the functional form of included variables and the covariance
restrictions on the error terms.
     In the first period of data used in this analysis, no institutionalized persons are
interviewed. Although the initial conditions are estimated jointly with the structural
equations in the empirical model, theoretically the fact that there are no institutionalized
persons sampled in the first period could bias estimates because of selection. However,
the average stay in a nursing home is quite short. Of the 384 persons who entered a
nursing home between 1993 and 1995, 41% had deceased by 1995 and 89% had deceased
by 2000.




33
  Variables used for identification of the initial conditions are in Table A4 of Appendix A. Coefficient
estimates are available upon request.
                                                                                                        47



Table A1. Medicaid Eligibility Limits for the Aged by State, 1998
                          Categorically Needy                        Medically Needy
                          Income Limits     Asset Limits             Income Limits     Asset Limits
State                     HCBS         NH                            HCBS         NH
Alabama                     494      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Arizona                   1,482      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Arkansas                  1,482      1,482     2,000                   108         ---      2,000
California                 650         650     2,000                   600        600       2,000
Colorado                  1,482      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Connecticutb              1,482      1,482     1,600                   476        476       1,600
District of Columbia        ---        512     2,000                   377        377       2,600
Florida                   1,482      1,482     5,000                   180       N/A        5,000
Georgia                   1,482      1,482     2,000                   317        317       2,000
Idaho                     1,482      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Illinoisb                   554        283     2,000                   283        283       2,000
Indianab                    494        494     1,500                   494        494       1,500
Iowa                      1,482      1,482     2,000                   483       N/A       10,000
Kansas                    1,482      1,482     2,000                   475        475       2,000
Louisiana                 1,482      1,482     2,000                  N/A         100       2,000
Maryland                    988      1,482     2,000                   350        350       2,500
Massachusetts               651        623     2,000                   651        651       2,000
Michigan                  1,482      1,482     2,000                   408        408       2,000
Minnesotab                1,482      1,482     3,000                   467        467       3,000
Missourib                   932        932    999.99                   494        821      999.99
Nebraska                    651        502     4,000                   392        392       4,000
New Hampshireb,c          1,165      1,165     1,500                   508        508       2,500
New Jersey c              1,482      1,482     2,000                   367         ---      4,000
New Mexico                1,270      1,270     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
New York                    580        580     2,000                   584        584       3,500
North Carolina              651        494     2,000                   242        242       1,500
Ohiob                       427      1,281     1,500                   427        427       1,500
Oregon                    1,482      1,482     2,000                  N/A        N/A        5,000
Pennsylvaniac             1,482      1,482     2,400                   425        425       2,400
South Carolina            1,482      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Tennessee                 1,482      1,482     2,000                   175        175       2,000
Texas                     1,482      1,482     2,000                  N/A        N/A         N/A
Virginiab                 1,482      1,482     2,000                   250        250       2,000
Washington                1,482      1,482     2,000                   521        521       2,000
West Virginia             1,482      1,482     2,000                   200        200       2,000
Wisconsin                 1,482      1,482     2,000                   578        578       2,000
Wyoming                   1,482      1,482     2,000                    ---        ---         ---
Sources: NASMD; Bruen et al., correspondence with state Medicaid offices; Kassner et al., 2000.
Note: The 1998 federal poverty level (FPL) is $8,050 for one person (Source: Federal Register, 1998).
a) Comm = Living in the community with a HCBS Waiver; NH = Residence in a nursing home.
b) These are 209(b) states. If they do not have a medically needy program they must allow spend
   down to their categorically needy income limits.
b) Connecticut and Virginia have income limits that vary by region.
c) These states have different asset limits for NH and HCBS eligibility. Ones shown are for NH; for
    HCBS, the limits are: New Hampshire – $1,500; New Jersey – $2,000; and Pennsylvania – $2,000.
d) Limits with ‘N/A’ have a medically needy program, but it does not cover the indicated service.
                                                                                             48

Table A2. Maintenance Needs Allowances and Spousal Protection Limits
                       MNA1                            Spousal Protection Limits
                                                        Assets                       Income
                                         Minimum                  Maximum
State                   HCBS        Nursing     HCBS         Nursing    HCBS     Nursing HCBS
Alabama                   562         25,000          0        25,000       0     1,295         0
Arizona                 1,410         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Arkansas                1,410         76,740          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
California                600         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Colorado                1,410         15,347          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
Connecticut             1,254         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
District of Columbia         0        15,347          0        15,347       0     1,919         0
Florida                 1,410         76,740          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
Georgia                   470         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Idaho                     530         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Illinois                  283         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Indiana                   470         15,347          0        15,347       0     1,919         0
Iowa                    1,410         21,169 21,169            76,740 76,740      1,919         0
Kansas                    627         15,347 15,347            15,347 15,347      1,919     1,919
Louisiana               1,410         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919         0
Maryland                  350         76,740          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
Massachusetts             627         76,740          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
Michigan                1,410         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Minnesota                 467         24,247 24,247            24,247 24,247      1,919     1,919
Missouri                  863         15,347 15,347            15,347 15,347      1,919         0
Nebraska                  392         15,347 15,347            15,347 15,347      1,295     1,295
New Hampshire             508         15,347          0        15,347       0     1,919         0
New Jersey              1,410         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
New Mexico              1,207         27,600 27,600            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
New York                  584         70,000 70,000            70,000 70,000      1,919     1,919
North Carolina            242         15,347 15,347            15,347 15,347      1,919         0
Ohio                      964         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Oregon                    476         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,295     1,295
Pennsylvania              502         15,347          0        15,347       0     1,919         0
South Carolina          1,410         66,480 66,480            66,480 66,480      1,479     1,479
Tennessee                 940         15,347 15,347            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Texas                   1,410         15,347 15,347            76,740 15,347      1,919         0
Virginia                  470         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Washington                627         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
West Virginia           1,410         76,740          0        76,740       0     1,919         0
Wisconsin                 710         44,103 44,103            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Wyoming                 1,410         76,740 76,740            76,740 76,740      1,919     1,919
Sources: National Association of State Medicaid Directors (NASMD), 2000; Kassner et al., 2000;
          correspondence with state Medicaid offices.
                                                                                                49

Table A3. Supply-Side Policy Variables, 1998
                                                       Medicaid     Average HCBS           Out-of
                  Ratio of Medicaid       Number of    Nursing       Spending per          Pocket
                 Spending: Home to        Beds Per    Home Rate     Eligible2 Elderly   Nursing Home
                 Institutionalization1   1000 Elderly  Per Day          per Year        Cost Per Day
State               (HH+Personal$/NH$) (Bed/1000 Eld)                  (HCBS$/Elig. Elderly)
Alabama                         4                 42         101.69          223.42            102.19
Arizona                         8                 23          91.16               0            130.16
Arkansas                      27                  64          63.03          1533.3             93.65
California                    20                  30          83.02           20.38            162.17
Colorado                      15                  47          98.33          850.59            105.95
Connecticut                   13                  60         128.03           997.5            230.16
DC                             9                  30         146.15               0            161.11
Florida                        9                  27         100.28          182.16            122.75
Georgia                        7                  50          77.61          246.88            107.54
Idaho                         21                  42          88.72           258.5            116.69
Illinois                       1                  69          70.15         1286.59            133.93
Indiana                        7                  79          81.06          139.87            128.97
Iowa                          14                  74          80.09         1615.75             92.06
Kansas                          9                 78          70.80         9403.77             94.44
Louisiana                      4                  77          60.04           27.53             72.62
Maryland                      14                  34         104.41           25.71            133.73
Massachusetts                 17                  58         117.97          123.15            203.97
Michigan                      21                  37          89.50            52.4            130.16
Minnesota                     18                  68         107.44         2991.76            145.24
Missouri                      14                  64          90.47         2967.16            117.06
Nebraska                        7                 77          83.17          331.14            164.28
New                             3                 51         109.56       10409.08             149.21
New Jersey                    21                  39         117.36          252.55            172.22
New Mexico                      3                 29         132.45          379.15            122.22
New York                      43                  39         157.00           38.54            182.54
North                         26                  40          97.87          733.32            115.08
Ohio                           2                  63         109.23          494.75            152.12
Oregon                        11                  31          84.68         2299.54            113.89
Pennsylvania                    2                 48         116.38          325.23            133.35
South                          6                  35          81.76          453.08            104.36
Tennessee                       0                 57         104.79           25.77            103.18
Texas                         16                  56          75.38          441.84            41,425
Virginia                       2                  33          79.08          687.84            50,405
Washington                    24                  39         114.38         1476.12            52,722
West Virginia                 19                  20         115.73         10591.1            47,218
Wisconsin                     15                  63          89.21         1179.47            49,986
Wyoming                        9                  57         101.25          771.59            36,500
Sources: Number of Nursing Home Beds: Harrington et al., 2000
           Elderly Population: U.S. Census Bureau.
           Medicaid Nursing Home Payment Rates: Harrington et al., 1999; Bectel et al., 1998
           HCBS Expenditures per Participant: Home and Community Based Services Resource Network
           Number of Elderly Enrolled in SSI: Green Book (http://aspe.os.dhhs.gov/98gb/intro.htm)
           Total Medicaid Spending on Personal Care, Nursing Home Care, and Mandatory Home Care:
           Costs are from the CNN Money calculator at
           http://cgi.money.cnn.com/tools/elder_care/elder_care_cost_finder.html
           and indexed by a medical services price index from
1
           http://www.econmagic.com/em-cgi/data.exe/blscu/CUUR0000SAM2.
  This is the ratio of total Medicaid spending on the optional Personal Care program and Mandatory Home
care to total spending on Nursing Home Care.
2
  These are average HCBS expenditures per eligible elderly, not per elderly participant. An elderly
individual is considered eligible if enrolled in Supplemental Security Income (SSI).
                                                                                                           50


Table A4. Exclusion Restrictions for Initial Conditions (1993)

Dependent Variable                  Independent Variables
Insurance Choice                    Number of Years Worked
                                    Hospitalization in Previous Year Indicator
                                    Spouse's Sex Interacted with Spouse's Education Status
                                    Type of Job Indicators (nine)
                                    Health of the Spouse
Long-Term Care Choice               Number of grand-children
                                    Health of the Spouse
                                    Number of Sisters Living
                                    Number of Brothers Living
Health                              Mother has 8 or more years of Education Indicator
                                    Father has 8 or more years of Education Indicator
                                    Age of Mother at her Death
                                    Age of Father at his Death
Assets                              Years Worked
                                    Spouse's Sex Interacted with Spouse's Education Status
                                    Type of Job Indicators (nine)
                                    Health of the Spouse



Table A5. Definition of Selected Endogenous Variables

Private Insurance No LTC              Indicator = 1 if had private insurance that does not cover long-term care
Private Insurance With LTC            Indicator = 1 if had private insurance that does cover long-term care
Medicaid                              Indicator = 1 if had Medicaid coverage
Health                                Health (health is worse as number increases)
Assets                                Unprotected Assets (Log)
Gifts                                 Gifts (Log)
Medicaid Eligibility                  Indicator = 1 if eligible for Medicaid at the beginning of the period
Informal Home Care                    Indicator = 1 if received unpaid home care at least twice a week
Formal Home Care                      Indicator = 1 if received paid home care at least twice a week
Nursing Home Resident                 Indicator = 1 if living in a Nursing Home
Health * Health Improved              Health * Indicator = 1 if health improved (Healtht - Healtht-1) < 0)
Health * Health Declined a little     Health * Indicator = 1 if health declined a little (Healtht – Healtht-1) < 2)
Health * Health Declined a lot        Health * Indicator = 1 if health declined a lot (Healtht - Healtht-1) >= 2)
Health * Informal Home Care           Health * Indicator = 1 if received informal home care
Health * Formal Home Care             Health * Indicator = 1 if received formal home care
Health * NH Resident                  Health * Indicator = 1 if live in nursing home
                                                                                        51


                                     REFERENCES

Bectel, Robert and Natalie Graves, “Across the States 1998: Profiles of Long-Term Care
Syste,s,” AARP, Washington D.C. (1998).

Bruen, Brian K., Wiener, Joshua M., Kim, Johnny, and Ossai Miazad, “State Usage of
Medicaid Coverage Options for Aged, Blind, and Disabled People,” The Urban Institute
(1999).

Currie, Janet and Gruber, Jonathan, “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy,
104(6) (1996).

Ettner, Susan L., “Do Elderly Medicaid Patients Experience Reduced Access to Nursing
Home Care?”, Journal of Health Economics 12 (1993).

Federal Register, Vol. 63, No. 36, February 24, 1998, pp. 9235-9238
(http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/98poverty.htm).

Gertler, P.J., “Medicaid and the Cost of Improving Access to Nursing Home Care,
Review of Economics and Statistics 74 (1992).

Greene, V.L., Lovely, M.E. and J.I. Ondrich, “The Cost-Effectiveness of Community
Services on a Frail Elderly Poplation,” Gerontologist 33 (1993).

Greene, V. and J.I. Ondrich, “Risk Factors for Nursing Home Admissions and Exits in
the National Long Term Care Channeling Demonstration: A Discrete-Time Hazard
Function Approach.” Journal of Gerontology: Social Science 45 (1990).

Gruber, Jonathan and Yelowitz, Aaron, “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107(6) (1999).

Harrington, Charlene, Carrillo, Helen, Thollaug, Susan C., Summers, Peter R., and
Valerie Wellin, “Nursing Facilities, Staffing, Residents, and Facility Deficiencies, 1992
Through 1998,” San Francisco: Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
University of California (2000) http://www.hcfa.org/medicaid/nursfac98.pdf

Harrington, Charlene, Swan, James, Wellin, Valerie, Clemeña, Wendy, Carrillo, Helen,
and Carrie Griffin, “1997 State Data Book on Long Term Care Program and Market
Characteristics,” San Francisco: Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences,
University of California (1999).

Heckman, J. and B. Singer, “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,” Econometrica 52 (1984).
                                                                                         52

Hoerger, Thomas J., Picone, Gabriel A., and Frank A. Sloan, “Public Subsidies, Private
Provision of Care and Living Arrangements of the Elderly,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 78 (1996).

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Skinner, Jonathan, and Stephen P. Zeldes, “The Importance of
Precautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving,” Carnegie-
Rochester Conf. Ser. Public Policy 40 (1994).

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Skinner, Jonathan, and Stephen P. Zeldes, “Precautionary Saving and
Social Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy 103 (1995).

Kassner, E. and Shirey, L., “Medicaid Financial Eligibility for Older People: State
Variations in Access to Home and Community-Based Waiver and Nursing Home
Services,” AARP PPI: Washington, D.C. (2000).

Liu, Korbin, Pamela Doty, and Kenneth Manton, "Medicaid Spend-down in Nursing
Homes," Gerontologist 30 (1990).

Liu, K., McBride, T.D. and T.A. Coughlin, “Predicting Nursing Home Admissions and
Length of Stay: A Duration Analysis,” Medical Care 29(2) (1991).

McKnight, Robin, “Home Care Reimbursement, Long-Term Care Utilization, and Health
Outcomes,” Working Paper, http://econ-
www.mit.edu/graduate/candidates.research.htm?athenan=robinmck (2002).

Moses, Stephen A., "The Fallacy of Impoverishment," Gerontologist 30 (1990).

Mroz, Tom, “Discrete Factor Approximation in Simultaneous Equation Models:
Estimating the Impact of a Dummy Endogenous Variable on a Continuous Outcome,''
Journal of Econometrics 92 (1999).

Mroz, Tom and David Guilkey, “Discrete Factor Approximations for Use in
Simultaneous Equations Models with Both Continuous and Discrete Endogenous
Variables,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill (1992).

National Association of State Medicaid Directors (NASMD), http://www.nasmd.org/.

Norton, Edward, "Elderly Assets, Medicaid Policy, and Spend-Down in Nursing Homes,"
Review of Income and Wealth 41 (1995).

Norton, Edward, “Long Term Care,” in A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse, eds. Handbook
of Health Economics, Elsevier Science (2000).

Sloan, Frank A., and May W. Shayne, "Long-term Care, Medicaid, and Impoverishment
of the Elderly," The Milbank Quarterly 71 (1993).
                                                                                      53

Sloan, F. A., Hoerger, T.J., and Picone, G., “Pubic Subsidies, Private Provision of Care
and Living Arrangements of the Elderly,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 78(3)
(1996).

Spence, D., and Wiener, J., "Estimating the Extent of Medicaid Spend-Down in Nursing
Homes," Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, Vol. 15, No. 3, Fall 1990.

Taylor, D.H., Sloan, F.A., and E.C. Norton, “Formation of Trusts and Spend Down to
Medicaid,” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 54B (1999).

Tilly, Jane, Goldenson, Susan, and Jessica Kasten, “Long-Term Care: Consumers,
Providers, and Financing A Chart Book,” Urban Institute (2001).

U.S. General Accounting Office, “Nursing Homes: Admission Problems for Medicaid
Recipients and Attempts to Solve them,” Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, GAO/HRD-90-135, 1990.

Venti, Stephen F. and David A. Wise, “Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth,” in David
A. Wise, ed., The Economics of Aging, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
(1989a).

Venti, Stephen F. and David A. Wise, “But They Don’t Want to Reduce Housing
Equity,” NBER Working Paper #2859 (1989b).

Venti, Stephen F. and David A. Wise, “Aging and the Income Value of Housing Wealth,”
Journal of Public Economics, 44 (1991).

Wiener, Joshua M., “Can Medicaid Long-Term Care Expenditures for the Elderly be
Reduced?” Gerontologist 36 (6) (1996).

Wiener, Joshua M. Stevenson, David G., and S.M. Goldenson, “Controlling the Supply of
Long-Term Care Providers at the State Level,” The Urban Institute, Occasional paper No.
22 (1998).
