NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING AND EXPLAINING MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES ACROSS FIRMS AND COUNTRIES
Nick Bloom
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 12216
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12216
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

We would like to thank the Economic and Social Research Council, the Anglo-German Foundation and the
Advanced Institute for Management for their substantial financial support. We received no funding from the
global management consultancy firm we worked with in developing the survey tool. Our partnership with
John Dowdy, Stephen Dorgan and Tom Rippin has been particularly important in the development of the
project. The Bundesbank and HM Treasury supported the development of the survey. Helpful comments have
been received from many people and numerous seminar audiences. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Nick Bloom and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and Countries
Nick Bloom and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 12216
May 2006
JEL No. L2, M2, O32, O33
ABSTRACT
We use an innovative survey tool to collect management practice data from 732 medium sized
manufacturing firms in the US, France, Germany and the UK. These measures of managerial practice
are strongly associated with firm-level productivity, profitability, Tobin’s Q, sales growth and
survival rates. Management practices also display significant cross-country differences with US firms
on average better managed than European firms, and significant within-country differences with a
long tail of extremely badly managed firms. We find that poor management practices are more
prevalent when (a) product market competition is weak and/or when (b) family-owned firms pass
management control down to the eldest sons (primo geniture). European firms report lower levels
of competition, while French and British firms also report substantially higher levels of primo
geniture due to the influence of Norman legal origin and generous estate duty for family firms. We
calculate that product market competition and family firms account for about half of the long tail of
badly managed firms and up to two thirds of the American advantage over Europe in management
practices.
Nick Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
John Van Reenen
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM

I. INTRODUCTION
Economists have long speculated on why such astounding differences in the productivity performance
exist between firms and plants within countries, even within narrowly defined sectors. For example,
labor productivity varies dramatically even with the same five digit industry and these differences are
often highly persistent over time1.

The focus of much applied economic research has been in “chipping away” at these productivity
differences through better measures of inputs (capital, materials, skills, etc.). Some parts of the
literature have attempted to see how much of the residual can be accounted for by explicit measures of
technology such as Research and Development or Information and Communication Technologies2.
But technology is only one part of the story and a substantial unexplained productivity differential still
remains, which panel data econometricians often label as the fixed effects of “managerial quality”
(e.g. Mundlak, 1961).

While the popular press and Business Schools have long-stressed the importance of good
management, empirical economists had relatively little to say about management practices. A major
problem has been the absence of high quality data that is measured in a consistent way across
countries and firms. One of the purposes of this paper is to present a survey instrument for the
measurement of managerial practices. We collect original data using this survey instrument on a
sample of 732 medium sized manufacturing firms in the US, UK, France and Germany.
1

For example, Baily, Hulten and Campbell (1992), Bartelsman and Dhrymes (1998), Disney, Haskel and Heden (2003),
Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2005).
2
For example, see Griliches (1979) on R&D and Stiroh (2004) on information technology.

3

We start by evaluating the quality of this survey data. We first conduct internal validation by resurveying firms to interview different managers in different plants using different interviewers in the
same firms, and find a strong correlation between these two independently collected measures. We
then conduct external validation by matching the data with information on firm accounts and stock
market values to investigate the association between our measure of managerial practices and firm
performance. We find that “better” management practices are significantly associated with higher
productivity, profitability, Tobin’s Q, sales growth rates and firm-survival rates. This is true in both
our English-speaking countries (the UK and the US) and the Continental European countries (France
and Germany), which suggests that our characterization of “good” management is not specific to
Anglo-Saxon cultures.

We then turn to analyzing the raw survey data and observe a surprisingly large spread in management
practices across firms (see Figure 1). Most notably, we see a large number of firms who appear to be
extremely badly managed with ineffective monitoring, targets and incentives. We also observe
significant variations in management practices across our sample of countries, with US firms on
average better managed than European firms.

[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

This raises an important question – what could rationalize such variations in management practices?
We start by considering two pure classes of theories: the “optimal choice of management practices”
whereby management practices are a choice variable determined by the firm; and the “managerial

4

inefficiency” model whereby management simply reflects differences in efficiency with “worse”
management practices predicted to be associated with lower profitability. We find some evidence for
both models.

We then investigate what determines the variation in these management practices across firms and
countries. The two factors that appear to play an important role are product market competition and
family firms. First, higher levels of competition (measured using a variety of different proxies such as
trade openness) are strongly and robustly associated with better management practices. This
competition effect could arise through a number of channels, including the more rapid exit of badly
managed firms and/or the inducement of greater managerial effort.3 Secondly, family-owned firms in
which the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is chosen by primo geniture (the eldest male child) tend to
be very badly managed. Family ownership could have beneficial effects from the concentration of
ownership as this may overcome some of the principal-agent problems associated with dispersed
ownership. In our data, we find family ownership combined with professional management (i.e. where
the CEO is not a family member) has a mildly positive association with good managerial practices.
The impact of family ownership and management is more ambiguous, however, with positive effects
from reducing the principal-agent problem but negative effects due to more limited selection into
managerial positions as well as the “Carnegie effect”.4 We find that companies who select the CEO
from all family members are no worse managed than other firms, but those who select the CEO based
on primo geniture are very poorly managed.
3

Other possible mechanisms include the learning effect, whereby higher competition involving more firms within the
same industry allows firms to learn superior management practices more quickly.
4
The “Carnegie effect” is named after the great philanthropist Andrew Carnegie who claimed, “The parent who leaves his
son enormous wealth generally deadens the talents and energies of the son, and tempts him to lead a less useful and less
worthy life than he otherwise would”. See also Holtz-Eakin et al. (1993).

5

The impact of competition and family firms is quantitatively important. Low competition and primo
geniture family firms account for about half of the tail of poorly performing firms. Across countries
competition and family firms also play a large role, accounting for as much as two- thirds of the gap
in management practices between the US and France and one third of the gap between the US and the
UK. One reason is that European competition levels are lower than in the US. Another reason is that
primo geniture is much more common in France and the UK due to their Norman heritage, in which
primo geniture was legally enforced to preserve concentrated land-holdings for military support. More
recently, Britain and other European countries have also provided generous estate tax exemptions for
family firms.

Our work relates to a number of strands in the literature. First, our findings are consistent with recent
econometric work looking at the importance of product market competition in increasing
productivity.5 It has often been speculated that these productivity-enhancing effects of competition
work through improving average management practices and our study provides support for this view.
Second, economic historians such as Landes (1969) and Chandler (1994) have claimed that the
relative industrial decline of the UK and France in the early Twentieth Century was driven by their
emphasis on family management, compared to the German and American approach of employing
professional managers.6 Our results suggest this phenomenon is still important almost a century later.
A third related strand is the work on the impact of Human Resource Management (HRM)7 that also
5

There are a very large number of papers in this area but examples of key contributions would be Syverson (2004a,b),
Olley and Pakes (1996) and Nickell (1996)
6
See also the recent literature on family firms and performance, for example Morck et al. (2005), Bertrand et al (2005),
Perez-Gonzalez (2005), and Villalonga and Amit (2005).
7
For example, Bartel et al (2005), Ichinowski et al. (1997), Lazear (2000) and Black and Lynch (2001).

6

finds that these management practices are linked to firm performance. Finally, there is the recent
contribution of Bertrand and Schoar (2003), who focus on the impact of changing CEOs and CFOs in
very large quoted US firms. This will tend to reflect the impact of management styles and strategies,
complementing our work emphasizing the practices of middle management.8 We see management
practices as more than the attributes of the top managers: they are part of the organizational structure
and behavior of the firm, typically evolving slowly over time even as CEOs and CFOs come and go.

The layout of the paper is as follows. Section II discussed why management practices could vary,
section III discusses measuring management practices the management data, and section IV details the
empirical model and the results. In section V, we discuss the distribution of management practices and
offer evidence on the causes for the variations in management. In section VI, we pull this all together
to try to explain management practices across firms and countries. Finally, some concluding
comments are offered in section VII. More details of the data, models and results can be found in the
Appendices.

II. MODELS OF MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
We consider two classes of theories of why good management practices will vary across firms. We
will later show evidence that both appear important, but consider the pure form of each theory to
generate clear predictions we can take to the data. We characterize the first set of models as the
“optimal choice of management practices” and the second set of models as “managerial inefficiency”.
8

In a sub-sample of 59 companies we piloted questions on the hierarchical structure of the firm and found the average
number of levels to the shop floor was 5.03 for the CEO versus 2.78 for the plant managers (our target management group)
placing them centrally within the organization.

7

IIA. Optimal choice of management practices
A conventional economic approach is to consider management as a choice variable for the firm.
Improving management practices may be a costly activity and the firm will weigh these costs against
the future expected benefits. There is nothing inefficient about “worse” management practices: firms
have simply chosen the optimal level. For example, middle managers may prefer to trade-off lower
levels of effort and monitoring by the corporate head quarters in return for a lower compensation
package. This perspective covers a large range of models from those where firms can perfectly control
managerial inputs just as surely as any other factor of production to models where firms can influence
managerial effort indirectly through contract choice.

Consider a basic parameterization of this type of model. Define M as an indicator of overall
management practices which is an increasing function of two individual practices, M = h(M1,M2),
where M1 and M2 could be thought of respectively as human capital management (performance based
promotions etc.) and fixed capital management (shop floor operations etc.). For simplicity we ignore
all other factors of production. We then write the production function in the following CES form:

Y=
where

σ −1
σ
1

(B1 M )

+ (B 2 M

σ −1
σ
2

)

σ
σ −1

(1)

is the elasticity of substitution is (which we assume is greater than unity) and B1 >0 and

B2 >0 are parameters. Profits are written as:
Π = PY − W 'X − ρ 1 M 1 − ρ 2 M 2

8

(2)

where P is the price of output, W is the unit cost vector for inputs X and ρ j is the unit cost of
managerial practice M j .

The first order conditions for management practice j are then

ln M j = (σ − 1) ln(ϕ ( X ) ) + ln(Y ) − σ ln

ρj
P

+ (σ − 1) ln B j

(3)

From (3) we can see that each individual practice is also decreasing in the cost of the practice and
increasing in the technological parameter ( B j ). Combining the first order conditions for the two types
of management practices gives the relative demand for management practices:
ln

M1
ρ
B
= −σ ln 1 + (σ − 1) ln 1
M2
ρ2
B2

(4)

Unsurprisingly, the relative demand for the practices is decreasing in the relative costs and increasing
in the relative benefits. Prices and technologies of the management practices are not observable but
are likely to be systematically different by industry. For example, if M 1 represents a human capital
focused practices and M 2 represents a fixed capital practices we would expect B1/B2 to be larger in
the more highly skilled sectors. This is something that we examine empirically correlating the relative
use of different types of management practices with proxies for the relative importance of skills.

II.B Managerial inefficiency

An alternative view of the variation in management practices is that it simply reflects differences in
efficiency. A representation of this process is that there are exogenous differences in management
quality between firms and these are not openly traded on markets – examples include Lucas (1978)

9

and Mundlak’s (1961) fixed effects. In this set-up, we could consider a production function of the
form:
Y = A( M ) F ( X )

(5)

where A(M) represents total factor productivity which is increasing in management and the X are a
vector of conventional inputs such as labour, capital and materials with F(.) is increasing in X. As
with the previous model, an obvious empirical implication of (5) is the productivity is increasing in
the quality of management practices.

The associated profits are:
Π = PA( M ) F ( X ) − W 'X

(6)

A possible distinction between the two pure forms of the models is the relationship between
management practices and profits: if poor management were purely an optimal choice with no
exogenous efficiency differences between firms, then badly managed firms should be no less
profitable than well-managed firms. If instead poor management causes lower efficiency (A), then
better management should be associated with higher profitability. Accounting profits may differ from
true economic profits, however, so we also consider the relationship between stock market values and
management. In a dynamic setting, under the managerial efficiency view firms with bad management
should also be more likely to exit the market and to grow more slowly. We also examine these
predictions, paying attention to the issue of the endogeneity.

10

II.C Management and Product Market Competition

Both optimal choice and efficiency models also have implications for the relationship between
product market competition and management.

The most obvious effect of competition on management is through a Darwinian selection process in
the “management inefficiency” model. Higher product market competition will drive inefficient firms
out of the market and allocate greater market share to the more efficient firms. Syverson (2004a,b)
focuses on productivity and offers supportive evidence of these predictions in his analysis of the US
cement industry, finding that tougher competition is associated with a higher average level of
productivity with a lower dispersion of productivity as the less efficient tail of firms have been
selected out.9 Therefore, we expect a better average level and more compressed spread of
management practices in environments that are more competitive.

Natural variation in management practices will arise in equilibrium if entrepreneurs found firms with
distinctive cultures that are deeply embedded and hard to change. They do not know exactly how well
their firm will perform until they enter a market and compete with other firms. Over time, they learn
about the quality and suitability of their management practices and decide whether to continue
operating in the market (Jovanovic, 1982). A more general model would allow best management
practice to be stochastically evolving over time with firms continually innovating, generating a spread
even across long-lived incumbents (e.g. Klette and Kortum, 2004).

9

An alternative specification is perfect competition between incumbents within markets but a fixed cost of entry, such at
Hopenhayn (1992). In his specification lower costs of entry also supports a higher average level and a lower dispersion of
productivity.

11

Under the “optimal choice” approach there are models where higher competition could increase the
incentives to provide greater managerial effort (or higher investments in quality). This could be done
in a simple Bertrand differentiated product model to show some of the forces at play. Firms choose
contracts with managers after they have entered the market, but before their marginal costs are
revealed. Marginal costs are an outcome of managers’ (unobservable) efforts and a cost shock.
“Investing in managerial effort” is essentially choosing a higher-powered incentive contract that will
elicit more effort (better managerial practices) but at the cost of giving away more of the firm’s profits
to the manager. For a given number of firms an increase in competition has an ambiguous effect on
managerial effort. On the one hand, higher competition should increase firm incentives to promote
managerial effort because any unit cost reduction will have a larger effect on market share. On the
other hand, rents are lower when competition is higher, so the profit increase from any increase in
market share is less valuable. However, when we allow entry to be endogenous there is fall in the
number of firms who choose to enter the market because profits are lower. In a free entry long-run
equilibrium firms will be larger on average. This means they have a greater desire to cut marginal
costs through higher managerial effort. In the context of this type of model (which follows Raith,
2003), allowing for endogenous market structure an increase in product market competition
unambiguously increases management effort10.

The result that increased product market competition should improve incentives for managerial
practices are reasonably robust, but not completely general. Vives (2005) shows that providing the
market for varieties does not shrink the result goes through under the Bertrand competition for a wide
10

Schmidt (1997) allows bankruptcy costs in a principal agent model with Cournot competition. With risk neutrality, but a
wealth-constrained manager the fear of bankruptcy will increase the incentive of the manager to supply effort.
Nevertheless, the rent reducing effect of competition will still exist and this could be large enough to completely offset the
fear of bankruptcy. It is allowing the endogeneity of entry that makes a substantial difference to the comparative statics.

12

number of assumptions over the form of consumer utility. The conditions for Cournot are more
exacting, but will hold so long as output reaction functions are downward sloping, which is the
standard case.

The empirical prediction that we take to the data is that tougher competition should clearly be related
to better management in the managerial inefficiency model. The relationship is more ambiguous in
some optimal choice models, but is also likely to be positive.

II.D Family ownership and family management

The managerial inefficiency model has implications for the relationship between management and
family firms, since these provide a potential rationale for the continued existence of badly managed
firms. Family ownership can shield inefficient firms from competition if the owners are prepared to
accept a below market rate of return to capital because of the amenity value attached to having the
family’s name associated with the company.

There has been much recent work on the efficiency of family firms. Family firms are the typical form
of ownership and management in the developing world and much of the developed world11. As Table
1 shows in our sample of medium-sized manufacturing firms (see section III for details) family
involvement is common. In around thirty per cent of European firms and ten per cent of American
firms the largest shareholding block is a family (defined as the second generation or beyond from the
company’s founder). This is similar in broad magnitude to the findings of La Porta et al. (1999), who
report about forty per cent of medium sized firms were family-owned in Europe and about ten per cent
11

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1999) and Morck, Wolfenzon and Yeung (2005).

13

were family-owned in the US.12 Interestingly, we see in the second row that many of these firms have
a family member as CEO, suggesting families are reluctant to let professional managers run their
firms. In the third row, we see in the UK and France around two thirds of these CEOs are chosen by
primo geniture (succession to the eldest son) representing around fifteen per cent of the total sample.
In Germany and the US this only occurs in about one third of the family firms representing only three
per cent of the sample. In rows 4 and 5, we look at founder firms – those companies where the largest
current shareholder is the individual who founded the firm. We see that founder firms are also
common in the UK and France, as well as in the US, although much less so in Germany.

[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

One rationale for these differences in types of family involvement across countries is the historical
traditions of Feudalism, particularly in the Norman societies of the UK and France. This appears to
have persisted long after the Norman kingdoms collapsed, with primo geniture obligatory under
English law until the Statute of Wills of 1540 and de facto in France until the introduction of the
Napoleonic code in the early 1800s.13 German traditions were based more on the Teutonic principle of
gavelkind (equal division amongst all sons); while in the US, primo geniture was abolished after the
Revolution with equal treatment by birth order and gender by the middle of the 20th century (Menchik,

12

La Porta et al. (1999) define family “ownership” as controlling 20% or more of the equity, “medium sized” as those
with common equity of just above $500m; and “family” as including founder owned firms. Including “founder” firms in
our definition would increase “family” ownership to about 45% in Europe and 25% in the US, higher then their numbers,
although our “medium sized” firms are smaller. The main points to note is that family firms are common in the OECD,
particularly so in Continental Europe.
13
While Napoleonic inheritance code enforced the equal division of property, it was more flexible with companies. In fact,
a common route to pass property on to a single heir in France is to place this within a company. In England primo geniture
is also still common, with for example, the 2005 Oxford English Dictionary stating that it is “still prevailing in most places
in a modified form”.

14

1980). A second potential rationale for these differences is the structure of estate taxation, which for a
typical medium sized firm worth $10m or more, contains no substantial family firm exemptions in the
US, but gives about a 33%, 50% and 100% exemption in France, Germany and the UK respectively.14

The theoretical implications of family ownership depend on the extent of involvement in
management. Family ownership per se may have advantages over dispersed ownership because the
(concentrated) ownership structure may lead to closer monitoring of managers (e.g. Berle and Means,
1932)15. Under imperfect capital markets, founders will find it difficult to sell off the firm to outside
investors (Caselli and Gennaioli, 2002). Furthermore, when minority investor rights are not well
protected, it may be difficult to diversify ownership.

Even though a firm is family owned, outside professional managers can be appointed to run the firm
as is common in the US and Germany. Combining family ownership with family management has
several potential costs. Selecting managers from among the pool of family members will lower the
average human capital of the managerial cadre, as there is less competition for senior positions.
Furthermore, the knowledge that family members will receive management positions in future may
generate a “Carnegie effect” of reducing their investment in human capital earlier in life. These
selection and Carnegie effects are likely to be much more negative for primo geniture family firms in
which the eldest son is destined to control the firm from birth. On the other hand, principal-agent

14

For political economy reasons these generous estate taxes could have arisen endogenously from the power blocs of
politically connected family firms. Of course, estate tax can be reduced by tax planning, but this usually involves advanced
planning, financial costs and some loss of control.
15
Bennedsen et al. (2005) list a range of additional potential benefits (and costs) of family ownership, although these are
likely to be less important than those discussed in the main text. The benefits include working harder due to higher levels
of shame from failure, trust and loyalty of key stakeholders, and business knowledge from having grown up close to the
firm. The costs include potential conflicts between business norms and family traditions.

15

problems may be mitigated from combining ownership and control. There may also be investment in
firm-specific human capital if the owners’ children expect to inherit the family firm. So ultimately, the
impact of family firms on management practices is an empirical matter.

Of course, family-owned firms should have strong incentives to optimally balance off these factors
before deciding on using family or external managers. However, family-owned firms may choose
family management even though this is sub-optimal for company performance because family
members receive “amenity potential” from managing the family firm, which often bears the family
name and has been managed by several previous generations (Bukhart et al, 1998). In this case, the
family may accept lower economic returns from their management in return for the private utility of
managerial control. Indeed, the desire to retain family management may also be a reason for the
refusal of family owners to sell equity stakes in the company to outsiders.

The evidence on inherited family firms suggests that family ownership has a mixed effect on firm
profitability, but family management has a substantially negative effect16. Our approach in this paper
is to examine directly the impact of family firms on management practices rather than only look at
firm performance measures. Although there may be some endogeneity problems with the family firms
“effect” on management, these selection effects seem to cause OLS estimates to underestimate the
damage of family involvement in management. This is because empirically family firms are more

16

See for example Perez-Gonzalez (2005), and Villalonga and Amit (2005).

16

likely to involve professional managers when the firm has suffered a negative shock (see Bennedsen
et al. 2005).17

Family firms can account for why “exogenously inefficient” firms can persist even in competitive
markets: family owners are prepared to take a below market return on capital because of the amenity
value of having the family name attached to the company. It is hard to understand why there should be
any systematic relationship between family firms and managerial practices under the pure “optimal
choice” model.18

III. MEASURING MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
To investigate these issues we first have to construct a robust measure of management practices
overcoming three hurdles: scoring management practices, collecting accurate responses, and obtaining
interviews with managers. We discuss these issues in turn.

III.A Scoring Management Practices

To measure management requires codifying the concept of “good” and “bad” management into a
measure applicable to different firms across the manufacturing sector. This is a hard task as good
management is tough to define, and is often contingent on a firm’s environment. Our initial hypothesis
17

Bennedsen et al (2005) construct a dataset of 6,000 Danish firms, including information on the gender of the first born
child, which they use to instrumental firms remaining under family management after a succession.
18
One version of the optimal choice hypothesis is that firms could offer contracts with lower wages and worse
management (e.g. less risk of firing, lower effort). This compensating differential would vary depending on the firm’s
technology and environment. Possibly, primo geniture firms may prefer offering these types of contracts, although it is
hard to see why firms in the same industry, same size and age would differ dramatically in this respect purely because of
their family status.

17

was that while some management practices are too contingent to be evaluated as “good” to “bad”,
others can potentially be defined in these terms, and it is these practices we tried to focus on in the
survey.

To do this we used a practice evaluation tool developed by a leading international management
consultancy firm. In order to prevent any perception of bias with our study we chose to receive no
financial support from this firm.

The practice evaluation tool defines and scores from one (worst practice) to five (best practice) across
eighteen key management practices used by industrial firms. In Appendix A (Table A1) we detail the
practices and the questions in the same order as they appeared in the survey, describe the scoring
system and provide three anonymous responses per question. These practices can be grouped into four
areas: operations (3 practices), monitoring (5 practices), targets (5 practices) and incentives (5
practices). The operations management section focuses on the introduction of lean manufacturing
techniques, the documentation of processes improvements and the rationale behind introductions of
improvements. The monitoring section focuses on the tracking of performance of individuals,
reviewing performance (e.g. through regular appraisals and job plans), and consequence management
(e.g. making sure that plans are kept and appropriate sanctions and rewards are in place). The targets
section examines the type of targets (whether goals are simply financial or operational or more
holistic), the realism of the targets (stretching, unrealistic or non-binding), the transparency of targets
(simple or complex) and the range and interconnection of targets (e.g. whether they are given
consistently throughout the organization). Finally, the incentives section includes promotion criteria
(e.g. purely tenure based or including an element linked to individual performance), pay and bonuses,

18

and fixing or firing bad performers, where best practice is deemed the approach that gives strong
rewards for those with both ability and effort. A subset of the practices has similarities with those used
in studies on HRM practices.

Since the scaling may vary across practices in the econometric estimation, we convert the scores
(from the 1 to 5 scale) to z-scores by normalizing by practice to mean zero and standard deviation one.
In our main econometric specifications, we take the unweighted average across all z-scores as our
primary measure of overall managerial practice, but we also experiment with other weightings
schemes based on factor analytic approaches.

There is scope for legitimate disagreement over whether all of these measures really constitute “good
practice”. Therefore, an important way to examine the externality validity of the measures is to
examine whether they are correlated with data on firm performance constructed from company
accounts and the stock market. We also examine whether the relationship between management
practices and productivity is weaker in the Continental European nations to check for any “AngloSaxon” bias in our management scores.

III.B Collecting Accurate Responses

With this evaluation tool we can, in principle, provide some quantification of firms’ management
practices. However, an important issue is the extent to which we can obtain unbiased responses to our
questions from firms. In particular, will respondents provide accurate responses? As is well known in
the surveying literature (see, for example, Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001) a respondent’s answer to
survey questions is typically biased by the scoring grid, anchored towards those answers that they

19

expect the interviewer thinks is “correct”. In addition, interviewers may themselves have preconceptions about the performance of the firms they are interviewing and bias their scores based on
their ex-ante perceptions. More generally, a range of background characteristics, potentially correlated
with good and bad managers, may generate some kinds of systematic bias in the survey data.

To try to address these issues we took a range of steps to obtain accurate data when we administered
the survey in the summer of 2004.

First, the survey was conducted by telephone without telling the managers they were being scored.19
This enabled scoring to be based on the interviewer’s evaluation of the firm’s actual practices, rather
than their aspirations, the manager’s perceptions or the interviewer’s impressions.20 To run this
“blind” scoring we used open questions (i.e. “can you tell me how you promote your employees”),
rather than closed questions (i.e. “do you promote your employees on tenure [yes/no]?”). These
questions target actual practices and examples, with the discussion continuing until the interviewer
can make an accurate assessment of the firm’s typical practices. For each dimension, the first question
is broad with detailed follow-up questions to fine-tune the scoring. For example, in dimension (1)
Modern manufacturing introduction the initial question is “Can you tell me about your manufacturing
process” and is followed up by questions like “How do you manage your inventory levels”.21

19

This survey tool has been passed by Stanford’s Human Subjects Committee. The deception involved was deemed
acceptable because it is: (i) necessary to get unbiased responses; (ii) minimized to the management practice questions and
is temporary (we send managers debriefing packs afterwards); and (iii) presents no risk as the data is confidential.
20
If an interviewer could not score a question it was left blank, with the firm average taken over the remaining questions.
The average number of un-scored questions per firm was 1.3%, with no firm included in the sample if more than three
questions were un-scored.
21
Minimizing inventory levels is one of the key components of modern manufacturing.

20

Second, the interviewers did not know anything about the firm’s financial information or performance
in advance of the interview. This was achieved by selecting medium sized manufacturing firms and by
providing only firm names and contact details to the interviewers (but no financial details). These
smaller firms (the median size was 700 employees) would not be known by name and are rarely
reported in the business media. The interviewers were specially trained graduate students from top
European and US business schools, with a median age of twenty-eight and five years prior business
experience in the manufacturing sector22. All interviews were conducted in the manager’s native
language.

Third, each interviewer ran over 50 interviews on average, allowing us to remove interviewer fixed
effects from all empirical specifications. This helps to address concerns over inconsistent
interpretation of categorical responses (see Manski, 2004), standardizing the scoring system.

Fourth, the survey instrument was targeted at plant managers, who are typically senior enough to have
an overview of management practices but not so senior as to be detached from day-to-day operations
of the enterprise.

Fifth, we collected a detailed set of information on the interview process itself (number and type of
prior contacts before obtaining the interviews, duration, local time-of-day, date and day-of-the week),
on the manager (gender, seniority, nationality, company and job tenure, internal and external
employment experience, and location), and on the interviewer (we can include individual interviewer-

22

Thanks to the interview team of Johannes Banner, Michael Bevan, Mehdi Boussebaa, Dinesh Cheryan, Alberic de
Solere, Manish Mahajan, Simone Martin, Himanshu Pande, Jayesh Patel and Marcus Thielking.

21

fixed effects, time-of-day and subjective reliability score). Some of these survey controls are
significantly informative about the management score (see Appendix C and Table C1)23, and when we
use these as controls for interview noise in our econometric evaluations the coefficient on the
management score typically increased.

III.C Obtaining Interviews with Managers

The interview process took about fifty minutes on average, and was run from the London School of
Economics. Overall, we obtained a relatively high response rate of 54%, which was achieved through
four steps. First, the interview was introduced as “a piece of work”24 without discussion of the firm’s
financial position or its company accounts, making it relatively uncontroversial for managers to
participate. Interviewers did not discuss financials in the interviews, both to maximize the
participation of firms and to ensure our interviewers were truly “blind” on the firm’s financial
position. Second, questions were ordered to lead with the least controversial (shop-floor operations
management) and finish with the most controversial (pay, promotions and firings). Third,
interviewers’ performance was monitored, as was the proportion of interviews achieved, so they were
persistent in chasing firms (the median number of contacts each interviewer made in setting up the
interview was 6.4). The questions are also about practices within the firm so any plant managers can
respond, so there are potentially several managers per firm who could be contacted25. Fourth, the

23

In particular, we found the scores were significantly higher for senior managers, when interviews were conducted later
in the week and/or earlier in the day. That is to say, scores were highest, on average, for senior managers on a Friday
morning and lowest for junior managers on a Monday afternoon. By including information on these characteristics in our
analysis, we explicitly controlled for these types of interview bias.
24
Words like “survey” or “research” should be avoided as these are used by switchboards to block market research calls.
25
We found no significant correlation between the number, type and time-span of contacts before an interview is
conducted and the management score. This suggests while different managers may respond differently to the interview
proposition this does not appear to be directly correlated with their responses or the average management practices of the
firm.

22

written endorsement of the Bundesbank (in Germany) and the Treasury (in the UK), and a scheduled
presentation to the Banque de France, helped demonstrate to managers this was an important exercise
with official support.

III.D Sampling Frame and Additional Data

Since our aim is to compare across countries we decided to focus on the manufacturing sector where
productivity is easier to measure than in the non-manufacturing sector. We also focused on medium
sized firms selecting a sample where employment ranged between 50 and 10,000 workers (with a
median of 700). Very small firms have little publicly available data. Very large firms are likely to be
more heterogeneous across plants, and so it would be more difficult to get a picture of managerial
performance in the firm as a whole from one or two plant interviews. We drew a sampling frame from
each country to be representative of medium sized manufacturing firms and then randomly chose the
order of which firms to contact (see Appendix B for details). We also excluded any clients of our
partnering consultancy firm from our sampling frame26.

In addition to the standard information on management practices, we also ran two other surveys. First,
we collected information from a separate telephone survey on the Human Resource department on the
average characteristics of workers and managers in the firm such as gender, age, proportion with a
college degree, average hours, holidays, sickness, occupational breakdown and a range of questions
on the organizational structure of the firm and the work-life balance. The details of this questionnaire
are provided in Appendix A3. Second, we collected information from public data sources and another
telephone survey in summer 2005 on family ownership, management and succession procedures,
26

This removed 33 firms out of our sampling frame of 1,353 firms

23

typically answered by the CEO or his office. The details of this questionnaire are provided in
Appendix A4.

Quantitative information on firm sales, employment, capital, materials etc. came from the company
accounts and proxy statements, while industry level data came from the OECD. The details are
provided in Appendix B.

Comparing the responding firms with those in the sampling frame, we found no evidence that the
responders were systematically different on any of the performance measures to the non-responders.
They were also statistically similar on all the other observables in our dataset. The only exception was
on size where our firms were slightly larger than average than those in the sampling frame.

III.E Evaluating and Controlling for Measurement Error

The data potentially suffers from several types of measurement error that are likely to bias the
association of firm performance with management towards zero. First, we could have measurement
error in the management practice scores obtained using our survey tool. To quantify this we
performed repeat interviews on 64 firms, contacting different managers in the firm, typically at
different plants, using different interviewers. To the extent that our management measure is truly
picking up general company-wide management practices these two scores should be correlated, while
to the extent the measure is driven by noise the measures should be independent.

Figure 2 plots the average firm level scores from the first interview against the second interviews,
from which we can see they are highly correlated (correlation 0.734 with p-value 0.000). Furthermore,

24

there is no obvious (or statistically significant) relationship between the degree of measurement error
and the absolute score. That is to say, high and low scores appear to be as well measured as average
scores, and firms that have high (or low) scores on the first interview tend to have high (or low) scores
on the second interview. Thus, firms that score below two or above four appear to be genuinely badly
or well managed rather than extreme draws of sampling measurement error.

[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

Analyzing the measurement error in more detail (see Appendix C), we find that the question level
measures are noisier, with 42% of the variation in the scores due to measurement error, compared to
the average firm’s scores with 25% of the variation due to measurement error. This improved signalnoise ratio in the firm level measure – which is our primary management proxy - is due to the partial
averaging out of measurement errors across questions.

The second type of measurement error concerns the fact that our management practices cover only a
subset of all management practices that drive performance. For example, our interviews did not
contain any questions on management strategy (such as merger and acquisition strategy). However, so
long as firms’ capabilities across all management practices are positively correlated - which they are
significantly within the eighteen practices examined - then our measure based on a subset of practices
will provide a proxy of the firm’s true management capabilities. Again, however, this suggests that the
coefficients we estimate on management in the production function are probably biased towards zero
due to attenuation bias.

25

IV. MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AND FIRM PERFORMANCE
Before we investigate the reasons for the spread of management practices across firms it is worth
evaluating whether these practices are correlated with firm performance. The purpose of this exercise
is not to directly identify a causal relationship between our management practice measures and firm
performance. It is rather an external validity test of the survey measurement tool to check that the
scores are not just “cheap talk” but are actually correlated with quantitative measures of firm
performance from independent data sources on company accounts, survival rates and market value.

IV.A Econometric Modeling

Consider the basic firm production function
yitc = α lc l itc + α kc k itc + α nc nitc + β c M ic + γ c 'z itc + u itc

(7)

where Y = deflated sales, L = labor, K = capital and N = intermediate inputs (materials) of firm i at
time t in country c (note that we generally allow country specific parameters on the inputs) and lower
case letters denote natural logarithms y = ln(Y), etc. The z’s are a number of other controls that will
affect productivity such as workforce characteristics27 (the proportion of workers with a degree, the
proportion with MBAs and the average hours worked), firm characteristics (firm age, whether the firm
is listed), a complete set of three digit industry dummies and country dummies.

The crucial variable for us is management practices denoted M. Our basic measure takes z-scores of
each of the eighteen individual management questions and then averages over the variables to get M.

27

We experimented with a wide range of workforce characteristics such as gender, worker age and unionization. We only
found human capital to be statistically significant after controlling for firm characteristics.

26

We experimented with a number of other approaches including using the primary factor from factoranalysis and using the raw average management scores and found very similar results.

The most straightforward approach to estimating equation (7) is to simply run OLS in the cross
section (or on the panel with standard errors clustered by company) and assume that all the correlated
heterogeneity is captured by the control variables. Since we have panel data, however, an alternative
is to implement a two-step method where we estimate the production function in stage one and then
estimate the “permanent” component of total factor productivity (i.e. the fixed effect of TFP). We then
project the permanent component of productivity on the management scores in a separate second step.
This is the approach Black and Lynch (2001) followed in a similar two-step analysis of workplace
practices and productivity. We estimate the production function in a variety of ways. The simplest
method is within groups – i.e. including a full set of firm dummies. We compare this to “System
GMM” (see Blundell and Bond, 2000) approach that also allows for the endogeneity of the time
varying inputs (capital, labor and materials). Finally, we implement the Olley Pakes (1996)
estimator.28 This allows the unobserved firm-specific efficiency effect to follow a first-order Markov
process. Again, using these estimates of the production function parameters we construct firm specific
efficiency/TFP measures that we then relate in a second stage to management practices and other time
invariant firm characteristics.

28

See Arellano and Bond (1991) and Blundell and Bond (1998) on System GMM estimation, and Olley and Pakes (1996)
on their estimation strategy.

27

IV.B Econometric Results

Table 2 investigates the association between firm performance and management practices. Column (1)
simply reports a levels OLS specification including only labor, country and time dummies as
additional controls. The management score is strongly positively and significantly associated with
higher labor productivity. The second column includes capital and materials, and this almost halves
the management coefficient29. In column (3), we include our general controls of industry dummies,
average hours worked, education, firm age, and listing status. This reduces the management
coefficient slightly more, but it remains significant. Finally, in column (4) we include a set of
interview “noise controls” to mitigate biases across interviewers and types of interviewees.30 This
actually increases the management coefficient, as we would expect if we were stripping out some of
the measurement error in the management score. Overall, the first four columns suggest that the
average management score is positively and significantly correlated with total factor productivity.

[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

In Appendix D, we present more econometrically sophisticated production function estimates based
on the “two step” method discussed above where we recover the long-run component of TFP and
project this on the management score and other covariates.31 We estimate the permanent component
either by within groups, System GMM or Olley-Pakes. The results are as strong, if not stronger, than
29

If one of the mechanisms through which better management improves productivity is by increasing investment in
capital, we may be being too conservative by conditioning on capital.
30
In Table C1 in the Appendix, we detail these noise controls with column (1) reporting the results from regressing
management on the full set of noise controls and column (2) the results from regressing management on our selected set of
(informative) noise controls that we use in our main regressions.
31
The exact number of observations depends on estimation technique. For Olley-Pakes, we need at least one period for
lags and must drop all observations with non-positive values of investment. For System GMM we lose two lags to
construct instruments and include dynamics. We condition on firms having at least four continuous years of data.

28

those presented here for the simple OLS regressions. Whether estimated by GMM, Olley-Pakes or
within groups, management practices are always positively and significantly associated with the
longer run component of TFP.

We were concerned that the definition of “good management” may be biased towards an Anglo-Saxon
view of the management world. Some may regard such business practices as suitable for the ‘free
markets’ of Britain and America, but less suitable for Continental Europe. We empirically tested this
by including interactions of the management term with country dummies – we could not reject that the
hypothesis that the coefficients on management were equal across countries32.

In addition to the overall management score, we looked at the role that individual questions play. Rerunning column (4) of Table 2 we find that twelve of the question z-scores are individually significant
at the five per cent level, two are individually significant at the 10% level and four appear
insignificant33. The average question-level point estimate is 0.018 – less than half the pooled average
of 0.042 - reflecting the higher question level measurement error (see Appendix C). We also
calculated the average score separately for the four groups of management practices and entered them
one at a time into the production function. The point estimates (standard errors) were as follows:

32

For example, we generated a dummy for the two Continental European countries and interacting this with the
management score. When entered as an additional variable in the column (4) specification the coefficient was 0.024 with a
standard error of 0.028. In Table D the final two columns split the sample into different regions (Continental Europe and
Anglo-American). We find that the coefficients on management are, if anything, larger in France and Germany than in the
UK or US (although this difference is not statistically significant).
33
This suggests that not all eighteen of the individual management practices are associated with better performance. We
could of course construct a “refined” management measure by averaging over the individually significant questions, but
this becomes too close to crude data mining.

29

operations 0.032 (0.011), monitoring 0.025 (0.011), targets 0.033 (0.011) and incentives 0.036
(0.013).34

We also considered whether the management measure was simply proxying for better technology in
the firm. Although technology measures such as Research and Development (R&D) and computer use
are only available for sub-samples of the dataset, we did not find that the management coefficient fell
by very much in the production function when we include explicit measures of technology, as these
are not strongly correlated with good management35.

The final four columns of Table 2 examine four other measures of firm performance. In column (5)
we use an alternative performance measure which is return on capital employed (ROCE), a
profitability measure used by financial analysts and managers to benchmark firm performance (see
Bertrand and Schoar, 2003). The significant and positive coefficient in the ROCE equation, which
also includes the same set of controls as in column (4), confirms the basic productivity results. In
column (6), we estimate a Tobin’s Q specification (the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book
value), which again includes the same set of controls as in the production function. We also find a
significant and positive coefficient on management. In column (7), we estimate the relationship
between exit in the twelve months after the survey and management practices. Over this period, eight
34

Details of the regressions appear in Appendix Table A2. We also examined specifications with multiple questions or
different groupings, but statistically the simple average was the best representation of the data. Part of the problem is that it
is hard to reliably identify clusters of practices in the presence of measurement error. We show how sub-sets of
management practices vary systematically in sub-section IV.C below.
35
In the context of the specification in Table 2 column (4) for the 219 firms where we observe PCs per employee the
management coefficient is 0.069 with standard error of 0.041 (the coefficient on PCs was 0.051 with a standard error of
0.024). This compares to a management coefficient of 0.073 with a standard error of 0.042 on the same sample when PCs
are not included. For the sample of 216 firms where we have R&D information the coefficient on management is 0.046
with a standard error of 0.017 in the specification with R&D and 0.050 with a standard error of 0.017 in the specification
without R&D.

30

firms went bankrupt, for whom the implied marginal effects of management in the probit equation are
large and statistically significant. In column (8), we estimate the relationship between the average
annual growth rate of sales and management practices and find a positive and significant coefficient
on management.

Overall then, there is substantial external validation that the measures of management we use are
positively and significantly associated with better firm performance. Interestingly, the association is
not simply with productivity but also with profitability (and market value, survival and growth). This
would be naturally predicted by the managerial inefficiency model, but is not predicted from the pure
“optimal choice of management model”. We must be cautious in interpreting this as strong positive
support for the former model, however, as Table 2 simply presents associations and there are
endogeneity issues (see sub-section V.E below). Nevertheless, at the very least these results offer
some external validation of the survey tool implying that we are not simply measuring statistical
noise.

IV.C Contingent management

In this sub-section we examine some of the empirical predictions of the “optimal choice” model of
management and produce some supportive evidence. In this model, the importance of different
practices for firm performance will be contingent on a firm’s environment. For example, firms in a
high-skill industry may find good human-capital management practices relatively more important than
those in a low-skill industry36.

36

See also Athey and Stern (1998)

31

First, we investigated the impact of the weighting across individual questions through factor analysis.
There appeared to be one dominant factor that loaded heavily on all our questions – which could be
labeled “good management” – which accounted for 49% of the variation37. The only other notable
factor, which accounted for a further 7% of the variation, could be labeled as “human capital relative
to fixed capital”, which had a positive loading on most of the human capital oriented questions and a
negative loading on the fixed capital/operations type questions. This factor was uncorrelated with any
productivity measures, although interestingly it was significantly positively correlated with our skills
measures (e.g. the proportion of employees with college degrees) and the level of organizational
devolvement38, suggesting a slightly different pattern of relative management practices across firms
with different levels of human capital.

We examine this issue more explicitly in Table 3 where we find robust evidence that firms and
industries with higher skills – as proxied by college degrees or average wages – have significantly
better relative human-capital management practices. Column (1) regresses the average score of the
three explicitly human-capital (“HC”) focused questions (13, 17 and 18) on the percentage of
employees with a degree (in logs), and finds a large positive coefficient of 0.220. By comparison,
column (2) runs the same regression but uses the average score of the three most fixed capital (“FC”)
focused questions (1, 2 and 4) as the dependent variable. In this column we also find a significantly
positive association but with a much smaller coefficient of 0.100. Column (3) uses the difference
between the human capital focused and fixed capital focused management practices as the dependent
variable and shows that this measure of “relative intensity of human-capital management practices”
37

Re-estimating the production functions of Table 2 column (4), we found that this “good management” factor score had a
coefficient of 0.029 with a standard error of 0.009.
38
In the survey we also collected two questions on organizational structure (see Appendix Table A3) taken from
Bresnahan et al. (2002).

32

(“HC-FC”) is significantly higher in highly skilled firms. Column (4) includes the general controls
that weaken the correlation but it remains significant at the 10 per cent level. Hence, while higher
skilled firms have better overall management practices, they are particularly good at the most humancapital focused management practices. Columns (5) to (8) run similar regressions on firm average
wages (rather than college degrees) as a measure of skills. We find a similar pattern of more humancapital focused management practices in higher waged firms. Finally, column (9) uses a three-digit
industry level measure of skills instead of a firm-specific measure, the proportion of employees with a
college degree in the US. We also find that this is positively correlated with the relative intensity of
human-capital management practices. Overall, this table is consistent with the “optimal choice model
of management practices” in which firms tailor their practices to their competitive environment.

[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]

IV.D Firm performance-related measurement bias

A criticism of our “external validity” test of looking at production functions is that for psychological
reasons managers will respond “optimistically” in firms who are doing well even if the true state of
management practices is poor39. We call this firm performance-related measurement bias. Note that
this is different from the reverse causality issue that states that management practices genuinely
improve in response to a shock that raises productivity (see section V.E below for a discussion of this
issues and an instrumentation strategy that attempts to deal with it).

39

We thank Bengt Holmstrom for emphasizing this issue.

33

There are several considerations mitigating the problem of firm performance-related measurement
bias in our study. First, the survey is deliberately designed to try to avoid this kind of bias by using a
“double-blind” methodology based on open questions, with the managers unaware they are being
scored. So to the extent that managers talk about actual practices in their firms this should help to
reduce this measurement bias.

Second, as we shall show below in section V.B, firms in more competitive industries – defined in
terms of lower historical average rents – are on average better managed. Therefore, at the industry
level the correlation between management practices and historic average profitability goes in the
reverse direction to that implied by this measurement bias story.

Third, psychological evidence (e.g., Schwarz and Strack, 1999) suggests that recent improvements in
a subject’s condition are more likely to have an impact on survey responses than the absolute level of
a condition. Therefore, if there were a large performance-related bias in the management scores we
would expect this to show up in the fact that recent improvements in firm productivity (relative to
comparators) have a big impact on managerial responses. In fact, when we regress management scores
against lagged productivity growth rates there is no significant correlation. For example, a regression
of management scores against the productivity growth rates over the previous year generated a
coefficient (standard error) of 0.001 (0.002).40

40

We also tested this management and productivity growth relationship over longer periods in a Table 2 Column (4)
specification – such as the last 5 years and the last 3 years – and found equally insignificant results. The positive
correlation of management with productivity levels and sales growth but not with productivity growth is consistent with a
simple dynamic selection model. Management (and therefore productivity levels) is fixed over time and the market
gradually allocates more sales to the more productive firms.

34

Finally, the Appendices report a further battery of robustness tests on this issue. Not all individual
questions are significantly correlated with performance, as shown in Appendix Table A2. Therefore,
to the extent this bias is a serious phenomenon it only seems to afflict certain questions. One reason of
course may be that some questions are more or less subject to bias because they are more or less
“objective”. To investigate this further Appendix Table D2 runs some robustness tests on the
management performance results by using a management measure based on the four questions which
are arguable the most objective (column 1), and the four questions which are arguably the least
objective (column 2).41 Comparing these two columns demonstrates that the coefficients on these two
sub-sets of questions, however, are not significantly different. In columns (3) to (8) in Appendix Table
D2 we report the results from running the production function estimation on three other survey
measures – a self-scored “work-life balance” indicator and two self-scored “organizational
devolvement” indicators - which should also be afflicted by the measurement bias story. However, as
can be seen from columns (3) to (8) these measures are not significantly correlated with productivity,
suggesting that the questions are not all reflections of a “warm glow” surrounding a firm who is
performing well.

Hence, in conclusion while there is undoubtedly scope for firm performance related measurement bias
in the survey; we do not find evidence that this is a major problem in our results.

41

Appendix Table A2 reports the individual coefficients for every question so any other grouping of the questions by an
alternative categorization of “objectivity” can also be analyzed.

35

V. ACCOUNTING FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES

V.A The distribution of management practices

Having confirmed that our management measures are significantly related to firm performance, we
now proceed to examine the management scores directly. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the
average management scores per firm across all eighteen questions, plotted by country in raw form (not
in z-score form). It is clear that there is a huge amount of heterogeneity within each country with firms
spread across most of the distribution. About 2% of the overall variation in firms’ average
management scores is across countries, 42% is across countries by three-digit industry, and the
remaining 56% is within country and industry. This spread is particularly wide when considered
against the fact that a score of one indicates industry worst practice and five industry best practices.
Therefore, for example, firms scoring two or less have only basic shop-floor management, very
limited monitoring of processes or people, ineffective and inappropriate targets, and poor incentives
and firing mechanisms. Thus, one of the central questions we address in the next sub-section is how
do these firms survive?

Looking across countries the US has on average the highest scores (3.37), Germany is second (3.32),
France third (3.13) and the UK last (3.08), with the gaps between the US, Continental Europe (France
and Germany) and the UK are statistically significant at the 5% level. The UK-US gap also appears
persistent over time. The Marshall Plan productivity mission of 1947 reported that “efficient
management was the most significant factor in the American advantage [over the UK]” (Dunning,

36

1958, p. 120). We were concerned that some of the apparent cross-country differences in management
scores may simply be driven by differences in the sampling size distribution, but these figures are
robust to controls for size and public ownership.42

The presence of the US at the top of the ranking is consistent with anecdotal evidence from other
surveys.43 It also reflects the productivity rankings from other studies comparing the four nations (the
US is top and the UK bottom). One might suspect this was due to an “Anglo-Saxon” bias that is why
in the previous section we had to confront the scores with data on productivity to show that the
management scores are correlated with real outcomes within countries (see Table 2). Furthermore, the
position of the UK as the country with the lowest average management scores indicates that the
survey instrument is not intrinsically Anglo-Saxon biased. Table A2 in Appendix A provides more
details behind these cross-country comparisons, and reveals a relative US strength in targets and
incentives (more people management) versus a German and French strength in shop floor and
monitoring (more operations management)44.

V.B Management practices and product market competition

A common argument is that variations in management practice result from the differences in product
market competition; either because of selection effects and/or because of variations in the incentives
to supply effort. Table 4 attempts to investigate this by examining the relationship between product
42

We also find that the 21 US multinational subsidiaries located in Europe in our dataset are significantly better managed
(average 3.74) than either the 405 domestic European firms (average 3.11) or the 16 non-US multinational subsidiaries
(average 3.12). So American firms also manage to transport their management practices to their overseas subsidiaries.
43
For example, Proudfoot (2003) regularly reports that US firms were least hindered by poor management practices (36%)
compared to Australia, France, Germany, Spain, South Africa and the UK. Unfortunately, these samples are drawn only
from the consulting groups’ clients so suffer from serious selection bias.
44
We also found in France and German firms were significantly more hierarchical (gave managers more power relative to
workers) in pace and task allocation compared to the UK and particularly the US.

37

market competition and management. We use three broad measures of competition following Nickell
(1996) and Aghion et al. (2005). The first measure is the degree of import penetration in the country
by three-digit industry measured as the share of total imports over domestic production. This is
constructed for the period 1995-1999 to remove any potential contemporaneous feedback45. The
second is the country by three digit industry Lerner index of competition, which is (1 – profits/sales),
calculated as the average across the entire firm level database (excluding each firm itself)46. Again,
this is constructed for the period 1995-1999 to remove any potential contemporaneous feedback. The
third measure of competition is the survey question on the number of competitors a firm faces (see
Appendix A3), valued zero for “non competitors”, one for “less than 5 competitors”, and two for “5 or
more competitors”47.

[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

In column (1), we see that better management scores are positively and significantly associated with
greater import penetration. In column (2), we re-estimate the same specification but now include a full
set of controls, and again find that higher lagged trade competition is significantly correlated with
better management. The firm controls include firm size, firm age, listing status, skills and
consolidation status.48 Even after conditioning on these additional covariates, we find that the more

45

Melitz (2003) and other have suggested this measure of trade exposure should truncate the lower part of the productivity
distribution. We have also looked at (Imports+Exports)/production as an alternative indicator of trade exposure with
similar results to those reported here.
46
Note that in constructing this we draw on firms in the population database, not just those in the survey.
47
This question has been used by inter alia Nickell (1996) and Stewart (1990).
48
We also experimented with many other controls (results available on request). Union density was negatively correlated
with management scores, but insignificant. Although there was a significant negative correlation between management
scores and average worker age in simple specifications, this disappeared when we controlled for firm age (older workers
are more likely to be matched with older firms). The proportion of females was insignificant.

38

competitive country-industry pairings contain firms that are on average significantly better managed.
In columns (3) and (4), we run two similar specifications on lagged Lerner index of competition as an
alternative competition measure and again find a significant and positive effect. In columns (5) and
(6), we run two further similar specifications, but this time using managers’ own self reported measure
of the number of competitors they face, and again we find a positive and significant association: the
more rivals a firm perceives it faces the better managed it appears to be. The final two columns
include all three competition measures simultaneously. Although the statistical significance and
marginal effects are typically a bit lower, the same pattern of results persists. Tougher product market
competition is associated with significantly better management practices49.

The magnitude of the competition effect on average management scores is of economic as well as
statistical significance. For example in column (6) increasing the number of competitors from “few”
to “many” is associated with a management z-score increase of 0.145 or a raw management score
increase of about 0.160.50 As discussed in the section VI this competition effect accounts for a
substantial proportion of the tail of badly performing firms and the management gap between the US
and Europe.

These are conditional correlations, of course, as we have no instrumental variable for competition.
However, it is likely that any endogeneity bias will cause us to underestimate the importance of
product market competition on management. For example, in columns (3) and (4) an exogenous
49

We also looked for a relationship between the level of competition and the spread of management practices (Syverson,
2004a, b), but could not find any significant relationship. One reason may be our current sample is too small to test for
differences in the second moment of management across sub-samples.
50
The difference in the raw management score between the 75th and 25th percentiles of the distribution is 1.06. The ratio of
the standard deviations of the firm-level management scores to the z-scores is 1.098.

39

positive shock that raises managerial quality in an industry is likely to increase profitability and
therefore the measured Lerner index (indeed, Table 2 showed a positive correlation between
management and individual firm level profitability). This will make it harder for us to identify any
positive impact of product market competition on management51.

One issue in interpreting this competition effect is that it potentially works through two mechanisms
(see Section II): (i) increasing management scores through greater managerial effort; and (ii) greater
competition increasing the relative exit rate of badly managed firms versus well-managed firms.
Using the managerial hours worked as a basic proxy for effort, we find an insignificant relationship
between tougher competition and longer hours52 Of course managerial hours is a very imperfect proxy
for managerial effort, as managers may supply more effort by a greater “intensity” of work rather than
longer hours. Still, it does suggest that the margin of impact of competition is not on the length of the
working day or week.

V.C Management practices and family firms

In Table 5, we investigate the impact of hereditary family ownership on firms’ management scores
(see Table 1 for descriptive statistics on types of ownership and control by the family). Column (1)
starts by regressing management scores against an indicator of the family as the single largest owner

51

Similarly, better management will improve exports, reduce the degree of imports, and probably mean that the firm pulls
away from other competitors and feels less threatened. These will all generate a bias towards zero on the competition
indicators in Table 4.
52
For example, the coefficient (standard deviation) of managerial hours on import penetration, the Lerner index and the
number of competitors is 1.033 (0.881), -2.498 (6.657) and 0.847 (0.612) respectively based on an identical specification
to Table 4 column (2), except with managerial hours as the dependent variable instead of the management score.

40

(defined on total family holdings53) plus the standard set of control variables. We see that family
ownership per se does not seem to be associated with depressed firm performance, with a negative but
insignificant coefficient. In column (2) we regress management practices against an indicator of
family ownership and family management (defined by the CEO being a family member), and find the
coefficient becomes more negative but again is not significantly different from zero. In column (3),
we include an indicator that the firm is family owned, family managed with the CEO succession
determined by primo geniture - that is they explicitly stated that the policy of the firm has been to pass
this position to the eldest son. For these firms we see a strongly negative and significant coefficient,
suggesting the sub-set of family firms who adopted primo geniture successions are substantially worse
managed. In column (4) we drop the general controls and show that the family firm correlation is
much stronger in the unconditional regressions. In column (5) we include all three indicators and see
that it is the primo geniture family firms that are driving the negative coefficients on family ownership
and management. In fact, family ownership per se has a positive and weakly significant association
with good management. The final column drops the founder firms from the sample so that external
ownership is the pure baseline, which makes little difference to the results. Taking Table 5 as a whole
it seems that the combination of family ownership and primo geniture family management
significantly damages company performance.

[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

53

We also looked at the breakdown of individual family holdings (e.g. if two brothers owned half the equity each), but
could not find any significant impact of the relative or absolute differences in holdings of the first and second largest
family shareholders. One reason may be that complete data on this was hard to obtain for European firms.

41

One interpretation of this result is that being a primo geniture company directly causes inferior
performance in family firms due to the types of selection and “Carnegie effects” discussed in section
II. Another interpretation is that primo geniture is an indicator of firms being more generally
backward, suggesting the persistence of “old-fashioned” management techniques. While this is
possible we do nevertheless find that primo geniture family firms are significantly worse managed
even after including controls for firm age, average employee age and CEO age.54 It is also difficult to
see why France and the UK should exogenously have a greater number of old-fashioned firms than
Germany or the US (given our controls for industrial structure, age and size). By contrast, the
common Norman legal origin of the France and the UK offers a direct historical reason for the
persistence of primo geniture.

V.D Management Scores and Management Ability

Another interpretation for the variation in managerial practices across firms is that our management
score proxies for the underlying ability of managers (and employees) in the firm, with well-managed
firms simply those containing a large-fraction of high ability managers. Under this view, our proxies
of human capital (such as the proportion of employees with college degrees and the proportion with
MBAs) do not control for this unobserved ability. Even under this interpretation it is, of course,
interesting that lower product market competition and primo geniture increases the incidence of poor
quality managers.

54

Another interpretation on the poor management of family firms is that they operate less formally due to a lower return
from “bureaucracy” (Novaes and Zingales, 2004). The point-estimate (standard errors) for the column (3) specification for
individual management components are: Shop floor operations -0.341 (0.147); Monitoring -0.345 (0.116); Targets -0.229
(0.115); and Incentives -0.231 (0.099). So while there is some evidence for this in the particularly low monitoring scores
for family firms, they still score significantly badly on other management components like shop floor operations and
incentives, which are not obviously linked to more formalized management styles.

42

However, several findings cause us to doubt that the management scores we measure are simply a
cipher for employee ability. First, assuming employees are paid their marginal product, we would not
expect to observe the positive correlation between good management practices and profits and market
value discussed earlier (see Table 2) as this would be “priced out” in the market. Second, we also find
that controlling for the average wages has very little effect on the size of the management coefficient
in the production functions, suggesting that the management score is not simply a proxy for
unobserved employee ability55. Finally, CEO pay (a proxy for top-managerial ability) is not correlated
with our management score once we control for firm size56. Therefore, while managerial ability may
account for some of the variation in management practices across firms; this is unlikely to explain all
the observed variation. Our interpretation is that managerial practices are deeply embedded in the
organizational capital of the firm, and this explains the higher productivity and profitability of wellmanaged firms. This organizational capital is greater than the sum of the parts of abilities and skills of
the current employees.

V.E Instrumental variable estimates of management practices in the production function

Returning to the production functions estimates in the previous section, we noted that it was not
possible to regard the coefficient on management as a causal effect of management on firm
performance. Our estimated effects of the “true effect” of management on productivity could be
biased upwards or downwards due to reverse causality. For example, positive feedback could occur if
55

When we include the ln(average wage of the firm) and its interactions with country dummies in a specification identical
to that of column (4) in Table 2, the management coefficient is 0.051 with a standard error of 0.017. This compares to a
management coefficient of 0.059 with a standard error of 0.017 without the wage terms on the same sample (we only have
2,612 observations for this regression compared to the 5,350 in Table 2 because wage data is not reported for some of the
firms in the sample). The wage terms are positive and significant.
56
For example, regressing log(CEO pay) on firm size, public/private status, country dummies, industry dummies, and the
management score, we find the coefficient (standard error) on the management score is 0.001 (0.051). Note that although
CEO pay includes bonuses it does not include share options.

43

higher productivity enabled cash-constrained to invest more resources in improving managerial
practices. This would bias our coefficient on management upwards. Negative feedback could occur if
higher productivity allows managers to reduce their input of effort.57 This would bias the coefficient
on management downwards.

[TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]

We present results in Table 6 using product market competition and/or family ownership as
instrumental variables for management practices. For this to be valid we need to not only assume that
our measures of product market competition and ownership are exogenous (as in Table 6) but also that
the mechanism by which competition (and ownership) impacts on productivity is solely through
improving managerial practices. Based on these admittedly very strong identification assumptions the
instrumental variable strategy identifies the causal effect of management on performance.

Table 6 contains the results of using competition and/or family management to instrument
management practices in the production function. The baseline is column (1) which repeats the simple
OLS productivity equations including management on the right hand side58. Columns (2), (3) and (4)
then present production function results confirming that competition and family primo geniture are
important determinants of firm level productivity, matching their role in determining management
practices. Column (5) then estimates a production function in which management is instrumented
using the import penetration and family primo geniture management, generating a management
57

Higher scoring practices involve more time and effort from managers on a range of the monitoring and target practices,
plus potentially more difficult decisions in incentive practices over hiring, firing, pay and promotions.
58
This is identical to column (1) in Table D1.

44

coefficient which significantly positive and over five-fold larger in magnitude than the OLS
coefficient. As noted in Section IV, this is likely to be due to heavy measurement error in our
definition of “good” management and/or negative feedback from firm performance to managerial
effort. As can be seen from the bottom of column (5) these instruments are not rejected by the
Hansen-Sargan test of instrument validity. Columns (6) and (7) then present robustness results
instrumenting management using just competition and then just family management individually.
These also suggest downward bias from the OLS estimates

The coefficients in the production function estimates are of quantitative as well as statistical
significance. Although we cannot clearly attribute causality to the management scores on productivity,
a movement from the lower to the upper quartile of management scores between firms (0.971 points)
is associated with an increase in TFP of between 3.2% and 7.5% under OLS and 21.6% under IV.
Empirically the difference in TFP between the lower quartile and upper quartile of our firms is 31.9%.
In a purely accounting sense, therefore, management scores explain between 10% and 23% of the
inter-quartile range of productivity under OLS and about 66% under IV59.

59

We take the OLS coefficients in Table 2 to be between 0.032 and 0.075; we use the IV coefficient of Table 6 column
(5). The TFP calculations are the within-group residuals from Table D1 column (s). An equivalent calculation for the 9010 implies that management accounts for up to 22% under OLS and 64% under I.V.

45

VI. EXPLAINING MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ACROSS FIRMS
AND COUNTRIES: QUANTIFICATION

We turn to quantifying the role of product market competition and primo geniture family firms in
accounting for management practices.

VI.A Explaining the Tail of Badly Managed Firms

One of the interesting features of the raw data is the substantial fraction of firms that appear to have
surprisingly bad management practices, with scores of two or less. These firms have only basic shopfloor management, very limited monitoring of processes or people, ineffective and inappropriate
targets, and poor incentives and firing mechanisms. In addition, our calibration of the measurement
error suggests these firms cannot be entirely explained by sampling noise. Interestingly most of the
differences across countries highlighted in Figure 1 are due to the left tail60 - the low UK and French
average management scores are primarily due to their long tail of badly managed firms.

To investigate the extent to which low competition and primo geniture family firms can account for
this tail of badly run firms we split the sample based on these measures. Figure 3 plots the
management histogram for all firms reporting low competition61 and/or primo geniture family

60

We ran a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of management score distributions between the US and Germany
versus the UK and France and found this is rejected (p-value=0.002) on the whole sample. If we test equality of this
distribution for management scores above 2 this is not rejected (p-value=0.391). After truncating at 2 the coefficients on
the country dummies (standard errors) in a Table 7 Column (1) specification with a US-baseline fall to -0.015 (0.060) for
Germany, -0.012 (0.078) for France and -0.128 (0.070) for the UK, so that the US-French gap is eliminated and the USUK gap falls by more than half.
61
Defined by firms reporting “few” or “no” competitors. We use this measure to analyze cross-country competition
because it is consistently measured across the sample. The Lerner index and import penetration measures may vary with

46

succession, accounting for 415 firms. Figure 4 plots the management histogram for the remaining
high-competition and no primo geniture succession, accounting for the remaining 307 firms.
Comparing these two graphs, it is clear that the tail of badly managed firms is substantially larger in
the low competition and primo geniture sample, with 8.9 per cent of firms scoring two or less,
compared to 2.7 per cent of firms in the high competition no primo-geniture sample.62 Given that 6.5
per cent of all firms in the sample scored 2 or less, controlling for competition and primo geniture
succession appears to remove over half of the tail of very badly managed firms.63

[FIGURES 3 AND 4 ABOUT HERE]

VI.B Explaining the Cross-Country Variation in Management Scores

In Table 7, we attempt to account for the variations in management practices across countries. In
column (1), we regress management on dummy variables for Germany, France and the UK (with the
US as the omitted as baseline category). We find that French and UK firms are significantly worse
managed than US firms on average, with a gap of 0.202 and 0.276 respectively, while German firms
are worse managed but not significantly so with a smaller gap of 0.045. In column (2), we include a
dummy for a primo geniture family firm whose coefficient is negative and significant at the 5% level
as expected. The coefficient on the UK and French dummy variables drop substantially by around
0.09, reflecting the extensive presence of family firms with traditional primo geniture progression
accounting standards and country size respectively. In the regression results, we controlled for this with country dummies
and identify from within country variations, but in this section we want to look across countries.
62
This split is also true in the US and European sub samples. In the US 5.2% of firms, score 2 or less in the low
competition and/or primo geniture group while 0.6% score two or less in the high competition non primo geniture group.
In Europe 11.2% of firms score 2 or less in the low competition and/or primo geniture group while 5.3% score 2 or less in
the high competition non primo geniture group.
63
Competition explains around two-thirds of this reduction in the tail, with conditioning on “many” competitors alone
taking the share of firms scoring two or less from 6.9% (in the whole sample) down to 4.2%.

47

rules.64 In column (3), we condition on our measure of the number of competitors faced by the firm.
Consistent with the earlier results of the competition variables this enters the regression with a
positive and significant coefficient. The coefficient on the UK dummy drops slightly as the degree of
competition is only marginally lower in the UK than in the US. By contrast the coefficients for France
and Germany drop by about 0.04, because the level of competition is reported to be lower by French
or German companies than by US firms.65 Together competition and family firm status accounts for
around two-thirds (62% = 100*(.202-.077)/.202) of the gap between the US and France and one-third
(32% = 100*(.276-.188))/.276) of the gap between the US and the UK. In column (4), we add one
final control, which is the proportion of employees with a college degree, and find that this accounts
for much of the remaining UK and French gap with the US.

[TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]

Although we were expecting the competition results, the role of family firms is more surprising. The
finding matches up with an earlier economic history literature of Landes (1967) and Chandler (1994),
who claim that hereditary family management was probably the primary the reason for the industrial
decline of the UK and France relative to the US and Germany around the early 1900s.66 For example,
Landes (1967) states that:

64

Controlling for firm size and public/private mix does not notably change these results with the respective coefficients for
Germany, France and the UK in column (1) -0.081, -0.183 and -0.276; in column (2) -0.051, -0.075 and -0.200; in column
(3) -0.042, -0.127 and -0.251; and in column (4) 0.010, -0.028 and -0.126.
65
In the descriptive statistics of Table B1, the index of competition is 2.56 for the US, 2.52 for the UK, 2.35 for Germany
and 2.32 for France.
66
Nicholas (1999) provides supporting evidence for the UK, showing that over this period individuals who inherited
family firms accumulated less lifetime wealth than either firm founders or professional managers.

48

“The Britain of the late 19th Century basked complacently in the sunset of economic
hegemony. Now it was the turn of the third generation…[and] the weakness of British
enterprise reflected their combination of amateurism and complacency”
[p. 563]

“Before the war the model [French] enterprise was family-owned and operated, securityorientated rather than risk-taking, technologically conservative and economically inefficient”
[p. 528]

The results in Table 6 suggest family firms – at least in our sample of medium sized manufacturing
firms - are still a factor in explaining cross-country management practices one hundred years later.
And extrapolating from the 20 per cent of firms under family ownership in 2004 to the majority share
they would have accounted for in the early Twentieth Century suggests they could have played the
dominant cross-country role in that period as suggested by Landes and Chandler.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we use an innovative survey tool to collect management practice data from 732 medium
sized manufacturing firms in Europe and the US. The methodology described here combines
traditional survey tools used by economists with the more in-depth case study interview techniques
recommended by management specialists. We believe that it will be a useful part of the empirical
toolkit to be used by economists interested in the internal organization of firms. Rather than simply

49

label unobserved heterogeneity “fixed effects” we have explicitly developed indicators of managerial
best practice.

In our application we find these measures of better management practice are strongly associated with
superior firm performance in terms of productivity, profitability, Tobin’s Q, sales growth and survival.
We also find significant country variation with American firms on average much better managed than
European firms. There is, however a much larger variation between firms within countries with a long
tail of extremely badly managed firms. This heterogeneity is consistent with what we know from the
productivity distribution between firms and plants. Why do so many firms exist with apparently
inferior management practices, and why does this vary so much across countries? We find this is due
to a combination of: (i) low product market competition that appears to allow poor management
practices to persist, and (ii) family firms passing management control down by primo geniture.
European firms in our sample report facing lower levels of competition than American firms. France
and the UK also display substantially higher levels of primo geniture probably due to their Norman
legal origin and traditions and the more generous exemption from the estate taxation regime. Product
market competition and family firms alone appear to account for around half of the long tail of badly
managed firms and between two thirds (France) and one-third (UK) of the European management gap
with the US.

A possible criticism of our research design is that we have focused on managerial practices from the
employer perspective rather than the worker perspective. Do these “tough” management practices
come at the expense of work intensification and a breakdown of reciprocity and job satisfaction in the
workplace? Although we did not interview workers directly regarding managerial practices, we doubt

50

that we would get a radically different picture from such information. In a companion paper (Bloom,
Kretschmer and Van Reenen, 2006) we show that our overall management score is strongly positively
correlated with many pro-worker features of firms such as more generous childcare subsidies and
better work-life balance indicators. Although these indicators have no association with productivity
conditional on management, it suggests that workers may actually prefer working in well-run firms to
badly run firms.

A range of potential extensions to this work is planned, including running a second survey wave in
2006. It is important to follow up these firms in order to examine the extent to which management
practice evolves over time. This will enable us to examine whether competition is working simply
through selection or if there is learning of better managerial techniques by incumbent firms. The
methodology of quantifying management is general enough to be applied (with modifications) to other
countries and other sectors, including the public sector. We are also developing this survey
methodology to measure the organizational structure and characteristics of firms, attempting to
empirically test the long line of organizational theories of the firm.

51

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Howitt, P., (2005) “Competition and
Innovation: An inverted U relationship”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2005.
Arellano, M. and Bond, S. (1991), “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence
and an application to employment functions”, Review of Economic Studies, 58, 277-297
Athey, S. and Stern, S (1998), “An empirical framework for testing theories about complementarity in
organizational design”, NBER working paper 6600.
Baily, M., Hulten, C. and Campbell, D. (1992), “Productivity dynamics in manufacturing plants”,
Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, 187-267.
Bartel, A., Ichinowski, K. and Shaw, K. (2005) “How does information technology really affect
productivity? Plant-level comparisons of product innovation, process improvement and worker
skills” NBER Working Paper 11773
Bartelsman, E. and Dhrymes, P. (1998), “Productivity Dynamics: US Manufacturing plants, 19721986”, Journal of Productivity Analysis, 9, pp5-34.
Bartlelsman, E. and Doms, P. (2000), “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata”, Journal of Economic Literature, 38, 3, 569-594.
Bartelsman, E., Becker, R. and Gray, W. (2000), “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database”,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K., Perez-Gonzales, F., and Wolfenzon, D. (2005), “Inside the family firm:
the role of families in succession decisions and performance”, New York University mimeo.
Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A. (2003), “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
Policies”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1169-1208.
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2001), “Do people mean what they say? Implications for
subjective survey data”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91(2), May 2001:
67-72.
Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2003), “Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate Governance and
Managerial Preferences”, Journal of Political Economy, 111(5), 1043-1075.
Bertrand, M., Johnson, S., Samphantarak, K. and Schoar, A. (2005) “Mixing family with business: A
study of Thai business groups and the families behind them”, mimeo Chicago GSB

52

Berle, A. and Means, G. (1932) The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New York, NY,
McMillan
Black, S. and Lynch, L. (2001), “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
Information Technology on Productivity”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3), 434-445.
Bloom, N., Kretschmer, T. and Van Reenen (2006) “Work-life balance, Management Practices and
Productivity” mimeo, London School of Economics
Blundell, R. and Bond, S. (1998) “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in dynamic panel data
models” Journal of Econometrics, volume 88, 115-143.
Blundell, R. and Bond, S. (2000) “GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an Application to
production functions” Econometric Reviews, 19(3), 321-340.
Bresnahan, T., Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L. (2002), “Information Technology, Workplace
Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 339-376.
Burkart, M., Panunzi, F. and Shleifer, A. (2003) “Family Firms”, Journal of Finance, October 2005.
Caroli, E. and Van Reenen, J. (2001), “Skill-biased Organizational change? Evidence from a panel of
British and French establishments”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116(4), 1449-1492,
Caselli, F. and Gennaioli, N. (2002), “Dynastic Management”, London School of Economics mimeo.
Caselli, F. (2004) “Accounting for Cross Country Income Differences” Forthcoming in Aghion, P.
and Durlauf, S. (eds) Handbook of Economic Growth,
Chandler, A., (1994) Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, Belknap Press.
Disney, R. Haskel, J. and Heden, Y. (2003), “Restructuring and Productivity Growth”, Economic
Journal, July 2003.
Dunning, J. (1958), American Investment in British Manufacturing Industry, George Allen, London
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. and Syverson, C. (2005) “Reallocation, Firm turnover and efficiency:
Selection on productivity or profitability?” NBER Working Paper 11555
Ichinowski, C., Shaw, K. and Prenushi, G. (1997), “The Effects of Human Resource Management: A
Study of Steel Finishing Lines”, American Economic Review, 291-313
Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D. and Rosen, H. (1993), “The Carnegie Conjecture: Some empirical
evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol CVIII, 413-436.

53

Hoppenhayn, H. (1992) “Entry, Exit and Firm Dynamics in Long-Run Equilibrium” Econometrica,
60(5), 1127-50
Jovanovic, B. (1982) “Selection and the evolution of industry” Econometrica, 50(3), 649-70
Klette, T. and Kortum, S. (2004) “Innovating firms and Aggregate Innovation” Journal of Political
Economy, 112, 5, 986-1018
Landes, D., (1969), The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial
Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present, Cambridge University Press.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, L. and Shleifer, A. (1999), “Corporate ownership around the world”,
Journal of Finance, volume 54, 471-517.
Lazear, Edward (2000) “Performance pay and productivity”, American Economic Review, 90, 13461361.
Lucas, R. (1978) “On the Size distribution of business firms” Bell Journal of Economics, 9, 2, 508523
Manski, C. (2004) “Measuring expectations”, Econometrica, 72 (5), 1329-1376.
Melitz, M. (2003) “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate productivity
growth” Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725
Menchik, P. (1980) “Primogeniture, equal sharing and the U.S. distribution of wealth”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 299-316.
Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D. and Yeung, B. (2005), “Corporate governance, economics entrenchment
and growth”, Journal of Economic Literature, 43 (3) 655-720
Mundlak, Y. (1961), "Empirical Production Function Free of Management Bias”, Journal of Farm
Economics 43(1): 44-56
Nicholas, T. (1999), “Clogs to clogs in three generations? Explaining entrepreneurial performance in
Britain since 1850” Journal of Economic History, vol 59.
Nickell, S. (1996) "Competition and Corporate Performance", Journal of Political Economy, 104,
724-746.
Novaes, W. and Zingales, L. (2004) "Bureaucracy as a mechanism to generate information", Rand
Journal of Economics, vol 35(2), 245-259.
Olley, S and Pakes, A. (1996), “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications industry”,
Econometrica, 64: 1263-97.

54

Perez-Gonzalez, F. (2005) “Inherited control and firm performance”, Columbia University mimeo.
Proudfoot Consulting (2003) Missing Millions: How Companies mismanage their most valuable
resource
Raith, M. (2003) “Competition, Risk and Managerial Incentives” American Economic Review, 93,
1424-1436
Salop, Steve (1979) “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods” Bell Journal of Economics 10,
141-156
Schmidt, K. (1997) “Managerial Incentives and Product Market Competition” Review of Economic
Studies 64(2) 191-213
Stewart, M (1990), “Union wage differentials, product market influences and the division of rents”,
Economic Journal, 100, 1122-1137.
Stiroh, K. (2002) “Reassessing the impact of IT in the production function: A meta analysis” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo
Schwarz, N. and Strack, F. (1999) “Reports of subjective well-being: Judgmental processes and their
methodological implications” in Kahneman, D., Diener, E. and Schwarz, N. (eds) Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology, New York: Russell Sage Foundation
Syverson, Chad (2004a) “Market Structure and Productivity: A concrete example” Journal of
Political Economy, 112, 6, 1181-1222
Syverson, Chad (2004b) “Product substitutability and Productivity Dispersion” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86, 534-50
Villalonga, Belen and Amit, Raphael, (2005) “How do family ownership, control and management
affect firm value?” forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics
Vives, Xavier (2005), “Innovation and competitive pressure”, CEPR discussion paper DP4369.

55

Figure 1: Distribution of management scores by country
Germany

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

Density
.6

Density
.6

.8

.8

1

1

1.2

1.2

France

1

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

US

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

Density
.6

Density
.6

.8

.8

1

1

1.2

1.2

UK

1

1

2

3

4

5

Note: These are the distributions of the raw management scores (simple averages across all 18 questions for each firm). 1
indicates worst practice, 5 indicates best practice. There are 135 French observations, 156 German observations, 151 UK
observations and 290 US observations.

1

2

2 n d in te rvie w s co re
3

4

5

Figure 2: First management score on second management score

1

2

3
1st interview score

4

5

Note: Scores from 64 repeat interviews on the same firm with different managers and different interviewers. Simple
scores averaged across the eighteen raw management scores.

56

.6
0

.2

.4

Density

.8

1

1.2

Figure 3: Management scores: low competition and/or primo geniture family firms

1

2

3

4

5

Average management
across
questions
and interviews
- note
dropping
lean3 and/or (ii) have
Notes: Average management
scores for the score
415 firms
which:
(i) report
facing “few”
or “no”
competitors,
nd
a family (2 generation or more) as the largest shareholder with a family CEO chosen by primo geniture. Split by country
is France (95), Germany (101), UK (85) and the US (134). Overall 8.9% of the sample score two or less. 1 indicates worst
practice, 5 indicates best practice

.6
0

.2

.4

Density

.8

1

1.2

Figure 4: Management scores: high competition and non primo geniture family firms

1

2

3

4

5

Average management
across
questions
interviews
note dropping
Notes: Average management
scores for thescore
307 firms
which
reportand
facing
“many” -competitors,
andlean3
do not have a family
nd
(2 generation or more) as the largest shareholder with a family CEO chosen by primo geniture. Split by country is France
(34), Germany (51), UK (66) and the US (156). Overall 2.7% of the sample score two or less. 1 indicates worst practice, 5
indicates best practice

57

TABLE 1: HEREDITARY FAMILY FIRM INVOLVEMENT BY COUNTRY
%

France

Germany

UK

US

Family largest shareholder

32

30

30

10

Family largest shareholder and family CEO

22

12

23

7

Family largest shareholder, family CEO and primo geniture

14

3

15

3

Founder largest shareholder

18

5

14

18

Founder largest shareholder and CEO

10

2

12

11

Number of firms

137

156

152

290

NOTES: These mean values are taken from our sample of 732 firms. Family shareholding is combined across all family members.
Family involvement is defined as second-generation family or beyond. Primo geniture defined by a positive answer to the question
“How was the management of the firm passed down: was it to the eldest son or by some other way?” (see Table A3). Alternatives
to primo-geniture in frequency order are younger sons, son in-laws, daughters, brothers, wives and nephews. “Family largest
shareholder” firms defined as those with a single family (combined across all family members, whom are all second generation or
beyond) as the largest shareholder; “Family largest shareholder and family CEO” firms are those with additionally a family member as
the CEO; “Family largest shareholder, family CEO and primo geniture” who additionally the CEO was selected as the eldest male child
upon succession. See Appendix B for more details on construction of the variables.

58

TABLE 2: ESTIMATES OF FIRM PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Probit

OLS

All

All

All

All

All

Quoted

All

All

Dependent
variable

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

ROCE

sales

sales

sales

sales

profitability

Ln(Tobin’s
Av. Q)

Exit (by
death)

Sales
Growth

Management
z-score

0.075
(0.024)

0.039
(0.012)

0.032
(0.011)

0.042
(0.012)

2.534
(0.686)

0.270
(0.073)

-0.225
[0.024]

0.018
(0.006)

ln (L) it

1.081
(0.034)

0.522
(0.036)

0.535
(0.033)

0.526
(0.032)

1.372
(1.724)

0.299
(0.187)

0.263
[0.024]

-0.020
(0.014)

0.186
(0.029)

0.147
(0.025)

0.146
(0.025)

-1.765
(1.351)

-0.588
(0.169)

-0.178
[0.056]

0.009
(0.012)

0.301
(0.037)

0.306
(0.025)

0.304
(0.024)

0.946
(1.011)

0.210
(0.108)

-0.095
[0.202]

0.007
(0.009)

Estimation
Method
Firms

labor

Ln(K) it
capital

ln (N) it,
materials

General Controls

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Noise Controls

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Firms

709

709

709

709

690

374

709

702

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,089

2,635

709

4,777

Observations

NOTES: All columns estimated by OLS except column (7) which is estimated by probit Maximum Likelihood. In all columns (except
7), standard errors are in parentheses under coefficient estimates and allow for arbitrary heteroskedacity and correlation (i.e. clustered by
firm). In column (7), we report the p-value in square brackets below the marginal effects of each variable on the percentage increase in
the probability of exit (between 2004 and 2005). The coefficients on capital, materials and labor are allowed to be different across
countries and consolidation status (UK is base). “General controls” comprise of firm-level controls for ln(average hours worked),
ln(firm age), a dummy for being listed, a dummy for being consolidated, the share of workforce with degrees, the share of workforce
with MBAs, 108 three digit industry dummies and four country dummies interacted with a full set of time dummies. “Noise controls”
are those in the final column of Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the seniority, gender, tenure and number of countries worked in of
the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted, the time of the day the interview was conducted), the
duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the information as coded by the interviewer). Data runs between 1994 and
2004 except in column (7).

59

TABLE 3: SKILL CONTINGENT MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Countries

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

Dependent
variable

Human
Capital
(HC)
management

Fixed
Capital
(FC)
management

HCFC
manag
ement

HCFC
manag
ement

Human
Capital
(HC)
management

Fixed
Capital
(FC)
management

HCFC
manag
ement

HCFC
manag
ement

HCFC
manag
ement

0.220
(0.039)

0.100
(0.043)

0.120
(0.043)

0.099
(0.057)

0.594
(0.120)

0.256
(0.130)

0.337
(0.122)

0.340
(0.168)

Ln(proportion
of employees
with college
degrees)
Firm level
Ln(firm average
wages) it
Ln(proportion
of employees
with college
degrees), three
digit industry
level
General
Controls

0.281
(0.169)

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Industry
Controls

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

No

Firms/industries

732

732

732

732

424

424

424

424

732

NOTES: All columns estimated by OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses (standard errors are clustered by industry in
column (9)). A single cross section of data used. “HC management” is the average z-score of the three explicitly human capital
focused questions (questions 13, 17 and 18 in Appendix Table A1). “FC management” is the average z-score of the 3 most fixed
capital focused questions (1, 2 and 4 in Appendix Table A1). “HC-PC management” is the difference of these two averages. “General
controls” comprises controls for ln(firm age), ln(average number of employees), a dummy for being listed and country dummies.
“Industry controls” are a full set of three digit industry dummies. “ln(proportion of employees with college degrees), three digit
industry level” is the average number of employees with a college level qualification (or higher) in the industry in the 1991 to 1998
US Current Population Survey (NBER MORG files). We use this measure in all four countries under the assumption that the relative
skill intensity of industries is similar across countries. Column (9) is weighted by the number of observations on each industry in the
CPS.

60

TABLE 4: MANAGEMENT AND PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION

Estimation
Method
Dependent
variable
Import
penetration
(5-year
lagged)
Lerner
index of
competition
(5-year
lagged)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

0.144
(0.040)

0.157
(0.078)

0.123
(0.041)

0.174
(0.080)

1.203
(0.619)

1.376
(0.569)

1.516
(0.682)

1.318
(0.588)

Number of
competitors

0.143
(0.051)

0.144
(0.045)

0.125
(0.045)

0.123
(0.045)

Firms

732

732

726

726

732

732

726

726

General
controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

NOTES: Coefficients from OLS regressions with standard errors in parentheses (robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and clustered
by country * industry pair); single cross-section “General controls” includes a full set of 108 three digit industry dummies, four
country dummies, ln(firm size), ln(firm age), a dummy for being listed, the share of workforce with degrees, the share of workforce
with MBAs, a dummy for being consolidated, and the “noise controls of column (2) in Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the
seniority, gender, tenure and number of countries worked in of the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was
conducted, the time of the day the interview was conducted, the duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the
information as coded by the interviewer); “Import Penetration” = ln(Import/Production) in every country*industry pair with the
average over 1995-1999 used. “Lerner index of competition” constructed, as in Aghion et al. (2005), as the mean of (1 - profit/sales)
in the entire database (excluding the firm itself) for every country industry pair (average over 1995-1999 used). “Number of
competitors” constructed from the response to the survey question on number of competitors, and is coded as zero for “none” (1% of
responses), 1 for “less than 5” (51% of responses), and 2 for “5 or more” (48% of responses).

61

TABLE 5: MANAGEMENT AND FAMILY FIRMS

Estimation Method
Sample
Dependent variable
Family largest
shareholder

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

All

All

All

All

All

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Management
z-score

Family and
External
Owners
Management
z-score

0.304
(0.166)

0.154
(0.176)

-0.152
(0.186)

-0.011
(0.195)

-0.450
(0.123)

-0.444
(0.139)

-0.029
(0.094)

Family largest
shareholder and
family CEO
Family largest
shareholder, family
CEO and primo
geniture

-0.100
(0.078)
-0.329
(0.095)

-0.596
(0.098)

Firms

732

732

732

732

732

497

Country Controls
General Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

NOTES: Coefficients from OLS regressions with standard errors in parentheses (robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity); single cross
section. In columns (1) to (5), the complete sample is used, in column (6) only family firms plus firms with external largest
shareholders and professional managers are used. “General controls” are 108 three-digit industry dummies, ln(firm size), ln(firm
age), a dummy for being listed, share of workforce with degrees, share of workforce with MBAs, a dummy for being consolidated,
and the “noise controls of column (2) in Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the seniority, gender, tenure and number of countries
worked in of the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted, the time of the day the interview was
conducted, the duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the information as coded by the interviewer).

62

TABLE 6: INSTRUMENTING MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Countries

All

All

All

All

All

All

All

Estimation

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

IV

IV

IV

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

sales

sales

sales

sales

Dependent variable

sales

sales

sales

0.216
(0.094)

0.403
(0.282)

0.157
(0.097)

Management z-score

0.042
(0.012)

ln (L) it

0.526
(0.032)

0.507
(0.020)

0.502
(0.020)

0.504
(0.020)

0.512
(0.020)

0.519
(0.026)

0.511
(0.020)

0.146
(0.025)

0.126
(0.013)

0.129
(0.013)

0.127
(0.014)

0.107
(0.017)

0.085
(0.035)

0.111
(0.017)

0.304
(0.024)

0.358
(0.017)
0.089
(0.032)

0.358
(0.017)

0.360
(0.017)
0.088
(0.032)
-0.058
(0.030)

0.357
(0.017)

0.357
(0.018)

0.358
(0.017)

Imports,
Family

Imports

Family

Yes

Yes

Yes

20.79
[0.000]

4.33
[0.010]

28.38
[0.000]

labor

Ln(K) it
capital

ln (N) it,
materials

Import penetration
(5-year lagged)
Family largest shareholder,
family CEO and primo geniture

-0.060
(0.030)

Instrumental variables for
Management
General Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Hansen-Sargan test of overidentification (p-value)

0.520

First stage F-test value [p-value]
Firms
Observations

709

709

709

709

709

709

709

5,350

5, 350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

NOTES: In all columns, standard errors are in parentheses under coefficient estimates and allow for arbitrary heteroskedacity and
correlation (i.e. clustered by firm). Columns (1) to (3) estimated by OLS levels. Column (4) estimated by IV, with the instrument set
including all independent variables except management, plus “Import penetration (5-year lagged)” and “Family largest shareholder,
family CEO and primo geniture”. All columns include a set of “general controls” comprising of ln(hours worked), ln(firm age), a
dummy for being listed, a dummy for being consolidated, the share of workforce with degrees, the share of workforce with MBAs,
108 three digit dummies and four country dummies interacted with a full set of time dummies. Controls also includes the “noise
controls” of column (2) Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the seniority, gender, tenure and number of countries worked in of the
manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted, the time of the day the interview was conducted , the
duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the information as coded by the interviewer). “Import Penetration” =
ln(Imports/Production) in every country*industry pair (average over 1995-1999) is used as an explanatory variable in columns (2) and
(4) and is in the instrument set in columns (5) and (6). “Family largest shareholder, family CEO and primo geniture)” and
“Family” is a binary indicator for whether the family is the largest shareholder, and the family is CEO chosen by primo geniture. The
same variable is used as an explanatory variable in columns (3) and (4) and as an instrumental variable in columns (5) and (7). Data
runs 1994 through 2004.

63

TABLE 7: ACCOUNTING FOR MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ACROSS COUNTRIES
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Estimation Method

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

Dependent variable

Management
raw score

Management
raw score

Management
raw score

Management
raw score

Country is the US

Baseline

Baseline

Baseline

Baseline

Country is Germany

-0.045
(0.064)

-0.036
(0.063)

-0.004
(0.063)

0.063
(0.067)

Country is France

-0.202
(0.086)

-0.115
(0.088)

-0.077
(0.088)

-0.021
(0.089)

Country is the UK

-0.276
(0.078)

-0.199
(0.076)

-0.188
(0.076)
-0.648
(0.102)

-0.107
(0.079)
-0.606
(0.100)

0.147
(0.052)

0.154
(0.051)

Family largest shareholder,
family CEO and primo geniture

-0.658
(0.102)

Number of competitors
Ln(Proportion of employees with
degrees)
Firms

0.134
(0.037)
732

732

732

732

NOTES: Coefficients from OLS regressions with standard errors in parentheses (robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity); single cross
section. “Family largest shareholder, family CEO and primo geniture)” and “Family” is a binary indicator for whether the family
is the largest shareholder, and the family is CEO chosen by primo geniture. “Number of competitors” constructed from the response
to the survey question on number of competitors, and is coded as zero for “none” (1% of responses), 1 for “less than 5” (51% of
responses), and 2 for “5 or more” (48% of responses).

64

APPENDIX A: DETAILS OF THE SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRES
TABLE A1: MANAGEMENT PRACTICE INTERVIEW GUIDE AND EXAMPLE RESPONSES
Any score from 1 to 5 can be given, but the scoring guide and examples are only provided for scores of 1, 3 and 5. Multiple questions are
used for each dimension to improve scoring accuracy.
(1) Modern manufacturing, introduction
a) Can you describe the production process for me?
b) What kinds of lean (modern) manufacturing processes have you introduced? Can you give me specific examples?
c) How do you manage inventory levels? What is done to balance the line?
Scoring grid:

Examples:

Score 1
Other than Just-In-Time (JIT) delivery from
suppliers few modern manufacturing
techniques have been introduced, (or have
been introduced in an ad-hoc manner)

Score 3
Some aspects of modern manufacturing
techniques have been introduced, through
informal/isolated change programs

Score 5
All major aspects of modern manufacturing have been
introduced (Just-In-Time, autonomation, flexible
manpower, support systems, attitudes and behaviour) in
a formal way

A UK firm orders in bulk and stores the
material on average 6 months before use.
The business focuses on quality and not
reduction of lead-time or costs. Absolutely
no modern manufacturing techniques had
been introduced.

A supplier to the army is undergoing a full
lean transformation. For 20 years, the
company was a specialty supplier to the
army, but now they have had to identify
other competencies forcing them to compete
with lean manufacturers. They have begun
adopting specific lean techniques and plan to
use full lean by the end of next year.

A US firm has formally introduced all major elements of
modern production. It reconfigured the factory floor
based on value stream mapping and 5-S principles, broke
production into cells, eliminated stockrooms,
implemented Kanban, and adopted Takt time analyses to
organize workflow [these are all forms of lean/modern
manufacturing techniques].

(2) Modern manufacturing, rationale
a) Can you take through the rationale to introduce these processes?
b) What factors led to the adoption of these lean (modern) management practices?
Score 1

Score 3

Score 5

Scoring grid:

Modern manufacturing techniques were
introduced because others were using them.

Modern manufacturing techniques were
introduced to reduce costs

Modern manufacturing techniques were introduced to
enable us to meet our business objectives (including
costs)

Examples:

A German firm introduced modern
techniques because all its competitors were
using these techniques. The business
decision had been taken to imitate the
competition.

A French firm introduced modern
manufacturing methods primarily to reduce
costs.

A US firm implemented lean techniques because the
COO had worked with them before and knew that they
would enable the business to reduce costs, competing
with cheaper imports through improved quality, flexible
production, greater innovation and JIT delivery.

65

(3) Process problem documentation
a) How would you go about improving the manufacturing process itself?
b) How do problems typically get exposed and fixed?
c) Talk me through the process for a recent problem.
d) Do the staff ever suggest process improvements?
Scoring grid:

Examples:

(4) Performance tracking

Score 1
No, process improvements are made when
problems occur.

Score 3
Improvements are made in one week
workshops involving all staff, to improve
performance in their area of the plant

Score 5
Exposing problems in a structured way is integral to
individuals’ responsibilities and resolution occurs as a
part of normal business processes rather than by
extraordinary effort/teams

A US firm has no formal or informal
mechanism in place for either process
documentation or improvement. The
manager admitted that production takes
place in an environment where nothing has
been done to encourage or support process
innovation.

A US firm takes suggestions via an
anonymous box, they then review these each
week in their section meeting and decide any
that they would like to proceed with.

The employees of a German firm constantly analyse the
production process as part of their normal duty. They
film critical production steps to analyse areas more
thoroughly. Every problem is registered in a special
database that monitors critical processes and each issue
must be reviewed and signed off by a manager.

a)
b)
c)

Scoring grid:

Examples:

Tell me how you track production performance?
What kind of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) would you use for performance tracking? How frequently are these measured? Who gets to see
this KPI data?
If I were to walk through your factory could I tell how you were doing against your KPI’s?

Score 1
Measures tracked do not indicate directly if
overall business objectives are being met.
Tracking is an ad-hoc process (certain
processes aren’t tracked at all)

Score 3
Most key performance indicators are tracked
formally. Tracking is overseen by senior
management.

Score 5
Performance is continuously tracked and communicated,
both formally and informally, to all staff using a range of
visual management tools.

A manager of a US firm tracks a range of
measures when he does not think that
output is sufficient. He last requested these
reports about 8 months ago and had them
printed for a week until output increased
again.

At a US firm every product is bar-coded and
performance indicators are tracked
throughout the production process; however,
this information is not communicated to
workers

A US firm has screens in view of every line. These
screens are used to display progress to daily target and
other performance indicators. The manager meets with
the shop floor every morning to discuss the day past and
the one ahead and uses monthly company meetings to
present a larger view of the goals to date and strategic
direction of the business to employees. He even stamps
napkins with key performance achievements to ensure
everyone is aware of a target that has been hit.

66

(5) Performance review

Scoring grid:

Examples:

(6) Performance dialogue

Scoring grid:

Examples:

a)
b)
c)

How do you review your Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)?
Tell me about a recent meeting
Who is involved in these meetings? Who gets to see the results of this review?
Score 1
Score 3
Performance is reviewed infrequently or in
Performance is reviewed periodically with
an un-meaningful way, e.g. only success or
successes and failures identified. Results are
failure is noted.
communicated to senior management. No
clear follow-up plan is adopted.
A manager of a US firm relies heavily on
his gut feel of the business. He will review
costs when he thinks there is too much or
too little in the stores. He admits he is busy
so reviews are infrequent. He also
mentioned staffs feel like he is going on a
hunt to find a problem, so he has now made
a point of highlighting anything good.

a)
b)
c)
d)

A UK firm uses daily production meetings to
compare performance to plan. However,
clear action plans are infrequently developed
based on these production results.

Score 5
Performance is continually reviewed, based on indicators
tracked. All aspects are followed up ensure continuous
improvement. Results are communicated to all staff
A French firm tracks all performance numbers real time
(amount, quality etc). These numbers are continuously
matched to the plan on a shift-by-shift basis. Every
employee can access these figures on workstations on
the shop floor. If scheduled numbers are not met, action
for improvement is taken immediately.

How are these meetings structured? Tell me about your most recent meeting.
During these meeting, how much useful data do you have?
How useful do you find problem solving meetings?
What type of feedback occurs in these meetings?

Score 1
The right data or information for a
constructive discussion is often not present
or conversations overly focus on data that is
not meaningful. Clear agenda is not known
and purpose is not stated explicitly

Score 3
Review conversations are held with the
appropriate data and information present.
Objectives of meetings are clear to all
participating and a clear agenda is present.
Conversations do not, as a matter of course,
drive to the root causes of the problems.

Score 5
Regular review/performance conversations focus on
problem solving and addressing root causes. Purpose,
agenda and follow-up steps are clear to all. Meetings are
an opportunity for constructive feedback and coaching.

A US firm does not conduct staff reviews.
It was just “not the philosophy of the
company” to do that. The company was
very successful during the last decade and
therefore did not feel the need to review
their performance.

A UK firm focuses on key areas to discuss
each week. This ensures they receive
consistent management attention and
everyone comes prepared. However,
meetings are more of an opportunity for
everyone to stay abreast of current issues
rather than problem solve.

A German firm meets weekly to discuss performance
with workers and management. Participants come from
all departments (shop floor, sales, R&D, procurement
etc.) to discuss the previous week performance and to
identify areas to improve. They focus on the cause of
problems and agree topics to be followed up the next
week, allocating all tasks to individual participants.

67

(7) Consequence management
a) What happens if there is a part of the business (or a manager) who isn’t achieving agreed upon results? Can you give me a recent example?
b) What kind of consequences would follow such an action?
c) Are there are any parts of the business (or managers) that seem to repeatedly fail to carry out agreed actions?
Scoring grid:

Examples:

(8) Target balance

Scoring grid:

Examples:

Score 1
Failure to achieve agreed objectives does
not carry any consequences

Score 3
Failure to achieve agreed results is tolerated
for a period before action is taken.

Score 5
A failure to achieve agreed targets drives retraining in
identified areas of weakness or moving individuals to
where their skills are appropriate

At a French firm, no action is taken when
objectives are not achieved. The President
personally intervenes to warn employees
but no stricter action is taken. Cutting
payroll or making people redundant
because of a lack of performance is very
rarely done.

Management of a US firm reviews
performance quarterly. That is the earliest
they can react to any underperformance.
They increase pressure on the employees if
targets are not met.

A German firm takes action as soon as a weakness is
identified. They have even employed a psychologist to
improve behavior within a difficult group. People
receive ongoing training to improve performance. If this
doesn’t help they move them in other departments or
even fire individuals if they repeatedly fail to meet
agreed targets

a)
b)
c)

What types of targets are set for the company? What are the goals for your plant?
Tell me about the financial and non-financial goals?
What does Company Head Quarters (CHQ) or their appropriate manager emphasize to you?

Score 1
Goals are exclusively financial or
operational

Score 3
Goals include non-financial targets, which
form part of the performance appraisal of top
management only (they are not reinforced
throughout the rest of organization)

Score 5
Goals are a balance of financial and non-financial
targets. Senior managers believe the non-financial
targets are often more inspiring and challenging than
financials alone.

At a UK, firm performance targets are
exclusively operational. Specifically
volume is the only meaningful objective for
managers, with no targeting of quality,
flexibility or waste.

For French firm strategic goals are very
important. They focus on market share and
try to hold their position in technology
leadership. However, workers on the shop
floor are not aware of those targets.

A US firm gives everyone a mix of operational and
financial targets. They communicate financial targets to
the shop floor in a way they found effective – for
example telling workers they pack boxes to pay the
overheads until lunchtime and after lunch it is all profit
for the business. If they are having a good day the boards
immediately adjust and play the “profit jingle” to let the
shop floor know that they are now working for profit.
Everyone cheers when the jingle is played.

68

(9) Target interconnection
a)
b)
c)
d)
Scoring grid:

Examples:

(10) Target time horizon

Scoring grid:

Examples:

What is the motivation behind your goals?
How are these goals cascaded down to the individual workers?
What are the goals of the top management team (do they even know what they are!)?
How are your targets linked to company performance and their goals?

Score 1
Goals are based purely on accounting
figures (with no clear connection to
shareholder value)

Score 3
Corporate goals are based on shareholder
value but are not clearly communicated
down to individuals

Score 5
Corporate goals focus on shareholder value. They
increase in specificity as they cascade through business
units ultimately defining individual performance
expectations.

A family owned firm in France is only
concerned about the net income for the
year. They try to maximize income every
year without focusing on any long term
consequences.

A US firm bases its strategic corporate goals
on enhancing shareholder value, but does not
clearly communicate this to workers.
Departments and individuals have little
understanding of their connection to
profitability or value with many areas
labeled as “cost-centers” with an objective to
cost-cut despite potentially
disproportionately large negative impact on
the other departments they serve.

For a US firm strategic planning begins with a bottom up
approach that is then compared with the top down aims.
Multifunctional teams meet every 6 months to track and
plan deliverables for each area. This is then presented to
the area head that then agrees or refines it and then
communicates it down to his lowest level. Everyone has
to know exactly how he or she contributes to the overall
goals or else they will not understand how important the
10 hours they spend at work every day is to the business.

a)
b)
c)
d)

What kind of time scale are you looking at with your targets?
Which goals receive the most emphasis?
How are long term goals linked to short term goals?
Could you meet all your short-run goals but miss your long-run goals?

Score 1
Top management'
s main focus is on short
term targets

Score 3
There are short and long-term goals for all
levels of the organization. As they are set
independently, they are not necessarily
linked to each other

Score 5
Long term goals are translated into specific short term
targets so that short term targets become a "staircase" to
reach long term goals

A UK firm has had several years of
ongoing senior management changes –
therefore senior managers are only focusing
on how the company is doing this month
versus the next, believing that long-term
targets will take care of themselves.

A US firm has both long and short-term
goals. The senior managers know the longterm goals and the short-term goals are the
remit of the operational managers.
Operations managers only occasionally see
the longer-term goals so are often unsure
how they link with the short term goals.

A UK firm translates all their goals – even their 5-year
strategic goals - into short-term goals so they can track
their performance to them. They believe that it is only
when you make someone accountable for delivery within
a sensible timeframe that a long-term objective will be
met. They think it is more interesting for employees to
have a mix of immediate and longer-term goals.

69

(11) Targets are stretching

Scoring grid:

Examples:

(12) Performance clarity

Scoring grid:

Examples:

a)
b)
c)
d)

How tough are your targets? Do you feel pushed by them?
On average, how often would you say that you meet your targets?
Are there any targets which are obviously too easy (will always be met) or too hard (will never be met)?
Do you feel that on targets that all groups receive the same degree of difficulty? Do some groups get easy targets?

Score 1
Goals are either too easy or impossible to
achieve; managers provide low estimates to
ensure easy goals

Score 3
In most areas, top management pushes for
aggressive goals based on solid economic
rationale. There are a few "sacred cows" that
are not held to the same rigorous standard

Score 5
Goals are genuinely demanding for all divisions. They
are grounded in solid, solid economic rationale

A French firm uses easy targets to improve
staff morale and encourage people. They
find it difficult to set harder goals because
people just give up and managers refuse to
work people harder.

A chemicals firm has 2 divisions, producing
special chemicals for very different markets
(military, civil). Easier levels of targets are
requested from the founding and more
prestigious military division.

A manager of a UK firm insisted that he has to set
aggressive and demanding goals for everyone – even
security. If they hit all their targets he worries he has not
stretched them enough. Each KPI is linked to the overall
business plan.

a) What are your targets (i.e. do they know them exactly)? Tell me about them in full.
b) Does everyone know their targets? Does anyone complain that the targets are too complex?
c) How do people know about their own performance compared to other people’s performance?
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Performance measures are complex and not
Performance measures are well defined and
Performance measures are well defined, strongly
clearly understood. Individual performance
communicated; performance is public in all
communicated and reinforced at all reviews;
is not made public
levels but comparisons are discouraged
performance and rankings are made public to induce
competition
A German firm measures performance per
employee based on differential weighting
across 12 factors, each with its own
measurement formulas (e.g. Individual
versus average of the team, increase on
prior performance, thresholds etc.).
Employees complain the formula is too
complex to understand, and even the plant
manager could not remember all the details.

A French firm does not encourage simple
individual performance measures as unions
pressure them to avoid this. However, charts
display the actual overall production process
against the plan for teams on regular basis.

70

At a US firm self-directed teams set and monitor their
own goals. These goals and their subsequent outcomes
are posted throughout the company, encouraging
competition in both target setting and achievement.
Individual members know where they are ranked which
is communicated personally to them bi-annually.
Quarterly company meetings seek to review performance
and align targets.

(13) Managing human capital
a)
Do senior managers discuss attracting and developing talented people?
b)
Do senior managers get any rewards for bringing in and keeping talented people in the company?
c)
Can you tell me about the talented people you have developed within your team? Did you get any rewards for this?
Scoring grid:

Examples:

Score 1
Senior management do not communicate
that attracting, retaining and developing
talent throughout the organization is a top
priority

Score 3
Senior management believe and
communicate that having top talent
throughout the organization is a key way to
win

Score 5
Senior managers are evaluated and held accountable on
the strength of the talent pool they actively build

A US firm does not actively train or
develop its employees, and does not
conduct performance appraisals or
employee reviews. People are seen as a
secondary input to the production.

A US firm strives to attract and retain talent
throughout the organization, but does not
hold managers individually accountable for
the talent pool they build. The company
actively cross-trains employees for
development and challenges them through
exposure to a variety of technologies.

A UK firm benchmarks human resources practices at
leading firms. A cross-functional HR excellence
committee develops policies and strategies to achieve
company goals. Bi-monthly directors’ meetings seek to
identify training and development opportunities for
talented performers.

(14) Rewarding high-performance
a) How does you appraisal system work? Tell me about the most recent round?
b) How does the bonus system work?
c) Are there any non-financial rewards for top-performers?
d) How does your reward system compare to your competitors?
Scoring grid:

Examples:

Score 1
People within our firm are rewarded
equally irrespective of performance level

Score 3
Our company has an evaluation system for
the awarding of performance related rewards

Score 5
We strive to outperform the competitors by providing
ambitious stretch targets with clear performance related
accountability and rewards

An East Germany firm pays its people
equally and regardless of performance. The
management said to us “there are no
incentives to perform well in our
company”. Even the management is paid an
hourly wage, with no bonus pay.

A German firm has an awards system based
on three components: the individual’s
performance, shift performance, and overall
company performance.

A US firm sets ambitious targets, rewarded through a
combination of bonuses linked to performance, team
lunches cooked by management, family picnics, movie
passes and dinner vouchers at nice local restaurants.
They also motivate staff to try by giving awards for
perfect attendance, best suggestion etc.

71

(15) Removing poor performers
a) If you had a worker who could not do his job what would you do? Could you give me a recent example?
b) How long would underperformance be tolerated?
c) Do you find any workers who lead a sort of charmed life? Do some individuals always just manage to avoid being fixed/fired?
Scoring grid:

Score 1
Poor performers are rarely removed from
their positions

Score 3
Suspected poor performers stay in a position
for a few years before action is taken

Score 5
We move poor performers out of the company or to less
critical roles as soon as a weakness is identified

A French firm had a supervisor who was
For a German firm it is very hard to remove
At a US firm, the manager fired four people during last
regularly drinking alcohol at work but no
poor performers. The management has to
couple of months due to underperformance. They
action was taken to help him or move him.
prove at least three times that an individual
continually investigate why and who are
In fact, no employee had ever been laid off
underperformed before they can take serious
underperforming.
in the factory. According to the plant
action.
manager HR “kicked up a real fuss”
whenever management wanted to get rid of
employees, and told managers their job was
production not personnel.
(16) Promoting high performers
a) Can you rise up the company rapidly if you are really good? Are there any examples you can think of?
b) What about poor performers – do they get promoted more slowly? Are there any examples you can think of?
c) How would you identify and develop (i.e. train) your star performers?
d) If two people both joined the company 5 years ago and one was much better than the other would he/she be promoted faster?
Examples:

Scoring grid:
Examples:

Score 1
People are promoted primarily upon the
basis of tenure

Score 3
People are promoted upon the basis of
performance

Score 5
We actively identify, develop and promote our top
performers

A UK firm promotes based on an
individual’s commitment to the company
measured by experience. Hence, almost all
employees move up the firm in lock step.
Management was afraid to change this
process because it would create bad feeling
among the older employees who were
resistant to change.

A US firm has no formal training program.
People learn on the job and are promoted
based on their performance on the job.

At a UK firm each employee is given a red light (not
performing), amber light (doing well and meeting
targets) a green light (consistently meeting targets very
high performer) and a blue light (high performer capable
of promotion of up to two levels). Each manager is
assessed every quarter based on his succession plans and
development plans for individuals.

72

(17) Attracting human capital
a) What makes it distinctive to work at your company as opposed to your competitors?
b) If you were trying to sell your firm to me how would you do this (get them to try to do this)?
c) What don’t people like about working in your firm?
Scoring grid:

Score 1
Our competitors offer stronger reasons for
talented people to join their companies

Score 3
Our value proposition to those joining our
company is comparable to those offered by
others in the sector

Score 5
We provide a unique value proposition to encourage
talented people join our company above our competitors

A manager of a firm in Germany could not
A US firm seeks to create a value
A German firm offers a unique value proposition
give an example of a distinctive employee
proposition comparable to its competitors
through development and training programs, family
proposition and (when pushed) thinks the
and other local companies by offering
culture in the company and very flexible working hours.
offer is worse than most of its competitors.
competitive pay, a family atmosphere, and a
It also strives to reduce bureaucracy and seeks to push
He thought that people working at the firm
positive presence in the community.
decision making down to the lowest levels possible to
“have drawn the short straw”.
make workers feel empowered and valued.
(18) Retaining human capital
a) If you had a star performer who wanted to leave what would the company do?
b) Could you give me an example of a star performers being persuaded to stay after wanting to leave?
c) Could you give me an example of a star performer who left the company without anyone trying to keep them?
Examples:

Scoring grid:
Examples:

Score 1
We do little to try to keep our top talent.

Score 3
We usually work hard to keep our top talent.

Score 5
We do whatever it takes to retain our top talent.

A German firm lets people leave the
company if they want. They do nothing to
keep those people since they think that it
would make no sense to try to keep them.
Management does not think they can keep
people if they want to work somewhere
else. The company also will not start salary
negotiations to retain top talent.

If management of a French firm feels that
people want to leave the company, they talk
to them about their reasons for leaving and
what the company could change to keep
them. This could be more responsibilities or
a better outlook for the future. Managers are
supposed to “take-the-pulse” of employees
to check satisfaction levels.

A US firm knows who its top performers are. If any of
them signal an interest to leave the firm pulls in senior
managers and even corporate Head Quarters to talk to
them and try and persuade them to stay. Occasionally
they will increase salary rates if necessary and if they
feel the individual is being underpaid relative to the
market. Managers have a responsibility to try to keep all
desirable staff.

73

TABLE A2: QUESTION LEVEL AVERAGES BY COUNTRY
Question
number

Question
type

Countries
Modern manufacturing,
introduction

Average Value by Country
(US = 100)
(1)
(2)
(3)
UK
Germany France

1

Operations

90.0
(3.50)

86.4
(3.47)

101.3
(3.63)

0.019**
(0.008)

Modern manufacturing,
rationale

2

Operations

92.9
(3.35)

101.5
(3.32)

101
(3.47)

0.012
(0.008)

Process documentation

3

Operations

89.0
(3.51)

106.9
(3.49)

99
(3.64)

0.032***
(0.009)

Performance tracking

4

Monitoring

98.3
(3.19)

109.5
(3.17)

111
(3.32)

0.017**
(0.008)

Performance review

5

Monitoring

110.2
(2.97)

104
(3.10)

Performance dialogue

6

Monitoring

Consequence management

7

Monitoring

Target breadth

8

Targets

Target interconnection

9

Targets

Target time horizon

10

Targets

Targets are stretching

11

Targets

Performance clarity and
comparability
Managing human capital

12

Monitoring

13

Targets

94.7
(2.99)
93.0
(3.19)
96.5
(3.02)
91.1
(3.53)
93.7
(3.56)
91.9
(3.69)
87.8
(3.34)
93.7
(3.53)
89.4
(3.94)
81.6
(3.42)
89.4
(3.04)
90.2
(2.86)
90.4
(2.89)
93.6
(2.74)
91.5

103.3
(3.11)
108.7
(3.01)
93.3
(3.51)
97.3
(3.54)
98.6
(3.66)
104.9
(3.32)
80.7
(3.49)
99.0
(3.92)
85.2
(3.42)
92.5
(3.02)
104.9
(2.85)
95.1
(2.88)
97.7
(2.73)
98.7

99
(3.27)
94
(3.13)
94
(3.66)
78
(3.68)
92
(3.83)
101
(3.45)
83
(3.65)
89
(4.08)
85
(3.55)
83
(3.15)
92
(2.97)
85
(2.99)
97
(2.84)
93.8

0.018**
(0.008)
0.017**
(0.009)
0.017**
(0.008)
0.024***
(0.008)
0.025***
(0.008)
0.021***
(0.009)
0.014*
(0.008)
0.009
(0.008)
0.023**
(0.008)
0.021**
(0.009)
0.012
(0.009)
0.015*
(0.009)
0.029***
(0.009)
0.006
(0.009)
0.018

Rewarding high
performance
Removing poor performers

14

Incentives

15

Incentives

Promoting high performers

16

Incentives

Attracting human capital

17

Incentives

Retaining human capital

18

Incentives

Unweighted Average

Regression
Coefficients
(4)
All

NOTES: In columns (1) to (3) standard deviation of each question’s average response are reported below in brackets.
Calculated from full sample of 732 firms. Management z-scores used in these calculations. In column (4) results from 18
OLS estimations following exactly the same specification as column (4) Table 2 except estimated with each individual
question z-score one-by-one rather than the average management z-score. So every cell in column (4) is from a different
regression with 5,350 observations from 709 firms where: standard errors in parentheses allow for arbitrary heteroskedacity
and correlation (clustered by firm), and regression includes “general controls” as detailed in Table 2. *** denotes that the
variable is significant at the 1% level, ** denotes 5% significance and * denotes 10% significance.

74

APPENDIX A3: HUMAN RESOURCES INTERVIEW GUIDE
Run in parallel as the management survey but targeted at the HR department
Workforce Characteristics
Data Field
Breakdown
Total number of employees (cross-check again accounts) (all employees)
% with university degree
(all employees)
% with MBA
(all employees)
Average age of employees
(all employees)
% of employees
(managerial/non-managerial)
Average training days per year
(managerial/non-managerial)
Average hours worked per week (including overtime, excluding breaks)
(managerial/non-managerial)
Average holidays per year
(all employees)
Weeks maternity leave
(all employees)
Weeks paternity leave
(all employees)
Average days sick-leave
(all employees)
% part-time
(managerial/non-managerial)
% female
(managerial/non-managerial)
% employees abroad
(all employees)
% union membership
(all employees)
Are unions recognized for wages bargaining [yes / no]
(all employees)
Work-life Balance: Perceptions
Question
Response choice (all employees)
Relative to other companies in your industry
[much less / slightly less / the same / slightly
how much does your company emphasize
more / much more]
work-life balance?
Organizational Characteristics
Question
Response choice (all employees)
Who decides the pace of work?
[exclusively workers / mostly workers / equally /
mostly managers / exclusively managers]
Who decides how tasks should be allocated?
[exclusively workers / mostly workers/ equally /
mostly managers / exclusively managers]
Do you use self-managing teams?
[v. heavily / heavily / moderately / slightly / none]
Market & firm questions:
Response choice
# of competitors
[none / less than 5 / 5 or more]
# hostile take-over bids in last three years
[none / one / more than one ]
Interviewer’s assessment of the scoring reliability
1 to 5 scoring system calibrated according to:
1 = Interviewee did not have enough expertise for interview to be valuable; I have significant doubts about
most of the management dimensions probed]
3 = Interviewee had reasonable expertise; on some dimensions I am unsure of scoring
5 = Interviewee had good expertise, I am confident that the score reflects management practices in this firm

75

APPENDIX A4: FAMILY INVOLVEMENT DATA GUIDE
Run subsequently to the management survey and collected from company accounts, public sources and
telephones interviews primarily conducted with the CEO or his office.
CEO characteristics
CEO is a family member
CEO family generation
CEO age
CEO tenure
CEO worked at another company previously
CEO has a university degree
CEO shares name with the firm
CEO also Chairman

[yes/no]
continuous
continuous
continuous
[yes/no]
[yes/no]
[yes/no]
[yes/no]

Chairperson characteristics
Chairperson is a family member
Chairperson family generation
Chairperson age
Chairperson tenure
Chairperson shares name with the firm

[yes/no]
continuous
continuous
continuous
[yes/no]

Other directors
Number of other family directors
Total number of directors

continuous
continuous

Family ownership
% of family ownership
% largest family shareholder
% second largest family shareholder
% largest outside shareholder
Type of largest outside shareholder

continuous
continuous
continuous
continuous
[institution/state/manager/private
individual/other]

Handover data
Number of siblings (of current CEO)
How was the management of the firm passed down: was it to the
eldest son or by some other way?
Year of last handover

76

continuous
text
continuous

APPENDIX B: DATA
The entire anonymized dataset with a full set of do-files generating all results in this paper
will be made available on-line after publication of his paper.
Sampling Frame Construction
Our sampling frame was based on the Amadeus dataset for Europe (UK, France and
Germany) and the Compustat dataset for the USA. These all have information on company
accounting data. We chose firms whose principal industry was in manufacturing and who
employed (on average between 2000 and 2003) no less than 50 employees and no more than
10,000 employees. We also removed any clients of the consultancy firm we worked with
from the sampling frame (33 out of 1,353 firms).
Our sampling frame is reasonably representative of medium sized manufacturing firms. The
European firms in Amadeus include both private and public firms whereas Compustat only
includes publicly listed firms. There is no US database with privately listed firms with
information on sales, labor and capital. Fortunately, there are a much larger proportion of
firms are listed on the stock exchange in the US than in Europe so we are able to go
substantially down the size distribution using Compustat. Nevertheless, the US firms in our
sample are slightly larger than those of the other countries, so we are always careful to control
for size and public listing in the analyses. Furthermore, when estimating production functions
we allow all coefficients to be different on labor, capital, materials and consolidation status by
country (see notes to Table 2).
Another concern is that we condition on firms where we have information on sales,
employment and capital. These items are not compulsory for firms below certain size
thresholds so disclosure is voluntary to some extent for the smaller firms. By design, the firms
in our sampling frame (over 50 workers) are past this threshold for voluntary disclosure (the
only exception is for capital in Germany).
We achieved a response rate of 54% from the firms that we contacted: a very high success
rate given the voluntary nature of participation. Respondents were not significantly more
productive than non-responders. French firms were slightly less likely to respond than firms
in the other three countries were and all respondents were significantly larger than nonrespondents. Apart from these two factors, respondents seemed randomly spread around our
sampling frame
Firm level data
Our firm accounting data on sales, employment, capital, profits, shareholder equity, long-term
debt, market values (for quoted firms) and wages (where available) came from Amadeus
(France, Germany and the UK) and Compustat (US). For other data fields we did the
following:
Materials: In France and Germany, these are line items in the accounts. In the UK, these were
constructed by deducting the total wage bill from the cost of goods sold. In the US, these were
constructed following the method in Bresnahan et al. (2002). We start with costs of good sold

77

(COGS) less depreciation (DP) less labor costs (XLR). For firms who do not report labor
expenses expenditures we use average wages and benefits at the four-digit industry level
(Bartelsman, Becker and Gray, 2000, until 1996 and then Census Average Production Worker
Annual Payroll by 4-digit NAICS code) and multiply this by the firm'
s reported employment
level. This constructed measure is highly correlated at the industry level with materials.
Obviously there may be problems with this measure of materials (and therefore value added)
which is why we check robustness to measures without materials.
Company Shareholdings: This was manually extracted from the Bloomberg online data
service for the ten largest shareholders and the ten largest insider shareholders.
Dates of Incorporation: For UK, French and German companies this is provided by Amadeus
datasets. For the US, this was obtained from Dunn and Bradstreet.
Family ownership data
The ownership data, directors’ data, shareholder information and family generation was
collected from company SEC filings (particularly the DEF14a), company databases
(Compustat and ICARUS in the US, AMADEUS in the UK, France and Germany), company
websites, and The International Directory of Company Histories (St. James Press) and
Moody’s Manuals (Moody’s Investor Service). When this data was missing or ambiguous this
was supplemented with information from the family firm telephone survey, which was run on
around 300 firms in the sample who were (or potentially were) family owned.67 This allowed
us to separate firms into the three family firm categories: “Family largest shareholder” firms
defined as those with a single family (combined across all family members, whom are all
second generation or beyond) as the largest shareholder; “Family largest shareholder and
family CEO” firms as those with additionally a family member as the CEO; “Family largest
shareholder, family CEO and primo geniture” who additionally the CEO selected as the
eldest male child upon succession.
CEO Pay and Age: In the US, the S&P 1500 largest firms (which cover all sectors) are
contained in Execucomp, which provided data for 106 largest of our US firms. For the
remaining firms we manually downloaded the Def14a proxy statements from the SEC to
extract the details of the CEO and CFO compensation package and age over the last three
accounting years68. In the UK, the highest paid director is a mandatory line item in the
accounts and we took this as the CEO’s salary. In France and Germany we have no data on
executive pay.
Industry level data
This comes from the OECD STAN database of industrial production. This is provided at the
country ISIC Revision 3 level and is mapped into US SIC (1997) three (which is our common
industry definition in all four countries). The measure of competition we use are “Import
Penetration” = ln(Import/Production) in every country*industry pair (i.e. 4 countries and 108
industries implies up to 432 cells). We use the average over 1995-1999. “Lerner index of
competition” constructed, as in Aghion et al. (2005), as the mean of (1 - profit/sales) in the
entire database (excluding the firm itself) for every country industry pair (average over 19951999 used).
A full set of descriptive statistics are in Table B1.
67

Many thanks to Kevin Krabbenhoeft, Timo Hiller and Mohamed Moharram for the family firm surveys.
Many thanks to Guy Clark, Jatin Gulati, Sejal Mehta and Rahul Rathi for the construction of this and the
Bloomberg share-ownership data.
68

78

TABLE B1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Number of firms, #

All

France

Germany

UK

US

732

135

156

151

290

Management (mean z score)

-0.001

-0.084

0.032

-0.150

0.097

Employment (mean)

1,984

1,213

1,816

1,735

2,569

Tobin’s Q (in 2002)

1.92

1.15

1.88

1.87

2.01

Nominal sales growth rate, %

6.0

5.4

3.8

6.8

7.2

Age of firm (years)

53.4

38.6

86.8

44.7

48.4

Share workforce with degrees, %

21.2

15.5

14.3

14.0

31.0

Share workforce with an MBA, %

1.36

0.23

0.09

1.28

2.73

Sickness, days/year

6.80

8.16

8.51

6.21

5.01

Hours, hours per week

40.7

35.6

38.6

40.8

44.1

Holidays, days per year

22.7

32.2

29.7

26.9

12.4

2.47

2.32

2.35

2.52

2.56

0.055

0.040

0.071

0.040

0.060

0.31

0.33

0.32

0.42

0.24

19.9

9.7

41.4

25.3

9.4

57.2

16.1

41.0

28.5

100

Number of competitors index,
1=”none”, 2=”a few”, 3=”many”
Lerner index , excluding the firm
itself in three digit industry
Trade Openness (imports/output)
in three digit industry
Union density, %
Listed firm,%

Notes: Data descriptive calculated on the full sample of 732 firms for which management information is available.

79

APPENDIX C:
CONTROLS

MEASUREMENT

ERROR

AND

NOISE

We decompose the variation in the question level z-scores qij into four components

q ij = mi + pij + u i + eij (where subscript i denotes firm and j denotes practice): the average
firm management practice mi ; the practice (i.e. question) specific deviations from the average

pij = 0 ; the average firm-level measure error u i ; and
firm management practice pij where
the practice specific deviation in measurement error from the firm average measurement error
eij where
eij = 0 .

Assuming that the practice deviations and measurement error deviations are i.i.d. within firms
(although not across firms), we can decompose the variance in q ij as 1 = σ m2 + σ 2p + σ u2 + σ e2
using the fact that z-scores have a variance of one. To determine these values of these
components we exploit the information in the first and second interviews and the variance of
question scores within and between firms.
At the question level the regression coefficient from the first on the second interview
σ m2 + σ 2p
responses will take the value β q = 2
, from applying the standard result on
σ m + σ 2p + σ u2 + σ e2
the attenuation bias due to measurement error. The average coefficient from the first on
second interviews and the second on first interviews is 0.578. At the firm level the regression
coefficient of the first interview average scores on the second interview average scores will
take the value β q =

σ m2
. The average coefficient from the first on second and second on
σ m2 + σ u2

first interviews is 0.752. Finally, decomposing the variance in question scores within and
between firms provides values on σ m2 + σ u2 and σ 2p + σ e2 of 0.466 and 0.534.
Combining these three results together with the definition of the variances allows us to
calculate σ m2 = 0.350, σ 2p = 0.228, σ u2 = 0.116, and σ e2 = 0.306. Thus, we estimate the ratio of
variation from management practices to measurement error to be 58:42 at the question level.
This ratio rises to 75:25 at the firm level due to the higher correlation of management
practices than measurement error across questions within the firm. Interestingly the variation
in these management practices is driven both by changes in firm average management
practices (61%) and in firm specific practice capabilities (39%).
Table C1 below contains a list of interviewer, interview and interviewee characteristics as
described in III.E. Column (1) reports the results of an OLS regression where the dependent
variable is the average management z-score in the firm. The coefficient and standard errors of
each of the variables are reported. Column (2) drops the least significant variables from the
regression. We use these variables as “noise controls” in some of the regressions.

80

TABLE C1: CONTROLS FOR MEASUREMENT ERROR
Dependent variable is Management z-score
(1)

(2)

Explanatory Variable

Definition

Mean

Coefficient (s.e.)

Coefficient (s.e.)

Male

Respondent is male

0.982

-0.277
(0.128)

-0.298
(0.127)

Seniority

The position of manager in the
organization (1 to 5)

3.08

0.074
(0.026)

0.073
(0.026)

Tenure in this post

Years with current job title

4.88

-0.011
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.006)

Tenure in the company

Years with the company

11.7

0.002
(0.004)

Countries

Total number of countries
worked in over last ten years

1.19

0.085
(0.048)

Organizations

Total number of organizations
worked in over last ten years

1.66

-0.009
(0.032)

Manager is foreign

Manager was born outside the
country s/he works

0.032

-0.048
(0.142)

Ever worked in USA

The manager has worked in the
USA at some point

0.425

0.103
(0.152)

Location of manager

Manager based on site (rather
than in corporate HQ)

0.778

0.011
(0.063)

Tuesday

Day of the week that interview
was conducted, (Monday base)
Day of the week that interview
was conducted, (Monday base)
Day of the week that interview
was conducted, (Monday base)
Day of the week that interview
was conducted, (Monday base)
The time of the day (24 hour
clock) interview conducted
Count of days since start of the
project
The length of the interview with
manager (in minutes)
Number of telephone calls to
arrange the interview
Interviewer’s subjective ranking
of interview reliability (1 to 5)

Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Local time for manager
Days from start of
project
Duration of interview
Number of contacts
Reliability score
17 Interviewer
Dummies

0.181
0.280
0.195
0.165
12.45
39
46.0
5.73
4.15

0.011
(0.062)
0.017
(0.084)
0.183
(0.088)
0.059
(0.090)
-0.023
(0.010)
0.001
(0.001)
0.008
(0.003)
0.007
(0.006)
0.326
(0.034)
F(16,699)=3.05
p-value=0.000

0.092
(0.043)

0.016
(0.086)
0.014
(0.080)
0.176
(0.088)
0.054
(0.090)
-0.022
(0.010)

0.007
(0.003)
0.327
(0.033)
F(16,699)=3.46
p-value=0.000

NOTES: Coefficients from OLS regressions with standard errors in parentheses (robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity);
single cross section; 3 country dummies and 108 three digit industry dummies included in the regression; 732 observations.
Seniority scores defined by 1=”Technician/Engineer”, 2=”Manufacturing/Production manager”, 3=”Plant/Factory manager”,
4=”VP/General manager” and 5=”Director/CEO”.

81

APPENDIX D: ADDITIONAL RESULTS
In this Appendix, we give some additional results that we refer to in the main text (Section
IV.B), but did not have room to discuss in detail. In Table D1, we present alternative
estimates of the production function. Column 1 simply reports the OLS levels regression that
is comparable with column (4) of Table 269 .
In the rest of the table, we implement the two stage estimates described in Section 4 of the
text. In the first stage, we estimate the production function:
y it = α l l it + α k k it + α n nit + η i + u it

(D1)

We recover our estimates of the fixed effects,η i , and then in a second stage we project the
fixed effects on the time invariant variables including the management score, M. The upper
panel of Table D1 (Panel A) shows the “first stage” results of the production function. The
lower panel (Panel B) shows the results of the “second stage” regression.
Within groups estimates equation (D1) directly, GMM System follows Blundell Bond (2000)
and allows the uit to follow an AR (1) process, u it = ρu it −1 + ε it , where ε it is a serially
uncorrelated error. We estimate a general dynamic model with a lagged dependent variable
and lags of all the factor inputs:
y it = π 1 l it + π 2 l it −1 + π 3 k it + π 4 k it −1 + π 5 nit + π 6 nit −1 + η i* + ε it

(D2)

We use the moment conditions suggested by Arellano-Bond (1991) and Blundell and Bond
(1998) treating all factor inputs as endogenous. The underlying parameters of the production
function in equation (D1) are recovered by imposing the Common Factor restrictions in
equation (D2) by Minimum Distance. We can then estimate the fixed effects and proceed to
the second step regression as before.
In Olley-Pakes (1996) the unobserved productivity term is allowed to evolve over time in a
first order Markov process. In this case we estimate the efficiency term for each firm-year and
then average this over the eleven years in our data.
Note that we have also experimented with estimating the results in Table D1 for just the 19992004 periods instead of the 1994-2004 period that lead to very similar results.
Column (2) of Table D1 presents the within group results where we have included a full set of
firm fixed effects. Compared to OLS levels the coefficient on capital falls by over 50 per cent
and the coefficient on labour rises. This is typical of within group estimates of production
functions and is suggestive of attenuation bias in the capital stock measure that becomes
69

The minor differences with Table 2 are because we impose the same coefficients on the factor inputs across
countries in order to ease comparability with the other estimators – this makes practically no difference to the
results on the management term.

82

exacerbated when moving from OLS to within groups. The Olley Pakes results are in column
(3). The coefficient on capital is higher than in OLS levels and much higher than Within
Groups. The labor coefficient, by contrast, is lower. This is reassuring, as we would generally
expect OLS levels (column (1)) to generate an upwards bias in the labor coefficient and a
downwards bias in the capital coefficient. The GMM System estimator in column (4) also
generates a lower labor coefficient and higher capital coefficient than within groups70.
We recover the estimates of the unobserved efficiency terms/fixed effects and project them
against the management score and other variables in Panel B. In all three columns, there
remains a significant and positive association of (total factor) productivity with our
management score. The magnitude of this management coefficient ranges between 0.04 for
Olley Pakes and 0.08 for Within Groups with GMM system in between (0.07). We conclude
that using our simpler OLS methods of estimating the association of management and
productivity in the main text is not misleading. If anything, we may be underestimating the
importance of management.
The final two columns report the results of a simple test of splitting the sample completely
into the Continental European observations (France and Germany in column (5)) and AngloAmerican observations (US and UK in column (6)). This is a further test of whether our
management variables are Anglo-Saxon biased and matter less for the “social markets” of
France and Germany. We use the Within Groups estimates of column (2). The coefficient on
the management is significant in both columns and is actually larger in Continental Europe
than in the UK and US (although not significantly so). We therefore reject the hypothesis that
our management practice measures are culturally biased against France and Germany (this is
supported by the fact that one of the Anglo Saxon countries, Britain, has a lower average
management score than Germany and France).
Table D2 presents extensions to the production functions where we try to control for “firm
performance related measurement bias”. These are discussed in the text in sib-section IV.D.

70

The similarity of the capital coefficient in GMM System and OLS levels is surprising, but it may because of
problems with the extra moment conditions for the levels equations in Blundell-Bond. Even though the Sargan
Difference test fails to reject the null of instrument validity in column (4), it might have weak power to reject.
We re-estimated the equation using only the differenced moments (Arellano-Bond, 1991). The results were
similar to the other estimates. The coefficient (standard error) on capital was 0.174(0.064), on labor 0.361(0.054)
and on materials 0.416(0.057).

83

TABLE D1: ALTERNATIVE ECONOMETRIC ESTIMATES OF THE
PRODUCTION FUNCTION
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Estimation
Method

OLS
LEVELS

WITHIN
GROUPS

OLLEY
PAKES

GMMSYS

WITHIN
GROUPS

WITHIN
GROUPS

Countries

All

All

All

All

Dependent
variable:

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

Ln (Y) it

France and
Germany
Ln (Y) it

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

0.507
(0.019)

0.543
(0.022)

0.426
(0.022)

0.456
(0.064)

0.416
(0.049)

0.565
(0.025)

0.123
(0.013)

0.059
(0.015)

0.158
(0.042)

0.114
(0.050)

0.077
(0.028)

0.056
(0.018)

0.358
(0.017)

0.325
(0.022)

0.412
(0.026)

0.353
(0.046)

0.439
(0.043)

0.305
(0.024)

US and UK
Ln (Y) it

Panel A
Management zscore
ln (L) it
labor

Ln(K) it
capital

ln (N) it,
materials

0.041
(0.013)

SC(1)p-value

0.000

SC(2) p-value

0.195

SARGAN pvalue
SARGAN-DIF
p-value

0.153

General Controls
Observations

0.332
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

5,350

5,350

3,606

3,674

1,393

3,957

TFP

TFP

TFP

TFP

TFP

0.080
(0.017)
Yes

0.047
(0.017)
Yes

0.071
(0.017)
Yes

0.103
(0.042)
Yes

0.058
(0.020)
Yes

709

709

709

270

439

Panel B
Dependent
variable:
Management zscore
General Controls
Observations

Yes

NOTES: In all columns, standard errors are in parentheses under coefficient estimates and allow for arbitrary heteroskedacity
and correlation (i.e. clustered by firm). The data runs between 1994 and 2004. Column (1) is estimated by OLS levels and we
also include “general controls” comprising of “firm” controls for ln(hours worked), ln(firm age), a dummy for being listed, a
dummy for being consolidated, the share of workforce with degrees, the share of workforce with MBAs, 108 three digit
industry dummies and four country dummies interacted with a full set of time dummies. The controls also include the “Noise
controls” from the final column of Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the seniority, gender, tenure and number of countries

84

worked in of the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted, the time of the day the interview
was conducted, the duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the information as coded by the
interviewer). All other columns report “two stage” results where, in the first stage individual effects are included in the
production function and we report the estimated parameters on the factor inputs (Panel A). In the second stage the estimated
firm-specific efficiency term/“TFP” is regressed against the management z-score and the general controls as described above.
We report the coefficients and robust standard error for management in Panel B. Columns (2), (5) and (6) are estimated by
Within Groups. Column (3) implements a version of the Olley-Pakes (1996) technique. We use a third order series
approximation for (.), the non-parametric expansion of capital and investment. We also include a selection correction term
following Olley and Pakes (1996). Standard errors are bootstrapped (clustered by firm) with 200 replications. After
calculating the parameters of labor and materials (stage 1a) and capital (stage 1b), we calculate the efficiency term/TFP
averaged by firm across all year. This is used as a dependent variable in the lower panel and regressed on management and
the general controls (stage 2). Column (4) shows results from our implementation of the Blundell-Bond (1998) GMM system
(GMM-SYS) estimator (stage 1). Instruments for the differenced equation are lagged levels t-2 to t-3 on ln(sales), ln(capital),
ln(labor) and ln(materials). Instruments for the levels equation are lagged differenced t-1 on ln(sales), ln(capital), ln(labor)
and ln(materials). Standard errors are the “one step robust” (i.e. allow for clustering by firm). SC(k) is the p-value of an
LM(k) test of second order correlation of the differenced residuals (see Arellano and Bond, 1991). We find evidence of
significant negative first order correlation, but no evidence of second order correlation, which is consistent with the validity
of the instrumentation strategy. SARGAN is the p-value of a Sargan-Hansen test of over-identification (distributed 2 under
the Null). SARGAN-DIF reports the p-value of a Sargan Difference test of the validity of the extra “Blundell-Bond
moments” over the standard moments in Arellano and Bond (1991). We impose the COMFAC (Common Factor) restrictions
by Minimum Distance (see Blundell and Bond, 2000).

85

TABLE D2: EVALUATING FIRM PERFORMANCE RELATED MEASUREMENT
BIAS IN THE MANAGEMENT VARIABLE

Dependent variable
ln (L) it
labor

Ln(K) it
capital

ln (N) it,
materials

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Ln(Y) it

Ln(Y) it

Ln(Y) it

Ln(Y)it

Ln(Y)it

Ln(Y) it

Ln(Y)it

Ln(Y) it

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

sales

0.528
(0.032)

0.526
(0.032)

0.519
(0.032)

0.524
(0.032)

0.522
(0.033)

0.526
(0.032)

0.520
(0.032)

0.525
(0.032)

0.143
(0.025)

0.149
(0.025)

0.156
(0.025)

0.148
(0.025)

0.155
(0.025)

0.147
(0.025)

0.155
(0.025)

0.147
(0.025)

0.304
(0.024)

0.303
(0.024)

0.304
(0.024)

0.304
(0.024)
0.040
(0.012)

0.303
(0.024)

0.304
(0.024)

0.303
(0.024)

0.304
(0.024)
0.041
(0.012)

0.007
(0.008)
709
5,350

Management z-score
Management z-score,
most objective
questions
Management z-score,
least objective
questions
Work-life balance
focus
Organizational
devolvement – pace
Organizational
devolvement – tasks
Firms
Observations

0.041
(0.012)

0.037
(0.011)
0.032
(0.011)
0.014
(0.010)

0.011
(0.010)
0.009
(0.008)

0.008
(0.008)

709

709

709

709

709

709

0.007
(0.008)
709

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

5,350

NOTES: In all columns, standard errors are in parentheses under coefficient estimates and allow for arbitrary heteroskedacity
and correlation (i.e. clustered by firm). All columns estimated by OLS levels and include “full controls” comprising of
“firm” controls for ln(hours worked), ln(firm age), a dummy for being listed, a dummy for being consolidated the share of
workforce with degrees, the share of workforce with MBAs, 108 three digit dummies and four country dummies. The
coefficients on capital, materials and labor are allowed to be different across countries and consolidation status (UK is base).
Full controls also includes the “noise controls” of column (2) Table C1 (17 interviewer dummies, the seniority, gender,
tenure and number of countries worked in of the manager who responded, the day of the week the interview was conducted,
the time of the day the interview was conducted, the duration of the interviews and an indicator of the reliability of the
information as coded by the interviewer). Management z-score, more “objective” questions is the average of questions 1, 3,
4 and 9, chosen as being arguably the most objective questions in the interview, while Management z-score, least “objective”
questions is the average of questions 6, 12, 17 and 18, chosen as being arguably the least objective questions in the interview.
Work-life balance focus is the z-score from the work-life balance question, “Relative to other companies in your industry
how much does your company emphasize work-life balance?” [much less/slightly less/the same/slightly more/much more],
graded on a 1 to 5 scale. Organizational devolvement - pace is the z-score from the question “Who decides the pace of
work?” and Organizational devolvement – task is the z-score from the question “Who decides how tasks should be
allocated?” both scored on a 1 to 5 scale [exclusively managers/mostly managers/equally/mostly workers/exclusively
workers].

86

