NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BAUMOL’S DISEASES: A MACROECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE
William D. Nordhaus
Working Paper 12218
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12218
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

The author is grateful for extensive helpful comments from William Baumol and anonymous referees. 2 For
this working paper, Accompanying Notes are available that describe the equations, the sources, and provide
a list of data files. The note and the underlying files are available at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/Baumol/. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Baumol’s Diseases: A Macroeconomic Perspective
William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 12218
May 2006
JEL No. D4, O3, O4
ABSTRACT
William Baumol and his co-authors have analyzed the impact of differential productivity growth on
the health of different sectors and on the overall economy. They argued that technologically stagnant
sectors experience above average cost and price increases, take a rising share of national output, and
slow aggregate productivity growth. Using industry data for the period 1948-2001, the present study
investigates Baumol’s diseases for the overall economy. It finds that technologically stagnant sectors
clearly have rising relative prices and declining relative real outputs. Additionally, technologically
progressive sectors tend to have slower hours and employment growth outside of manufacturing.
Finally, sectoral shifts have tended to lower overall productivity growth as the share of stagnant
sectors has risen over the second half of the twentieth century.
William D. Nordhaus
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu

In a series of pioneering works, William Baumol and his coauthors have analyzed the impact of differential productivity growth on
the health of different sectors and on the overall economy.3 They
hypothesize that sectors whose productivity-growth rates are below the
economy’s average (call them stagnant) will tend to experience above
average cost increases. The resulting “cost disease” may lead stagnant
sectors to experience above-average price increases, declining quality,
and financial pressures. Additionally, there may be a reduction in the
economy’s overall rate of productivity and real output growth because
of the drag from stagnant sectors. This work suggests that a taste for the
output of stagnant sectors may lead to secular stagnation and declining
real-income growth as consumers increasingly demand labor-intensive
services where productivity growth is intrinsically limited.

Baumol et al. applied these ideas to several sectors, including
higher education, cities, health care and hospitals, the performing arts,
handicrafts, haute cuisine, custom clothing, and stately houses. The
studies provoked a flood of criticisms and analysis on industrial

3

William J. Baumol and William G. Bowen, “On the Performing Arts: The

Anatomy of their Economic Problems.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 55,
No. 2, 1965, pp. 495-502; William J. Baumol and William G. Bowen, Performing
Arts: The Economic Dilemma, New York: The Twentieth Century Fund, 1966;
William J. Baumol, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of
Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3, June, 1967, pp.
419-420; William J. Baumol, Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff,
“Unbalanced Growth Revisited: Asymptotic Stagnancy and New Evidence,”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No. 4., Sept, 1985, pp. 806-817.

-2-

productivity studies, but at the end of the day, it remains difficult to
determine the net result.4

4

Peter S. Albin, “Poverty, Education, and Unbalanced Economic Growth,”

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 1, Feb., 1970, , pp. 70-84;
Carolyn Shaw Bell, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: Comment (in
Communications),” The American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 4, Sept., 1968,
pp. 877-884; Albert Breton, “The Growth of Competitive Governments,” The
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 22, No. 4, Nov., 1989, pp. 717-750; Cristina
Echevarria, “Agricultural Development vs. Industrialization: Effects of
Trade,” The Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 28, No. 3, Aug., 1995, pp. 631647; Cristina Echevarria, “Changes in Sectoral Composition Associated with
Economic Growth,” International Economic Review, Vol. 38, No. 2, May, 1997,
pp. 431-452; Norman Gemmell, “A Model of Unbalanced Growth: The Market
versus the Non-Market Sector of the Economy,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol.
39, No. 2, June, 1987, pp. 253-267; Charles R. Hulten, “Productivity Change in
State and Local Governments,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 66,
No. 2, May, 1984, pp. 256-266; William D. Nordhaus, “The Recent
Productivity Slowdown,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3:1972, pp.
493-536; Joan Robinson, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: A Belated
Comment (in Communications),” The American Economic Review, Vol. 59, No.
4., Sept., 1969, p. 632; David Throsby, “The Production and Consumption of
the Arts: A View of Cultural Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
32, No. 1, Mar., 1994, pp. 1-29; Jack E. Triplett and Barry P. Bosworth, “
‘Baumol's Disease’ Has Been Cured,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Economic Policy Review, September 2003, pp. 23-33; Edward N. Wolff,
“Industrial Composition, Interindustry Effects, and the U.S. Productivity
Slowdown,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, No. 2, May, 1985,
pp. 268-277; Michael C. Wolfson, “New Goods and the Measurement of Real
Economic Growth,” The Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2, Special

-3-

The purpose of this study is to analyze various Baumol-type
diseases using detailed data on economic activity by industry. This
reevaluation is motivated by the availability of more comprehensive
data on output, prices, and productivity by industry as well as by
improved approaches to measuring price and output indexes. The
discussion proceeds in five sections. The first section describes briefly
the different Baumol-related diseases that will be examined. The second
section lays out an analytical framework for examining Baumol’s
diseases, while the following section describes the data used for the
analysis. The fourth section applies the theory and data to examine the
impact of differential productivity growth by sector on the structure of
industry and examines the impact of the cost disease on the economy’s
overall rate of productivity. The final section summarizes the results.

I. Variants of Baumol Diseases
There are several syndromes that might arise from differential
rates of productivity growth. Here are some important ones:

1. Cost and price disease. We would generally expect that average
costs and prices in stagnant industries – ones with relatively low
productivity growth – would grow relative to the average.

Issue on Service Sector Productivity and the Productivity Paradox, Apr., 1999,
pp. 447-470.

-4-

2. Stagnating real output. Additionally, because of the rapid rise in
relative prices, we would expect that real output in low-productivitygrowth industries would grow slowly relative to the overall economy.

3. Unbalanced growth. The impact of low productivity growth on
nominal shares is ambiguous because it depends on the interaction of
rising relative prices and declining relative outputs. Baumol sometimes
assumed that demand would be price-inelastic, so low productivity
growth would generally lead to rising shares of nominal output in
stagnant industries.

4. Impact on employment and hours. The impact of low productivity
growth on labor inputs will depend on the impact on output as well as
on the structure of production. Generally, those industries with priceelastic demand for output will experience a positive impact of
productivity growth on employment, and contrariwise for industries
with price-inelastic demand.

5. Impact on factor rewards. An important question concerns who
captures the gains from higher productivity growth, and who loses from
stagnant productivity. In their 1965 article, Bowen and Baumol argued
that stagnant industries such as the performing arts were likely to be
financially stressed because of rising costs and prices. What are the
facts?

6. Impact on aggregate productivity growth. Will stagnant industries
have rising shares of total output? If so, will this tend to reduce overall
growth in productivity and living standards? This important question
-5-

will depend upon the composition of output and is an intriguing
question raised by the earlier studies.

II. Analytical Framework for Baumol’s Cost Disease
Most of the early studies of the various Baumol hypotheses used
either a stylized two-sector analysis or Laspeyres output indexes or
both. This section examines the interpretation of the propositions for
many sectors and in the context of current superlative measures of
output.

Assume that the economy is composed of a large number of nondurable final goods and services. The notation used for different
variables is shown in the accompanying box. The general notation is
that upper-case roman letters represent levels, lower-case roman letters
represent natural logarithms, and Greek letters represent parameters or
random terms. We define the logarithmic growth rate of a variable as a
lower-case roman letter with a circumflex; therefore,
aˆ t = at - at -1 = ∆ln(At ) is the growth rate of productivity.

We can write a simplified production, cost, supply and demand
structure as follows. Each industry has a Cobb-Douglas value-added
production function in capital, labor, and time-varying exogenous
technology.5 The derivation here uses the growth rates of variables in
5

An alternative approach would be to use total output rather than value

added. This approach has been used, for example, in Dale W. Jorgenson, Mun
Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh, “Growth of U.S. Industries and Investments in
Information Technology and Higher Education” in Carol Corrado, John

-6-

the production and demand functions to be consistent with superlative
output measurement. The exposition assumes that all industries are
vertically integrated. The error term is interpreted as production shocks
(such as measurement errors) that do not enter into costs.

(1)

Production:

ˆ it + (1 - βit ) kˆit + ε itx
xˆ it = aˆ it + βit m

Under the assumption of cost minimization, the unit cost function
is the dual of (1). It excludes the error in (1) but includes random cost
errors. Note that by duality, the production and cost elasticities in (1)
and (2) are identical.

(2)

Cost:

ˆ it + (1 - βit ) cˆit + ε itz*
zˆ it = - aˆ it + βit w

Pricing is assumed to be a markup over cost. In this specification,
marginal and average costs are equal, so no ambiguity arises with
respect to which cost is involved in pricing. The price function may
include monopolistic elements as well as random elements and drift.

(3)

Price:

pˆ it = γ i + θ i zˆ it + ε itp

Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, eds., Measuring Capital in the New Economy,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2005. The relative merits of value-added
output and total output are discussed below.

-7-

Industrial variables for industry i in period t::
Ait = productivity (either total factor or labor)
Bit = index of inputs (either total or labor)
Cit= cost per unit capital services
Kit = capital inputs
Mit = labor inputs
Pit = price
Rit = rate of profit on capital
Sit = share of nominal output
Vit = share of total inputs
Wit = cost per unit labor
Xit = real output
Zit = unit cost of output
Aggregate variables for period t:
At = aggregate productivity
Bt = index of aggregate inputs
Pt = aggregate price index
Xt = aggregate real output
Qt = aggregate nominal output
Natural logarithms of variables:
ait = ln(Ait)
xt = ln(Xt)
etc.
Parameters and random errors:
α, β, γ, λ, µ, θ, χ, σ = parameters of functions or equations
ηi = own-price demand elasticity in demand system
ε tk = random error for variable k in period t
Logarithmic rate of growth between period t-1 and t:
aˆ t = at - at -1 = ∆ln(At ) = rate of growth of productivity
xˆ t = xt - xt -1 = ∆ln(Xt ) = rate of growth of aggregate real output
etc.

-8-

The factor shares are determined by the income identity:

(4)

Qit ≡ Pit Xit ≡ Rit K it + Wit Mit

Income

Note that the rate of profit on capital (Rit ) includes not only the cost per
unit capital input in (2) but also any returns to market power,
innovation, risk-bearing, and other non-labor returns.

Consumer demand for output from the different sectors is a
variant of the almost ideal demand system, in which expenditure shares
are determined by relative prices and total income.6 In the version used
here, we simplify by assuming that all cross-elasticities of demand are
proportional to output shares; we further have prices and total output
determine the logarithm of the shares. Working in the rates of growth,
and solving for real output growth, we then write the simplified almost
ideal demand system (SAIDS) as:

(5)

xˆ it = λ i + ηi (pˆ it - pˆ t ) + µi xˆ t + ε its

In this equation, ηi is the own price-elasticity of demand for industry i
as a function of the price of that good relative to the aggregate price
index. The logarithmic changes in the aggregate price and output are
n

n

i =1

i =1

Törnqvist indexes, pˆ t = ∑ pˆ it Sit and xˆ t = ∑ xˆit Sit , where Sit are the
Törnqvist shares of nominal output. We have for notational convenience
6

See Angus Deaton and John Muellbauer, “An Almost Ideal Demand

System,” American Economic Review, vol. 70, no. 3, June 1980, pp. 312-326.

-9-

dated the shares concurrently with the growth rates, whereas in the
actual calculations for Törnqvist indexes, shares are averages of current
and last period shares. Equation (5) has the disadvantage of imposing
share proportionality on the cross price elasticities for each good. This is
unlikely to have an important practical effect in the current context
because the cross effects are omitted from the empirical estimates; in
any case, with this large a set of industries, examining the full set of
cross effects is effectively impossible.
Econometric Issues in the Specification

The econometric interpretation of the different Baumol laws is as
reduced-form equations. More specifically, they are reduced-form
equations in which the various endogenous variables (price, nominal
output, real output, wages, and profits) are determined primarily by
exogenous technological change. This section examines the reducedform equations and explains the conditions under which the impacts of
productivity on the major variables are identified and consistent.

I will discuss this strategy only for one of the reduced-form
equations, the output equation, while the others are discussed in the
Accompanying Note. Estimates of the growth of real output from
equation (5) require substituting the determinants of industrial price. To
do this, I make the following assumptions: that changes in TFP by
industry are independent of shocks to other variables; that unit input
costs in different industries move independently of other variables; and
that prices are a constant markup over unit costs. The average response
will depend upon the statistical average price elasticity, defined as

- 10 -

η = E (ηi ), where ηi = η + εηi . I then solve for real output as a function of

TFP growth and shocks, obtaining:7

xˆ it = - η aˆ *it + εix1 + εitx2

( 6)
where

εix1 = λ i + ηi γ i
ε itx2 = ηi zˆ t + ηi aˆ t − εηi aˆ it − εηi εita + ηi εitz + ηi εita + ηi εitp - ηi pˆ t + µi xˆ t + εits

In this equation, the average real output response depends upon
TFP growth, the average price elasticity of demand (η ), as well as
shocks from the different equations. Equation (6) will yield accurate
estimates of the impact of TFP on real output growth as long as the error
( ε itx1 + ε ix 2 ) is uncorrelated with measured TFP growth. The major concern
is measurement error in price deflators, which would bias both TFP
growth and real output growth. There are numerous other potential
contaminants, but most of the covariances between â*it and ε itx1 + ε ix 2 are
presumptively zero.8

The impacts of technological change on factor rewards are
straightforward in a world of competitive factor prices. To be more
realistic, we would need to take into account that there are monopolistic
elements in factor markets – particularly important are labor unions,
monopoly power, and Schumpeterian profits. Statistical tests of the
7

The detailed derivation of the equation is shown in Accompanying Notes at

the end of this paper.

8

The errors are discussed in detail in Accompanying Notes at the end of this

paper.

- 11 -

impact of technological change on factor rewards are unbiased as long
as there are constant returns to scale and if the feedback from factor
prices to technological change (say through induced technological
change) is unimportant. These are not likely to be completely accurate in
reality, but it seems likely that the major technological trends are
determined by other factors than differential factor rewards.

A final statistical question concerns the impact of the business
cycle on productivity. This is likely to be a concern for short-period
movements. However, we have taken sufficiently long periods (from a
decade to a half-century) that cyclical influences are unlikely to be a
major determinant of differential trends.

III. Data and Methods
The data used here are a complete set of industry accounts for the
period 1948-2001. Most of the data are from the Industry Accounts
prepared by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, while some also come
from the National Income and Product Accounts. These cover 67
detailed industries and include data on real and nominal value-added
output, industry value-added prices, compensation, hours worked, the
net capital stock, and profit-type income. Most of these data come
directly from the BEA, but data on real output and prices for 1948-76
were derived from earlier BEA data. These data allow construction of
indexes of both labor productivity and total factor productivity. The
major advantage of this data set is that it is constructed in a consistent
manner and (except for the statistical discrepancy and inevitable data
inaccuracies) the sectors aggregate to the national aggregates. This data
- 12 -

set was used to analyze the productivity slowdown in a companion
paper.9 Unfortunately, because of major changes in industrial
classification, the most recent industry data are completely incompatible
with the older data used here.10

Our approach for testing for each of the Baumol syndromes relies
on a variety of sample periods, industry groups, and estimation
procedures. The battery of tests used is the following:
• These use three different industry combinations: (1) All 67
detailed industry groups. (2) 14 broad industry groups. (3) 28
industry groups that have relatively well measured output. The
exact list of industries for each group is provided in Appendix A.

9

William Nordhaus with Alexandra Miltner, “A Retrospective on the Postwar

Productivity Slowdown,” NBER Working Paper No. 10950, December 2004.
That paper includes an appendix describing construction of the data set, and
the data are available online.

10

BEA has recently published estimates of output for the new industrial

classification system (the North American Industry Classification System or
NAICS) with historical data back to 1947 (see Robert E. Yuskavage and
Mahnaz Fahim-Nader, “Gross Domestic Product by Industry for 1947–86:
New Estimates Based on the North American Industry Classification System,”
Survey of Current Business, December 2005, pp. 70-84). However, BEA has not
yet made the corresponding input data for labor and capital available.

- 13 -

• There are four different sample periods for the estimation. (1)
Four subperiods (1948-59, 1959-73, 1973-89, 1989-2001), where the
data are estimated in first differences and with industry own
effects and time effects. These years are chosen because they are
convenient break points in terms of length and quality of data and
business cycle position. (2) The same sample as (1), but with the
estimates in levels, with industry and time effects. (3) The entire
sample, 1948-2001, as a cross section. (4) The period 1977-2000 as a
cross section; this later sample is useful because the data for these
years are constructed on a consistent basis by the BEA and are
probably of better quality than the earlier years; additionally, the
end points are roughly comparable in terms of cyclical position.

Two different measures of productivity are examined: (1) Total factor
productivity for sectors where capital stocks are available. Output is
measured as value added and inputs are the weighted growth of labor
and capital inputs. (2) Labor productivity, which is the growth in
chained output less the growth in hours.

The current study relies on value-added data for its results.
Because many other studies rely upon gross output data, some of the
major differences should be discussed. The first question involves the
use of value-added output rather than total output in the demand
equations. Because people buy cars and hats, not the value added of the
automotive or apparel industries, the estimates may miss some of the
features of the structure of commodity output.

- 14 -

Additionally, some analysts argue that the total output data are
more accurate than the value-added output for use in productivity
studies. Some of the early criticisms of value-added output production
estimates have been resolved with improved double-deflation
procedures and the use of superlative techniques at all stages of data-set
construction.11 Studies indicate that the hypothesis of value-added
production functions can be rejected in the sectoral data,12 but those
studies have not been updated to the current techniques. Moreover,
estimating the growth of value added (rather than its level), as is the
current method used by the BEA, does not require the same separability
assumptions in the superlative value-added data as was required in the
prior concepts.

The major advantage of using value added output is that it allows
us to identify in a more intuitive way the sources of major technological
changes. Most important technological advances occur in the value-

11

See Moyer, Brian C., Mark A. Planting, Paul V. Kern, and Abigail Kish,

“Improved Annual Industry Accounts for 1998-2003,” Survey of Current
Business, vol. 84, June 2004, pp. 21-57 and Brian C. Moyer, Marshall B.
Reinsdorf, and Robert E. Yuskavage, “Aggregation Issues in Integrating and
Accelerating BEA’s Accounts: Improved Methods for Calculating GDP by
Industry,” in Dale W. Jorgenson, J. Steven Landefeld and William D.
Nordhaus, Eds., A New Architecture for the U.S. National Accounts, The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, forthcoming, 2006.

12

See Dale W. Jorgenson, Frank W. Gollop, and Barbara M. Fraumeni,

Productivity and U.S. Economic Growth, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1987

- 15 -

added industries measured in this industry. For example, the rapid
productivity growth in electricity production occurred primarily in the
generation segment, not in the fuel component. Similarly, it is more
instructive to look at the computer and microelectronics sector than to
the final output of computers including cardboard boxes and retail and
wholesale trade. Accurate measures of all outputs and inputs in
principle allow analysts to untangle the sectoral contributions, but if the
measures of inputs are inaccurate, the industrial source of the
productivity growth can easily be misidentified.

A further qualification arises because our measures are industry
output rather than commodity output – for example, the output of the
chemical industries rather than the output of pharmaceuticals. For most
industries, the difference is small but this difference nonetheless clouds
the interpretation of the results. A related issue in all domestic
productivity studies is the omission of international trade. These data
omit the forces of relative price changes between domestic and foreign
goods; this is likely to be a major issue primarily for tradable goods like
agriculture and manufacturing.

IV. Results
We now investigate six diseases that might be associated with
Baumol’s analyses.

- 16 -

1. Does low productivity growth lead to a cost and price disease?

The first question is whether low relative productivity growth
leads to high relative price increases. This syndrome is sometimes called
“the cost disease of the stagnant services.” This was the key contention
in many of Baumol’s studies. A summary of the point is the following:13

If productivity per man hour rises cumulatively in one sector relative to
its rate of growth elsewhere in the economy, while wages rise
commensurately in all areas, then relative costs in the nonprogressive
sectors must inevitably rise, and these costs will rise cumulatively and
without limit…. Thus, the very progress of the technologically
progressive sectors inevitably adds to the costs of the technologically
unchanging sectors of the economy, unless somehow the labor markets
in these areas can be sealed off and wages held absolutely constant, a
most unlikely possibility.

A succinct statement was made in Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff:14

With the passage of time, the cost per unit of a consistently stagnant
product (for example, live concerts) will rise monotonically and
without limit relative to the cost of a consistently progressive product
(for example, watches and clocks).

13

William J. Baumol, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy

of Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3, June, 1967,
pp. 419-420.

14

Op. cit., p. 806.

- 17 -

From an economic point of view, it would be surprising if lower
productivity growth was not substantially passed on to consumers in
higher prices. But this tendency might be mitigated if price behavior is
sufficiently uncompetitive or if demand shifts dominate supply shifts.

Figure 1 shows a scatter plot of the total factor productivity and
price trends over the 1948-2001 period. The negative association is clear.
Table 1 shows the battery of tests for price trends. The industries in each
segment are listed in Appendix A, while details on the estimation are
provided in Appendix B. In each case, we report the coefficient of a
regression of the variable listed (average annual logarithmic change in
price in this case) on a measure of the annual logarithmic change in
productivity.

These tests show that productivity trends are associated almost
percentage-point for percentage-point with price declines. The most
pertinent results here are for the well-measured industries; the
summary coefficient is -0.965. This coefficient is well determined and is
not significantly different from one.

The results here are very powerful. They indicate that the major
determinant of long-term relative price trends is relative productivity
trends. The main notable feature is that consumers capture virtually all
the gains from technological change.

Summary diagnosis 1. The hypothesis of a cost-price disease due
to slow productivity growth is strongly supported by the historical
data. Industries with relatively lower productivity growth show a
- 18 -

percentage-point for percentage-point higher growth in relative
prices.

2. Does Low Productivity Growth Lead to Stagnating Real
Output?
The next question is whether relatively slow productivity growth
leads to relatively slow real output growth. This would seems an
obvious point but in fact is not. If differential output growth is driven
primarily by demand shifts rather than supply shifts, it would be
possible that there would be little association between productivity
growth and output growth. Baumol states the hypothesis as follows:15

In the model of unbalanced productivity there is a tendency for
the outputs of the “nonprogressive” sector whose demands are not
highly inelastic to decline and perhaps, ultimately, to vanish....

We see then that costs in many sectors of the economy will rise
relentlessly, and will do so for reasons that are for all practical purposes
beyond the control of those involved. The consequence is that the
outputs of these sectors may in some cases tend to be driven from the
market.

The relationship between productivity growth and real output
growth was investigated in detail in an earlier section. That section

15

William J. Baumol, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy

of Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3, June, 1967,
pp. 418, 420.

- 19 -

showed that, under ideal circumstances, the cross section coefficient of
real output growth on TFP growth would be (the negative of) the
average elasticity of demand in the SAIDS system.

Figure 2 shows the growth of real output and in total factor
productivity (TFP) over the 1948-2001 period. There is a clear positive
relationship between TFP growth and output growth. Table 2 shows the
formal tests of the relationship between real output and productivity
growth. Looking across the different specifications, there is a very
strong positive association between productivity growth and real
output growth. Every single specification has a statistically significant
positive coefficient. The summary coefficients – measuring the elasticity
of real output with respect to productivity – are between 0.67 and 0.76,
and the coefficients are well determined. For the well-measured
industries, the relationship is very tight, with a one percentage-point
faster productivity growth leading to a 0.76 percentage-point higher
growth in real output.

Among industries with well-measured output, the five industries
with declining real output over the period, starting from the bottom, are
Tobacco products, Local and interurban passenger transit, Personal
households, Leather and leather products, and Miscellaneous repair
services. Each of these has a tale to tell. Tobacco, local transit, and
miscellaneous repair service had negative measured TFP growth over
the 1948-2001 period. Tobacco was probably driven to distraction by
regulation, and there are no reliable measures of productivity for
private households.

- 20 -

Looking at the five industries with the most rapidly rising real
output over the 1948-2001 period, starting from the top, we have
Transportation by air, Electronic and other electric equipment,
Telephone and telegraph, Trucking and warehousing, and Wholesale
trade. All five had very dynamic technologies, and all five had high TFP
growth over the period.

Summary diagnosis 2. The real output/stagnation hypothesis is
strongly confirmed. Technologically stagnant industries have shown
slower growth in real output than have the technologically dynamic
ones. A one percentage-point higher productivity growth was
associated with a three-quarters percentage-point higher real output
growth.

3. Do Industries With Slow Productivity Growth Have
Declining Nominal Output Shares?
For the most part, businesses care very little about their real
output growth. They care about dollar sales, profits, and employment.
What are those relationships? Baumol recognized that there were
different possible cases:16

16

William J. Baumol, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: Comment (in

Communications),” The American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 4, Sept, 1968,
pp. 897.

- 21 -

Having predicted a cumulative cost rise for the output of the
“nonprogressive sector” of the economy I did not intend to go further
and attempt a generalized forecast of the activities that compose it. I
meant to suggest a variety of possibilities: that some, like the
construction of stately homes, would tend to disappear; that others,
such as very fine restaurants, would be reduced to a small number
catering almost exclusively to the very affluent; that some, like
handmade furniture and pottery, would fall into the hands of amateur
craftsmen; and that some, such as education (at least up to this point)
would continue to be demanded but would, as a consequence, eat up
an ever-growing portion of GNP. I do not believe that any one type of
time path will characterize the behavior of every output of the
nonprogressive sector in the future any more than it has until now.

In later work, Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff sharpened the view,
focusing primarily on services:17

The “rising share of services” turns out to be somewhat illusory.
The [real] output shares of the progressive and stagnant sectors have in
fact remained fairly constant in the postwar period, so that with rising
relative prices, the share of total expenditures on the (stagnant) services
and their share of the labor force have risen dramatically (their prices
rose at about the same rate as their productivity lagged behind the
progressive sectors), just as the model suggests. Similar trends are also
found internationally.

17

Op. cit., p. 815-816.

- 22 -

In fact, the first part of the second quotation – asserting the
constancy of real output shares – is incorrect for chained output indexes,
as we showed for syndrome 2 above.

What are the analytical presumptions here? The relationship is
closely related to the derivation of equation (6) above.18 Under the
assumptions in that section, the coefficient fn TFP growth on nominal
output growth will be - (1 + η ) , where η is the average SAIDS own-price
elasticity of demand. Indeed, as long as the independent variables are
identical, the coefficients on nominal output should be identical to the
sum of the coefficients on price and real output. There are in fact very
small deviations from that identity, presumably because the price
indexes are not always equal to the deflators.

Figure 3 shows a graph, while Table 3 shows the summary results
of the different specifications of the relationship between TFP growth
and nominal output growth. The summary statistics show a coefficient
in the range of -0.21 to -0.28. For the well-measured industries, the
standard error puts the estimated coefficients close to the 10 percent
significance level. This result is consistent with the finding in the last
section that the statistical average price-elasticity of demand for
industry output is around -0.7.

Looking at those industries with slow nominal growth over the
1948-2001 period, the bottom five (starting from the bottom) were
Leather and leather products, Railroad transportation, Farms, Coal

18

See Accompanying Notes at the end of this paper.

- 23 -

mining, and Textile mill products. All of these had quite robust
productivity growth. Their decline was probably driven largely by
income effects, substitute products, or competition from abroad, but the
rapid growth in productivity and decline in prices was insufficient to
offset other influences.

The most rapid growth in nominal GDP was found in Social
services, Business services, Radio and television, Transportation by air,
and Health services. With the exception of air, these had low measured
TFP growth, although there are serious questions about measurement in
most cases.
Summary diagnosis 3: There is a negative association of
productivity growth with the growth in nominal output. In other
words, stagnant industries tend to take a rising share of nominal
output; however, the relationship is only marginally statistically
significant.

4. Do Industries With Slow Productivity Growth Have
Declining Relative Employment and Hours?
Perhaps the most interesting question from a social perspective is
whether stagnant industries are gaining or losing shares of labor inputs
– either employment or hours. Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff concluded
that the stagnant service sector was demanding an increasing share of
labor inputs:19

19

Op. cit., p. 806.

- 24 -

As the model predicts, the U.S. labor force has been absorbed
predominantly by the stagnant subsector of the services rather than the
services as a whole.

The analysis of the impact of productivity on labor inputs is
similar to that of nominal share of output, with the resulting impact
ambiguous. The reduced-form estimates of the impact of total factor
productivity changes on employment are derived from those on output
but have one additional complication involving the derived demand for
labor inputs. Assume that firms in an industry are identical and
minimize costs. Further assume that the wages in each industry are
exogenous (determined by market power, unions, and other factors).
From the earlier analysis, we can derive the following reduced-form
equation for the growth of labor inputs:20
ˆ it = - (1 + η )aˆ it* - w
ˆ it + βˆ it + ε itm
m

(7)

where

ε itm = zˆt + aˆt + ε itz + ε ita + ε ix1 + ε itx2 + ε ite - εηi (aˆ it + ε ita )

The major new twist here is the variable β̂ it , the rate of change of
the elasticity of output with respect to labor. This represents biased
technological change in the Cobb-Douglas framework. The errors here
were defined above except for ε ite , which is the error in the equation for
demand for labor inputs.

20

See the Accompanying Notes at the end of this paper.

- 25 -

Equation (7) shows that the coefficient on TFP growth in the
employment equation is − (1 + η ) , which is minus (one plus the average
price-elasticity of demand). This indicates that (holding other forces
constant) the growth of labor inputs such as employment or hours will
be positively or negatively affected by technological change depending
upon whether output demand is price-elastic or price-inelastic,
respectively. The trend will also be affected to the extent that there is
differential wage growth in the industry, or if there is biased
technological change (represented by the rate of growth of the output
elasticity, β̂ it ).

Figure 4 shows the association of hours growth and TFP growth.
The negative association – similar to that for nominal output and TFP
growth – is evident. Table 4 shows the battery of tests run on hours,
which indicates a negative association of hours and productivity. The
results are particularly strong for the 1977-2000 period for which the
data are most reliable; also, they are uniformly negative for the wellmeasured industries. The average effect for well-measured industries
shows that a 1 percentage-point higher productivity growth is
associated with a 0.26 percentage-point lower growth in hours worked.
The results for employment are virtually identical, with the coefficients
and t-statistics very close to those for hours.

These results are consistent with those for nominal and real
output. They suggest that the most important factor driving differential
employment growth has been differential technological change across
industries. We can also test for the impacts of differential wage growth
- 26 -

and biased technological change by including the growth of wages and
the change in the share of compensation in the equations. For this
purpose, I concentrate only on the results for TFP growth for the
detailed industry groups. Adding either or both of wage growth or the
rate of growth of the labor share does not change the coefficient on total
factor productivity. It is interesting to note that the coefficient on biased
technological change is insignificant and very small. This result suggests
that, at least in these data, differential technological change was not
important in the relative demand for employment across different
sectors.

Differing Results for Manufacturing

One interesting extension of findings should be mentioned. The
results for manufacturing differ from those for the overall economy. A
careful examination of the impact of differential productivity growth on
employment and hours for detailed manufacturing industries finds a
positive rather than a negative relationship between productivity
growth and hours worked.21 The difference between manufacturing and
other industries probably arises because the openness of manufacturing
leads to more price-elastic demand for domestic production and
therefore to a positive relationship between productivity growth on the
one hand and nominal output and hours growth on the other hand.
Further research is needed in this area, but the difference between
21

William D. Nordhaus, “The Sources of the Productivity Rebound and the

Manufacturing Employment Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper No. 11354, May
2005.

- 27 -

manufacturing and the entire economy suggests the importance of
openness to the productivity-employment relationship.

Summary diagnosis 4: Industries with more rapid productivity
growth tend to displace labor and show lower growth of hours and
employment. However, this relationship appears to be reversed
within manufacturing industries, which show higher growth of labor
inputs with higher productivity growth.

5. Who Captures the Gains From Innovation?
A central question of economic growth concerns the distribution
of the fruits of productivity growth. Who captures the gains from
innovation, and who suffers losses from stagnation? The results on
pricing for syndrome 1 suggest that most of the gains are captured by
consumers in the form of lower prices. Are there any residual rewards
to either capital or labor? In their studies on the performing arts, Bowen
and Baumol argued that the low earnings and stressed financial status
in such industries were due to the stagnant productivity performance.22

Productivity and wages

22

William J. Baumol and William G. Bowen, “On the Performing Arts: The

Anatomy of their Economic Problems.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 55,
No. 2, 1965, pp. 495-502. Baumol has written to me that he has changed his
view of the relationship between low wages and stagnant productivity sectors
since the 1965 article was written and does not believe that stagnant sectors
necessarily show low wages (personal communication, October 28, 2004).

- 28 -

The general picture for wages is shown in Figure 5, which
indicates little relationship between productivity growth and wage
growth. Table 5 shows a battery of tests of the impact of relative
productivity growth on relative wages. Higher productivity growth has
a small positive impact on wage relative growth with an inconsistent
sign. For well-measured industries, the sign is slightly positive.
However, for all industries in the cross-section (shown in Figure 5), the
sign is negative, reflecting some strange outliers at the upper left. These
outliers are tobacco and several service industries, where output is
probably poorly measured.

In any case, the relative importance of productivity on differential
wages is very small. For example, the unweighted average effect across
different specifications is a 0.017 percent increase in wages per percent
increase in productivity. If we take the 0.017 coefficient and apply it to
the differences in productivity growth across industries, it would yield a
maximum wage differential of about 8 percent for the entire 1948-2001
period between the best and worst performer. This predicted impact
compares with the range of differential wage growth of 132 percent.
This result suggests that the low wages in the performing arts and other
stagnant sectors are due to factors other than productivity stagnation,
the most likely being a combination of compensating variations and a
winner-take-all incentive structure.

- 29 -

Productivity and profits

Estimating the impact on profit-type income presents greater
difficulties because of the poor data on depreciation and imprecision in
allocation of profits to industries. In a companion paper, I examined the
impact of technological change on “Schumpeterian profits” using both
aggregate data as well as the data used in this study.23 I estimated that
innovators were able to capture about 4 percent of the total social
surplus from innovation. This number results from a low rate of initial
appropriability (estimated to be around 10 percent) along with a high
rate of depreciation of Schumpeterian profits (judged to be around 20
percent per year). In terms of the rate of profit on capital, the rate of
profit on the replacement cost of capital over the 1948-2001 period is
estimated to be 0.27 percent per year.
Summary diagnosis 5: The differential impact of higher
productivity growth on factor rewards is extremely small. While the
impacts are statistically insignificant, there is a suggestion that higher
productivity growth leads to slightly higher wage and profit growth,
but at least 95 percent of productivity growth is passed on to
consumers in lower prices.

23

William D. Nordhaus, “Schumpeterian Profits in the American Economy:

Theory and Measurement,” NBER Working Paper No. 10433, April 2004.

- 30 -

6. Has the economy suffered from a growth disease?
A final and intriguing question is the impact of the changing
composition of output on overall productivity growth – a syndrome we
denote “Baumol’s growth disease.” Baumol’s growth disease occurs
when stagnant sectors (those with relatively slow productivity growth)
also have rising nominal output shares. The point can be seen by
comparing people with different tastes. Person A’s tastes run to
computers, software, and consumer electronics, while person B’s tend
toward New York real estate, Picasso paintings, and three-star Parisian
restaurants. Because person A’s consumption is tilted toward items
whose prices are falling rather than rising rapidly, A’s real income will
be experiencing a rapid increase relative to B’s real income associated
with Upper East Side tastes. Baumol’s discussion of this tendency was
the following:24

An attempt to achieve balanced growth in a world of unbalanced
productivity must lead to a declining rate of growth relative to the rate
of growth of the labor force. In particular, if productivity in one sector
and the total labor force remain constant the growth rate of the
economy will asymptotically approach zero.

24

William J. Baumol, “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy

of Urban Crisis,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3, June, 1967, pp.
419. Baumol commented that did not intend to say that the productivity
disease would slow growth; he views the disease as a cost disease, not a
growth disease (personal communication, October 28, 2004).

- 31 -

Analytics of the growth disease

The macroeconomics of the growth disease can be seen by
examining the growth of real output. Using the Törnqvist formula, real
output growth is equal to the weighted growth of output in different
sectors, where the weights are nominal shares of output. If stagnant
sectors have rising nominal output shares, then the aggregate growth
rate will be reduced as the share of output moves toward the slow
productivity-growth sectors.

This tendency can be seen by decomposing aggregate
productivity growth.25 Define ât as aggregate productivity growth and
b̂t as the growth of aggregate inputs. The one-period growth rate of TFP

is:

(8)

n

aˆ t = xˆ t − bˆt = ∑ xˆ it Sit −
i =1

25

n

∑ bˆ
i =1

it

Vit

This derivation relies on value-added superlative production relationships.

An alternative approach is used in Kevin Stiroh, “Information Technology and
U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the Industry Data Say?” American
Economic Review, vol. 92, no. 5, pp. 1559-76. The decomposition for total output
is found in Dale W. Jorgenson, Frank W. Gollop, and Barbara M. Fraumeni,
Productivity and U.S. Economic Growth, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1987. One advantage of the decomposition used here is that the
redistribution effects are much smaller than those using total output and
Domar weights.

- 32 -

⎛

n

⎞

Here, Vit = Bi t / ⎜⎜ ∑ B j t ⎟⎟ = the Törnqvist share of inputs of industry i in
j =1
⎝

⎠

the total. Add and subtract

n

∑ b̂
i =1

(9)

n

aˆ t = ∑ aˆ it Sit +
i =1

n

∑ bˆ
i =1

it

it

Sit to (6) and reorganize:

(Sit − Vit )

The two terms on the right-hand side of (9) are a pure productivity term
and a redistribution effect. The pure productivity term measures the
aggregate growth rate as the weighted sum of industrial growth rates.
The second term in (9) captures effects due to the interaction of
changing shares and the difference between the input share and the
nominal output share of an industry. For total factor productivity with
superlative output indexes, the redistribution term is zero as long as
output equals income; but this term may be non-zero for labor
productivity or if the output index is a Laspeyres index.26
26

An interesting off-stage actor in this drama concerns the output indexes.

Baumol, Blackman, and Wolff and Wolff analyzed the effects of industry
composition on aggregate productivity using fixed-year-weights for output
indexes (or Laspeyres indexes). (See William J. Baumol, Sue Anne Batey
Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff, “Unbalanced Growth Revisited: Asymptotic
Stagnancy and New Evidence,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No. 4.,
Sept, 1985, pp. 806-817.; and Edward N. Wolff, “Industrial Composition,
Interindustry Effects, and the U.S. Productivity Slowdown,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, No. 2, May, 1985, pp. 268-277.) To interpret
their results, we would need to add a third term to equation (9) – which might
be called the “fixed-weight drift term” – to represent the difference between
the growth rates of chain-weighted output and the growth of fixed-year-

- 33 -

To measure the Baumol growth effect, we estimate the growth
rate using nominal output shares for a given year, T, and denote the
results as the “fixed-shares growth rate” or “FSGR(T)”:

(10)

FSGR(T) =

n

∑ â
i =1

it

SiT

By comparing the FSGR(T) for different base years, we can determine
the impact of changing output shares on the growth of productivity. If
the FSGR is lower for later T, then the Baumol growth effect is negative,
indicating that shares are moving in a manner that is unfavorable to
growth. If the FSGR is higher for later T, then the Baumol growth effect
is positive.
Results
Figure 6 and Table 6 show the FSGR for aggregate total factor
productivity, and Figure 7 shows the results for aggregate labor
productivity. To get a flavor of the results, examine the last line in Table
6. This shows the aggregate rate of growth of total factor productivity
for 1948-2001 where the industries are weighted with nominal output
shares for five different years. If we use fixed shares for 1948, the
average rate of TFP growth would be 1.49 percent per year, whereas if
weighted output. The fixed-weight drift term exited the stage when old-style
Laspeyres indexes were replaced by superlative indexes, and it will not
feature in the discussion here.

- 34 -

we use late shares (2001), TFP growth would average 0.85 percent per
year. This indicates that the composition of output reduced output
growth by 64 basis points per year over the 1948-2001 period, or slightly
more than 1 basis point per year.

Comparing Figures 6 and 7, we see that the Baumol growth effect
tended to reduce productivity growth for both productivity concepts
and for all periods except but one. In other words, the composition of
output definitely tended to shift toward those industries with lower
productivity growth. The size of the effect comparing 2001 weights and
1948 weights varied from 27 basis points to 89 basis points depending
upon productivity concept and period. A summary estimate is that the
changing composition of output decreased overall annual productivity
growth by slightly more than ½ percentage point over the last half
century.

The results on Baumol’s growth disease are consistent with the
output patterns and the implicit demand price-elasticities found in
earlier sections. Because demand is on average price-inelastic, stagnant
industries have experienced rising nominal output shares. As nominal
output shares increased in those industries, overall weighted
productivity growth slowed.
Summary diagnosis 6: Trends in the composition of output have
been unfavorable to overall total factor productivity and labor
productivity. The changing shares over the 1948-2001 period had the
effect of lowering productivity growth by slightly more than ½

- 35 -

percentage point per year, indicating that Baumol’s growth disease
was an important factor during this period.

V. Conclusions

The present study has investigated a series of hypotheses
concerning the effects of productivity change on economic growth,
prices, and factor rewards. Before summarizing, two reservations must
be noted. First, the results presented here rely upon data on valueadded prices, output, and productivity by industry, such as
entertainment and textiles. These data are not completely adequate for
questions concerning final goods and services such as concerts or
clothing. For most cases, they are close but imperfect substitutes for the
ideal data.

Second, the data are sometimes poorly measured estimates of true
output and therefore cannot correctly calculate true prices or the correct
numerator for productivity. This shortcoming is particularly serious in
services such as health, education, and personal services, for which the
output measures are in reality measures of inputs. We have dealt with
measurement issues by taking different slices of the data, such as
examining data for different periods or for subsets of industries that are
well-measured, but we cannot wholly overcome the mismeasurement
difficulties.

Subject to these reservations, the results here speak clearly on
many of the hypotheses put forth by Baumol and his co-authors. The
data are particularly useful because they are a comprehensive account
- 36 -

of the market economy of the United States for more than a halfcentury. Here are the major results.

First, Baumol’s hypothesis of a cost-price disease due to slow
productivity growth is definitely confirmed by the data. Industries with
relatively low productivity growth (“stagnant industries”) show a
percentage-point for percentage-point higher growth in relative prices.
This result indicates that most of the economic gains from higher
productivity growth are passed on to consumers in lower prices.
Moreover, differences in productivity over the long term of a halfcentury explain around 85 percent of the variance in relative price
movements for well-measured industries. While the underlying forces
driving technological change remain a challenge, the impacts of
differential technological change on prices stand out clearly.

Second, the real output stagnation hypothesis is strongly
confirmed. Industries that are technologically stagnant tend to have
slower growth in real output than do the technologically dynamic ones,
with a one percentage-point lower productivity growth being associated
with a three-quarters percentage-point lower real output growth.
Moreover, the statistical association of output growth and productivity
growth is highly significant. The mechanism by which productivity
affects output is clearly through the price mechanism of the cost-price
disease.

Third, beyond the price and real output effects, the associations
become murkier. One interesting question is how higher industrial
productivity growth affects jobs. Industries with higher productivity
- 37 -

growth generally had declining employment and hours growth when
all industries are considered. However, this relationship was reversed
for internationally open manufacturing sectors.

Fourth, the differential impact of higher productivity growth on
factor rewards is extremely small. There is a suggestion that higher
industrial productivity growth leads to slightly higher industrial wage
growth and to higher profits, but the fraction of productivity retained as
higher factor rewards is very small. For the most part, industrial wage
and profit trends are determined by the aggregate economy and not by
the productivity experience of individual sectors.

Perhaps the most important macroeconomic result is the
operation of Baumol’s growth disease over the last half of the twentieth
century. The hypothesis underlying the growth disease is that – because
the composition of output has shifted away from industries with rapid
productivity growth like manufacturing toward those with stagnant
technologies like government, education, and construction – aggregate
productivity growth has slowed. There has indeed been a tendency for
changes in spending shares to slow economic growth. The growth
disease has lowered annual aggregate productivity growth by slightly
more than one-half percentage point over the last half century.

- 38 -

10%

Price change (percent per year)

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

-2%
-6%

-4%

-2%

0%

2%

4%

6%

Growth of total factor productivity (percent per year)

Figure 1. Price and Total Factor Productivity Trend from 1948 to
2001
Figures 1 through 6 show the annual logarithmic rate of change of
variables, generally total factor productivity and an associated
variable, for 58 industries.

- 39 -

Coefficient

Standard
error

t-statistics

Observations

-1.232
-0.887
-0.972
-0.968

0.153
0.079
0.070
0.088

-8.06
-11.17
-13.90
-11.03

84
112
28
28

-1.100
-0.800
-0.872
-0.891

0.154
0.079
0.065
0.065

-7.14
-10.09
-13.39
-13.68

84
112
28
28

-1.184

0.256

-4.63

36

28 well-measured industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
28 well-measured industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
14 major industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level

-0.816

0.177

-4.61

48

1977-2000 cross section

-1.157

0.133

-8.68

12

1948-2001 cross section

-0.975

0.218

-4.46

12

4 subperiod, difference

-1.073

0.277

-3.87

42

4 subperiod level

-0.731

0.135

-5.42

56

1977-2000 cross section

-1.000

0.145

-6.90

14

1948-2001 cross section

-0.921

0.097

-9.52

14

-0.539

0.087

-6.22

164

14 major industries
Labor productivity

59 detailed industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level

-0.734

0.052

-13.99

223

1977-2000 cross section

-1.008

0.041

-24.54

56

1948-2001 cross section

-0.904

0.051

-17.62

57

4 subperiod, difference

-1.016

0.109

-9.31

183

4 subperiod level

-0.885

0.076

-11.64

251

1977-2000 cross section

-1.021

0.052

-19.52

62

1948-2001 cross section

-0.931

0.040

-23.22

63

67 detailed industries
Labor productivity

Summary statistics
All regressions
Weighted

-0.956

0.129

-7.38

Unweighted

-0.942

0.167

-5.66

-0.965

0.131

-7.38

Well-measured industries
Unweighted

Table 1. Impact of Productivity Growth on Price Change
(For a discussion of the specification and variables, see
Appendix B.)
- 40 -

10%

Real output growth

8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%

-4%

-2%

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

Growth of total factor productivity

Figure 2. TFP Growth and Real Output Growth, 1948-2001
(annual average percent per year)

- 41 -

28 well-measured industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
28 well-measured industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
14 major industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
14 major industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
59 detailed industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
67 detailed industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
Summary statistics
All regressions
Weighted
Unweighted
Well-measured industries
Unweighted

Coefficient

Standard
error

t-statistics

0.783
0.946
0.737
0.803

0.145
0.083
0.157
0.269

5.40
11.42
4.69
2.98

0.629
0.805
0.650
0.716

0.147
0.089
0.144
0.240

4.27
9.04
4.51
2.98

0.706
0.924
0.638
0.599

0.112
0.110
0.272
0.332

6.32
8.38
2.35
1.80

0.610
0.549
0.682
0.673

0.136
0.116
0.231
0.167

4.49
4.74
2.95
4.02

0.313
0.513
0.662
0.475

0.061
0.050
0.093
0.118

5.11
10.32
7.13
4.02

0.773
0.852
0.630
0.409

0.069
0.055
0.101
0.122

11.25
15.43
6.26
3.35

0.670
0.670

0.160
0.162

4.20
4.12

0.759

0.094

8.07

Table 2. Impact of Productivity Growth on Real Output Growth

- 42 -

12%

Nominal output growth

10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-6%

-4%

-2%

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

Growth of total factor productivity

Figure 3. Growth of TFP and nominal output, 1948-2001 (annual
average percent per year)

- 43 -

Summary statistics
All regressions
Weighted
Unweighted
Well-measured industries
Unweighted

Coefficient

Standard
error

t-statistics

-0.276
-0.272

0.198
0.195

-1.39
-1.40

-0.206

0.176

-1.18

Table 3. Impact of productivity growth on nominal output
growth
Note: the coefficients of nominal output growth are very close to the
sum of the coefficients of price plus real output growth (see text)

- 44 -

8%

Hours change (percent per year)

6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-6%

-4%

-2%

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

Growth of total factor productivity (percent per year)

Figure 4. Growth of TFP and hours, 1948-2001

- 45 -

Coefficient

Standard
error

t-statistics

28 well-measured industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section

-0.206
-0.066
-0.351
-0.248

0.162
0.097
0.163
0.272

-1.27
-0.68
-2.15
-0.91

28 well-measured industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section

-0.369
-0.195
-0.350
-0.284

0.147
0.089
0.144
0.240

-2.51
-2.19
-2.43
-1.19

14 major industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference

-0.102

0.135

-0.76

4 subperiod level

0.121

0.146

0.83

1977-2000 cross section

-0.311

0.324

-0.96

1948-2001 cross section

-0.459

0.351

-1.31

4 subperiod, difference

-0.392

0.136

-2.89

4 subperiod level

-0.451

0.116

-3.89

1977-2000 cross section

-0.317

0.231

-1.37

1948-2001 cross section

-0.327

0.167

-1.96

0.053
0.097
-0.253
-0.453

0.050
0.041
0.103
0.128

1.06
2.35
-2.47
-3.53

-0.226
-0.148
-0.370
-0.591

0.069
0.055
0.101
0.122

-3.29
-2.68
-3.67
-4.83

-0.282
-0.258

0.150
0.193

-1.87
-1.34

-0.259

0.096

-2.69

14 major industries
Labor productivity

59 detailed industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
67 detailed industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
Summary statistics
All regressions
Weighted
Unweighted
Well-measured industries
Unweighted

Table 4. Impact of productivity growth on hours growth
- 46 -

7.5%

Wage rate growth

7.0%
6.5%
6.0%
5.5%
5.0%
4.5%
-6%

-4%

-2%

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

Growth of total factor productivity

Figure 5. Productivity growth and wage growth by
industry, 1948-2001 (annual average percent per year)

- 47 -

28 well-measured industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
28 well-measured industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
14 major industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
14 major industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
59 detailed industries
Total factor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
67 detailed industries
Labor productivity
4 subperiod, difference
4 subperiod level
1977-2000 cross section
1948-2001 cross section
Summary statistics
All regressions
Weighted
Unweighted
Well-measured industries
Unweighted

Coefficient

Standard error

t-statistics

-0.082
0.086
0.086
0.079

0.064
0.045
0.058
0.054

-1.28
1.90
1.47
1.46

-0.022
0.105
0.109
0.115

0.062
0.042
0.050
0.045

-0.36
2.50
2.16
2.55

-0.135
0.065
-0.018
0.004

0.105
0.088
0.180
0.130

-1.28
0.75
-0.10
0.03

0.013
0.089
0.017
0.019

0.117
0.069
0.125
0.062

0.11
1.29
0.13
0.30

0.026
-0.005
-0.088
-0.052

0.024
0.021
0.037
0.031

1.10
-0.24
-2.36
-1.66

0.018
0.076
-0.056
-0.029

0.036
0.028
0.039
0.031

0.49
2.74
-1.43
-0.94

-0.001
0.017

0.078
0.074

-0.02
0.23

0.059

0.067

0.88

Table 5. Coefficient of wage growth on productivity growth,
alternative specifications
- 48 -

TFP growth (% per year)

2.0%
1948 wts
1973 wts
2001 wts

1959 wts
1989 wts

1959-73

1973-89

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%
1948-59

1989-2001

Figure 6. Fixed-shares growth rate of total factor productivity for different
base years and periods
This figure shows the fixed-shares growth rate of total factor productivity for
the aggregate of BEA industries for which capital stocks are available. These
comprised 83 percent of GDP in 2001. The calculations show FSGR(T) =
n

∑ â
i =1

it

SiT using fixed nominal shares for the five periods shown. The declining

rates show that the Baumol growth disease had a major impact on overall
productivity growth during this period.

- 49 -

Growth of labor productivity (percent per year)

3.0%
1948 wts
1973 wts
2001 wts

2.5%

1959 wts
1989 wts

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%
1948-59

1959-73

1973-89

1989-2001

Figure 7. Fixed-shares growth rate of labor productivity for different base
years and periods
This figure shows the growth of labor productivity for gross domestic
product. The calculations show FSGR(T) =

n

∑ â
i =1

it

SiT using nominal shares for

the five base years shown.

- 50 -

Productivity
growth for:

Fixed output-share weights for period
1948

1959

1973

1989

Current
2001

weights

[percent per year, logarithmic growth]
1948-59

1.61

1.75

1.71

1.51

1.34

1.64

1959-73

1.44

1.39

1.26

1.03

0.78

1.32

1973-89

1.27

0.92

0.83

0.56

0.38

0.59

1989-2001

1.73

1.47

1.42

1.19

1.11

1.13

1948-2001

1.49

1.34

1.26

1.02

0.85

1.12

Table 6. Fixed-shares growth rate for total factor productivity for different
weights and periods

Table shows the fixed-share growth rates, FSGR(T) =

n

∑ â
i =1

it

SiT , for total factor

productivity, for different base years. The last column shows the current-year
(Törnqvist) growth in TFP. For the entire period, the annual average
difference between 1948 weights and 2001 weights is 0.64 percentage points.

- 51 -

Appendix A. Industry definitions in regressions
Industry definitions correspond to the 1987 SIC industry
code. Included industries in the different samples are as follow.

All 67 detailed industries
(Asterisks denote industries that do not have total factor productivity
estimates because BEA does not publish capital stock data.)

Farms
Agricultural services, forestry, and fishing
Metal mining
Coal mining
Oil and gas extraction
Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels
Construction
Lumber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary metal industries
Fabricated metal products
Industrial machinery and equipment
Electronic and other electric equipment
Motor vehicles and equipment
Other transportation equipment
Instruments and related products
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
Food and kindred products
Tobacco products
Textile mill products

- 52 -

Apparel and other textile products
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing
Chemicals and allied products
Petroleum and coal products
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
Leather and leather products
Railroad transportation
Local and interurban passenger transit
Trucking and warehousing
Water transportation
Transportation by air
Pipelines, except natural gas
Transportation services
Telephone and telegraph
Radio and television
Electric, gas, and sanitary services
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Depository institutions
Nondepository institutions
Security and commodity brokers
Insurance carriers
Insurance agents, brokers, and service
Nonfarm housing services
Other real estate
Holding and other investment offices
Hotels and other lodging places
Personal services
Business services
Auto repair, services, and parking
Miscellaneous repair services
Motion pictures

- 53 -

Amusement and recreation services
Health services
Legal services
Educational services
Social services*
Membership organizations*
Other services*
Private households*
Federal general government*
Federal government enterprises*
State and local general government*
State and local government enterprises*

All 28 Well-Measured Industries
Farms
Metal mining
Coal mining
Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels
Lumber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary metal industries
Fabricated metal products
Industrial machinery and equipment
Electronic and other electric equipment
Motor vehicles and equipment
Other transportation equipment
Food and kindred products
Textile mill products
Apparel and other textile products
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing

- 54 -

Chemicals and allied products
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
Leather and leather products
Railroad transportation
Trucking and warehousing
Transportation by air
Telephone and telegraph
Electric, gas, and sanitary services
Wholesale trade
Retail trade

One-Digit Industries
Farms
Mining
Construction
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Transportation
Communications
Electric, gas, and sanitary services
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Finance, insurance, and real estate
Services
Federal government
State and local governments

- 55 -

Appendix B. Notes on the Estimates in Tables 1 to 6
Details of Estimation for Tables 1 through 5

The results in Tables 1 through 5 were estimated using twentyfour different specifications. One set uses two different measures of
productivity (labor productivity and total factor productivity). A second
set is three different industry combinations as described in Appendix A.
A third specification involves four different time periods.

The specifications for the different time periods will be described
in this Appendix. The first two equations in each block are panel
estimators with fixed effects, while the last two are cross-sections over
long timer periods.

As an example, the panel estimate in the second equation of Table
1 is:

(B-1) pˆ it = γ 0i + γ 1aˆit* + γ 2 Dt + ε itp

where p̂it is the average annual change in the logarithm of price
between year 1948 and 1959 for t = 1, 1959 and 1973 for t = 2, 1973 and
1989 for t = 3, and 1989 and 2001 for t = 4. âit is the average annual
change in the logarithm of calculated industry productivity over the
same periods, Dt is a panel of time effects for the different periods, ε itp is
a random disturbance, the γ 0i are industry effects, while γ 1 and γ 2 are
coefficients. The first equation in each block takes the first difference of
- 56 -

equation in (B-1). The last two sets of equations are cross sections for
either the shorter period for which the data are better or for the entire
period. The equations are estimated using the panel estimator and
ordinary least squares in Eviews 5.0.

The summary statistics at the bottom of each table are calculated
under the assumption that each equation is independent. While this
assumption is clearly not the case, it is a convenient way of organizing
the different results. The weighted summary statistics take the estimates
shown in the columns above it and weight the coefficients by the
number of observations for each equation. The unweighted statistics
weight each equation equally.

- 57 -

