                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CONDUCT OF DOMESTIC
                        MONETARY FOL ICY




                        Robert J. Gordon




                     Working Paper No. 1221




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         October 1983




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation.
am grateful to Stephen King and John Veitch for their help with the
data, and to Stephen Axilrod, Hermann Dudler, Milton Friedman,
Herschel Grossman, Jerry Jordan, Thomas Mayer and Allen Sinai for
their comments and criticisms. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opi-
nions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1221
                                             October 1983



                The Conduct of Domestic Monetary Policy


                               ABSTRACT



     This paper develops the view that monetary policy operates within a
set of basic constraints that limit the set of outcomes that it can
achieve.  These include constraints on aggregate supply behavior that
determine how a given path of nominal income growth will be divided
between inflation and output growth, as well as "velocity" constraints
that influence the path of nominal income growth that will result from
any given time path for the monetary base, monetary aggregates, or
interest rates.   The interaction of monetary policy decisions with
shifts in constraints helps to explain the sources of deteriorating
macroeconomic performance in the 1970s and early l980s.

     The role of aggregate supply behavior is illustrated with a one—
equation approach to the econometric problem of predicting how changes
in nominal GNP growth will be divided between inflation and real GNP
growth. The results from the equation estimated through 1980 are used
to examine the behavior of inflation during the 1981—82 recession, and
to predict the behavior of inflation and unemployment that would ac-
company alternative paths of nominal GNP growth after 1982.

     The role of velocity is examined in a new set of multivariate
exogeneity tests using the vector—autoregressive (VAR) approach for
three separate sample periods (1953—61, 1962—70, and 1971—79).     The
major conclusions are that the monetary base has no significant ex-
planatory role for spending changes. The Treasury bill rate appears to
carry the main explanatory power, working directly on spending in the
1950s and indirectly through the money multiplier in the 1970s.




                                              Robert J. Gordon
                                              Department of Economics
                                              Northwestern University
                                              Evanston, IL 60201

                                              (312) 492—3616
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                  Page
   I.   INTRODUCTION                                                    1


 II. AGGREGATE SUPPLY BEHAVIOR                                       6

        Basic Identities and Hypotheses                              6
        Nominal GNP growth, Inflation, and the Output Ratio
          in U. S. Postwar Business Cycles                          10
        Table 1                                                     12
        Lessons from the Postwar U. S. Experience                  16

III. CHOICE OF THE OPTIMAL NOMINAL GNP GROWTH PATH                 17
        Estimates of the Tradeoff Equation and the Natural Rate
          of Unemployment                                          20
        An Illustration of Alternative Nominal CNP Paths           23
        Figure 1                                                   24
        Figure 2                                                   26

 IV. MANAGING MONETARY POLiCY IN THE FACE OF UNSTABLE
        VELOCITY GROWTH                                            27
        The Historical Behavior of Final Sales, Velocity and
          the Money Multiplier                                     29
        Table 2                                                    30
        Contribution of Monetary Variables to the Explanation
          of Nominal Final Sales Growth                            33
        Table 3                                                    35
        Table 4                                                    37
        Implications of the Statistical Analysis                   40
  V. IMPLEMENTING A NOMINAL FINAL SALES TARGET                     41
        Length of Horizon                                          43
        TheUse of Forecasts                                        45
        Objections to Targeting Nominal GNP Growth                 48
            Too much or too little discretion?                     49
            The Fed can't control nominal GNP                      50
            Coordination with Fiscal Policy                        50
            Avoidance of Accountability                            51
        Conclusion                                                 52

References
                             I.   INTRODUCTION


      Monetary policy has traditionally shared with fiscal policy joint

 responsibility for attainment of the ultimate macroeconomic goals——full

employment, price stability, and maximum feasible growth in per—capita

real—income.     In the decade after 1973 macroeconomic performance

deteriorated in most major industrialized nations, with high unemploy-

ment and inflation rates, and iower growth in per capita real income.

The design of new procedures for the conduct of domestic monetary policy

must start from an analysis of past performance.       An assessment is

required of the role, if any, that monetary policy played in contribu—

ting to worsened macroeconomic performance, and of the implications of

identifiable errors of policy and procedures.

     A well—established view holds that real phenomena like the un-

employment rate and real per—capita income growth are independent of

monetary policy, which guides the evolution of nominal monetary aggre-

gates, nominal bank reserves, and nominal interest rates. As stated by

Milton Friedman (1968) and other traditional monetarists, this interpre-

tation of nnetary neutrality holds in the long run, while nominal

monetary phenomena are capable of influencing real variables in the

short run. A stronger version of monetary neutrality is maintained in

the Lucas—Sargent—Wallace (LSW) "policy ineffectiveness proposition,"

which holds that only unanticipated movements in nominal monetary
aggregates can   influence real output (see especially Sargent and
Wallace, 1975). Subsequent empirical work with quarterly data for the

U. S. (Barro and Rush, 1980) implies that monetary changes must be

neutral for output over periods longer than one quarter.'

     Since money is held in the monetarist and LSW views to be neutral
                                       2




 for real   variables   over periods ranging from one quarter to a long run

 of   perhaps two—to--five years, it might be concluded that monetary policy

 could not be held responsible for the poor performance of real variables

 after 1973.     The same reasoning would hold monetary policy solely re-

 sponsible for faster Inflation.       Indeed, a standard prescription for

 monetary policy has been to maintain tight control over the growth rate

 of monetary aggregates or of the monetary base along a steadily

 decelerating path to eliminate inflation.


       This paper develops an alternative view of the consequences of

monetary policy. A long time is required for monetary policy to become

neutral, i.e., for its effect on real variables to vanish. Alternative

scenarios for the nominal money supply can make the difference between

smooth or oscillating paths for real variables over periods of a decade

or more.     Monetary policy operates within a set of basic constraints

that limit the set of outcomes that it can achieve.          These include

constraints on aggregate supply behavior that determine how a given path

of nominal income growth will be divided between inflation and output

growth, as well as "velocity" constraints that influence the path of

nominal income growth that will result from any given monetary policy,

whether stated in terms of the monetary base, monetary aggregates, or

interest rates.      The interaction of monetary policy decisions with




'The only variable with significant explanatory power in the equation
used by Barro and Rush to proxy for the concept of "anticipated monetary
changes" is a one—quarter lag on actual monetary change. Thus it takes
only a single quarter for a monetary change to become fully anticipated.
The policy ineffectiveness proposition is rejected in recent empirical
papers by Mishkin (1982) and Gordon (1982b).
                                    3




shifts in the constraints helps to explain the sources of deteriorating

macroeconomic performance. Explicit consideration of the constraints is

required in the design of new procedures.

     The presentation of a paper at an international conference on the

assigned topic of "domestic monetary policy" poses a serious problem of

delimiting scope.     Ideally those aspects of domestic monetary policy

should be isolated that are of such central importance as to be relevant

in every country. The approach taken here is to develop a common theme

that monetary policy operates in the face of constraints, and to regard

the constraints as a dimension of difference across nations.

     The constraints to be emphasized in the paper fall into the two

major categories of aggregate supply and velocity constraints.    Among

the aggregate supply constraints faced by most nations are (1) a short—

run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, (2) "inertia" in the

adjustment of inflation to nominal disturbances, (3) the absence of a

long—run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, (4) the exposure

of the short—term tradeoff to the influence of supply shocks, and (5)

the influence on the tradeoff slope of the economy's degree of openness

and its exchange rate regime.    For purposes of illustration the paper

concentrates on the operation of these aggregate supply constraints in

the United States but refers to likely differences in other nations,

particularly the lesser extent of inflation inertia and the greater

degree of openness.

     Among the determinants of monetary velocity that influence the path

of nominal spending for a given path of the monetary base or a monetary

aggregate are (1) the level and change in fiscal deficits, (2) shifts in

the demand function for a given monetary aggregate as a result of
                                   4




changes in tastes or innovations in financial markets, and (3) shifts in

the expenditure function for private goods and services related to the

cyclical dynamics of the demand for durable goods and to fluctuations in

the foreign trade surplus due to exchange rate movements or exogenous

foreign disturbances.

     Again the paper concentrates on the consequences of velocity shifts

in the United States, which in recent years have been particularly

related to financial innovation and the appreciation of the dollar,

which in turn has been partly caused by the anticipation of future

fiscal deficits. Velocity shifts in other nations may have a different

mix of sources but are still amenable to the same general policy

prescription outlined below. The U. S. situation is also unique in the

degree of independence of the central bank and the lack of coordination

of monetary and fiscal policy, which makes fiscal policy more of a

constraint than is the case elsewhere. In other nations it may be more

fruitful to regard monetary and fiscal policy as part of a coordinated

policy package, rather than regarding fiscal policy as imposing

constraints on monetary policy.

     Both the aggregate supply and velocity factors are treated as

"constraints" because they limit the ability of the central bank to

achieve its ultimate goals of price stability, full employment, and

maximum real income growth. What appears to be a constraint from the

viewpoint of the central bank may be the result of maximizing behavior

by individuals in the private economy or politicians influencing the

government's fiscal decisions.    For instance, the dilemma for anti—

inflationary monetary policy posed by inflation inertia in the U. S.

results indirectly from the American system of staggered three—year wage
                                   5




contracts, which in turn can be explained by a particular institutional

history of unionization and labor strife in the early postwar years.2

     The fact that central banks in different nations face a differing

set of constraints does not, of course, fully explain differences in

economic outcomes.   For instance, some commentators point to domestic

monetary policy choices as the main explanation of "why West Germany and

Japan coped with the oil crisis far better than the United States, or

why they have been more successful during the past decade in avoiding

high inflation than Britain or the United States" (Friedman, 1983).     in

my interpretation the central banks in West Germany, Britain, and Japan

face a different set of constraints than in the U. S., particularly a

smaller degree of inflation inertia. Thus, maximizing subject to this

constraint, it is optimal for the central banks of these three countries

to react to an oil shock with less monetary accommodation than the U. S.

central bank.   The low—inflation outcomes in West Germany and Japan,

then, resulted from the interaction of central bank decisions and con-

straints, not from independent decisions taken by central banks

operating in a vacuum.     The wide choice set open to central banks

implied by Friedman's comment is, I believe, well illustrated by the

different outcome In Britain as compared to West Germany and Japan.

    Examples developed in the paper show how aggregate supply
constraints can be taken explicitly into account in designing a path for




2An explanation of the origins of three—year union contracts in the
United States and the contrast with shorter—term contracts in the United
Kingdom and Japan is contained in Gordon (l982c). The general idea of
the central bank operating in the face of constraints in developed most
fully in Gordon (1975), which builds on ideas contained in Reder (1948).
                                     6




nominal CNP growth that aims to bring about stable future growth in

output with a stable (but non—zero) rate of inflation.      Much of the

discussion in the last half of the paper compares nominal GNP targeting

with the traditional dichotomy between money supply and interest rate

targeting.   It shares with recent papers by Feilner (1982) and Bryant

(1982)(l983) an emphasis on shifting the attention of the central bank

from monetary variables to the ultimate targets of policy, while

differing on      the appropriate length of horizon and details of

implementation.


                       II. AGGREGATE SUPPLY BEHAVIOR


Basic Identities and Hypotheses

     The term "aggregate supply behavior" refers to the set of factors

that influence how the growth rate of nominal CNP is divided between in-

flation and real GNP.      If the growth rate of nominal GNP is viewed as

predetermined, depending on monetary growth and other factors deter-

mining velocity growth, then the three key macroeconomic growth rates of

nominal GNP (y), real GNP (q), and the GNP deflator (p) can be

determined with only two equations (here I adopt the notation that

upper—case letters stand for levels and lower case letters stand for

proportional rates of change).

     One equation is the identity linking the three:


                             Pt +                           (1)
                      Yt


where the t subscripts designate the time period. This can be converted
                                       7




into a more useful form if we subtract from each side of (1) the growth

rate of "natural" real CNP (qN)• This is the growth rate of the amount

of real GNP that the economy can achieve when operating at the "natural

rate of unemployment," defined in turn as               the unemployment rate

compatible with steady nonaccelerating inflation in the absence of

supply shocks.


                         —   N                     N
                                  Pt
                                       +       —
                                                                   (2)

Even though (2) is an identity, it contains an important kernel of truth

about the underlying source of inflation.               If real GNP tends to

gravitate to its "natural" level in the long run, then in the long run

actual   and natural real CNP growth must he equal (q —
                                                                 q       =    0),   and

then inflation is simply the excess of nominal CNP growth over the

growth rate of natural real GNP            =
                                                   y — q).   I call this excess

nominal GNP concept "adjusted nominal GNP growth" (y —
                                                                 q).         Thus the

famous phrase "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon"

(Friedman, 1963) should really be rep'aced by "inflation in the long run

is always and everywhere an adjusted nominal GNP phenomenon."

     The identity (2) identifies three reasons why inflation does not

always and everywhere vary in proportion to movements in monetary

growth. First, at least in the short run, inflation can fall below

         if real GNP grows faster than natural real CNP (q — qN), and vice

versa. Second, inflation can speed up with constant nominal GM!' growth

If there is a slowdown in the growth rate of natural real GNP, due, for

instance, to the much—discussed worldwide post—1973 productivity growth

slowdown. Third, nominal GNP growth by definition is equal to monetary

growth plus velocity growth (y         m.+ v), and there is no reason for
                                        8



  velocity growth to be constant under every alternative monetary regime.

  For instance, the velocity of the '1l money supply concept in the U. S.

  (currency and demand deposits) exhibited a decade—long decline in the

  1930s and a 36—year--long rise between 1945 and 1981. Between 1981 and

  1983, velocity once again declined.

       One more implication of identity (2) provides an important link

  between inflation and unemployment, two of the basic goal variables of

  monetary policy. The difference between the unemployment rate and the

  natural rate of unemployment is closely related to the "output ratio,"

  that is, the ratio of actual to natural real CNP.      This relationship,

  usually called "Okun's Law," has held up extremely well in the United

  States through the economic turmoil of the last decade.3 This means

  that movements in the unemployment rate can be tracked accurately given

  knowledge of the current output ratio,            for which we use the
  symbol Q ( Q/Q). Inflation and the output ratio are linked together

  by identity (2), once we take note of the fact that:


                         —


 Thus (2) becomes


                         —     =   Pt +   t — t—l

 Thus, given some predetermined value of adjusted nominal CNP growth




3Estimates of the Okun's Law relationship between the U. S. unemployment
rate and the output ratio are contained in Cordon (1982a, p. 94). The
relationship between the demographically weighted unemployment rate and
the output ratio remains completely stable over the 1954—80 period. The
natural aggregate unemployment rate drifts up relative to the constant
weighted natural rate as a result of demographic shifts. The relation-
ship has recently been studied for Japan in Hamada and Kurosaka (1983).
                                          9




        —
            q)   and last period's output ratio              equation (3) contains

the two unknown variables of central interest in macroeconomics, the

inflation rate             and the output ratio

        The additional equation needed to determine the value of both

unknowns is a dynamic expectational Phillips tradeoff equation, which is

sometimes, following Friedman (1970) called "the missing equation." In

its simplest form this states that the inflation rate depends on the

expected rate of inflation (re),               the output ratio (Q), and the

influence of some proxy for the effect of supply shocks on inflation

(zr):


                                              — 1) +
                           Pt =      + b(Q             cz,           (4)



where h and c are parameters.

        The coefficient on the expected inflation term is assumed to be

unity, and therefore (4) incorporates the "natural rate hypothesis."

When supply shocks are absent (zt =           0),   inflation remains equal to the

expected rate of inflation when the output ratio is unity                   =   1),
i.e., when the economy is operating at its "no shock" natural rate of

                 =         Inflation tends to accelerate when the output ratio
output               Q).
is above unity and to decelerate when the output ratio is below unity.

If adverse supply shocks are present (z > 0), then inflation can

accelerate even when the output ratio is below unity.                      Among the

relevant set of adverse supply shocks in the U. S. have been increases

in the relative prices of oil, food, and raw materials; a depreciation

of the dollar; increases in indirect taxes; increases in the effective

minimum wage; and the rebound of prices after various price control
                                     10




programs. The post—1973 slowdown in productivity growth is taken into

account in the measurement of natural real GNP (Q).              Inflation—
reducing supply shocks have been limited to the transitory effects of

price control programs and, more recently, the partial reversal of the

oil shocks and the appreciation of the dollar.4

       The relationship between inflation and adjusted nominal GNP growth

can be seen when the two basic equations are combined. Substituting (3)

into (4), we obtain, after some rearrangement:


                 Pt = l+b       + b(y     —
                                              q   +   — 1) +
                                                               zJ '
                                                           ' —q
The economy is in long—run equilibrium when p =
                                                      p         and

Zt
     = 0.   An acceleration of inflation relative to the expected rate can

he caused by an acceleration of nominal GNP growth, a deceleration of

natural real GNP growth, a lagged output ratio above unity, and any

adverse supply shock.5


Nominal GNP Growth, Inflation, and the Output Ratio in U. S. Postwar
Business Cycles

      This section provides an interpretation of the behavior of

inflation and the output ratio in postwar business cycles. Then in the

following section we summarize the implications of recent econometric




4'rhts list of supply shocks includes several factors, including the
relative prices of oil, food and raw materials, as well as the exchange
rate, that also reflect the influence of monetary and fiscal policy.
These are termed supply shocks" solely for terminological convenience.


5The concepts and equations in this section are explained in full, both
in a graphical and algebraic treatment, in Chapters 8 and 9 of my
textbook (1981).
                                   IA



estimates of equation (5) for the effects on inflation and the output

ratio of alternative paths for adjusted nominal GNP growth that might be

chosen by a central bank conducting domestic monetary policy.

     Data for seven postwar business cycles are exhibited in Table 1.

The timing of each cycle is dictated by the choices of the National

Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), which has established a chronology

of U. S. hisiness cycles extending back to 1837.    The table shows each

business cycle in a grouping of three lines, labelled "expansion,"

•'plateau," and "recession."   The 'expansion" begins in the calendar

quarter designated by the NRER as the official cycle "trough."       The

"recession" begins in the quarter designated as the official NBER

"peak." An internediate stage is defined here that separates the period

between NBER trough and peak into two intervals, divided at the quarter

when the output ratio reaches its peak.   During the plateau phase, the

economy exhibits positive real GNP growth at a rate slower than the

natural growth (0 <   < q), so the output ratio declines.

     The five growth rates in columns (3) through (7) of Table 1

correspond to the famous quantity equation.   Growth in money (m) plus

velocity (v) equals that in nominal GNP (y), which also equals that in

the CNP deflator (p) plus that in real GNP (q).    These growth rates do

not tell us much about extreme highs and lows experienced by the

unemployment rate or the output ratio. Column (9) exhibits the official

unemployment rate observed in the first quarter of each of the three

cyclical phases. Column (8) exhibits my estimate of the output ratio; a

detailed econometric study of equation (4) is used to derive the output

ratio consistent with a constant rate of inflation in the absence of

supply shocks.
                                                                Table   1


                                         Basic Characteristics of U.         S.    Business Cycles
                                                            1949—1982


                                                                                                        Value at
               Date      Length              Four—quarter growth rates                                Start   of Phase
              Phase     of Phase  Honey +    Velocity    Nominal = GNE'      + Real                  Output    Unemploy—
Phase        Begins     in Years Supply(m)   of 111(v)   CNP(y)     Deflator(p) CNP(q)               Ratio     ment Rate

              (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)                (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)

Expansion     1949:Q4     3.50     4.3        6.5        10.8                3.3          7.5         93.5         7.0
P1 a tea u
Recession     1953:Q2     1.00     0.8       —2.7       —1.9                 1.4         —3.3        104.5         2.6

Expansion     1954:Q2     1.5()    2.9        5.6        8.5                2.0           6.5        98.3          5.8
Plateau       1955:Q4     1.75     0.8        6.1        6.9                 3.6          3.3        103.5         4.2
Recession     1957:Q4    0.75      0.6       —3.2       —2.6                 1.0         —3.6        100.5         4.2

Expansion     1958:Q2     1.00     4.5        6.3        10.8               2.7           8.1        95.6          7.4
Plateau       1959:Q2     1.00    —0.6        3.8         3.2                1.5          1.7        100.6         5.1
Recession     1960:Q2    0.75      1.9       —1.4        0.5                0.6          —0.1        98.8          5.2

Expansion     1961:Q1    5.00      3.8        3.9         7.7               1.9           5.8        96.1          6.8
J'lateau      1966:Q1     3.75     5.0        2.3         7.3               4.3           3.0        105.7         3.9
Recession     1969:Q4     1.00     5.0       —0.1        4.9                5.0          —0.1        102.3         3.6

Expansion     1970:Q4    2.25      7.7        3.5        11.2               4.6           6.6         98.1         5.9
Plateau       1973:Ql    0.75     4.8         4.7        9.5                7.3           2.2        103.7         4.9
Recegsiri     1973:Q4     1.25     4.4        1.4         5.8               10.1         —4.3        102.6         4.8

Expansion     1975:Q1    3.75      7.1        4.7       11.8                6.5           5.3         94.3         8.2
Plateau       1978:Q4    1.25      7.4        2.7        10.1               8.5           1.6        100.9         5.8
Recession     1980:Q1    0.50     10.8       —5.5         5.3               9.5          —4.2        99.0          6.2

Expansion    1980:Q3     0.50     7.9         8.5       16.4                10.2          6.2         95.5         7.5
Plateau      1981:Q1     0.50     4.5         3.6        8.1                 7.7          0.4        97.0          7.3
Recession    1981:Q3     1.50     6.1        —1.6        4.5                 5.9         —1.4         95.5         7.4

Average All Cycles (Weighted by length)
Expansion            2.53     5.1        5.1            10.2                3.8           6.4         95.9         6.9
Plateau              1.28     3.9        3.5             7.4                4.9           2.5        101.9         5.2
Recession            0.98     4.0       —1.4             2.1,               5.2          —2.6        100.5         4.9
                                       Ii

       Common   features of the seven cycles are summarized in the bottom

section of the table, which provides averages of the variables for each

phase over all seven cycles, with each phase weighted by its length.

Columns (3) through (5) show that nominal GNP growth was highly vola-

tile, with a 10.2 percent average growth rate during expansion phases

and 2.6 percent rate during recession phases, for a difference of 7.6

percent. In contrast, Ml growth was riuch less volatile, with growth in

expansion phases only 1.1 percent faster on average than in recession

phases.     As a result, fluctuations in monetary growth accounted on

average for only 14 percent (1.1/7.6) of fluctuations in nominal GNP

growth.    The remaining 86 percent is accounted for by fluctuations in

the growth rate of velocity.

       Two objections may be raised to the contrast between the roles of

money and velocity growth in business cycles. First, some commentators

have pointed out that the permanent income theory of money demand

implies a large elasticity of velocity movements to transitory monetary

changes. Yet an inspection of the data reveals important episodes like

1967—68 or 1982—82 when money growth and velocity growth moved in
opposite directions.     The second and more legitimate objection is that

the comparison in Table 1 neglects lags.       Since this reservation is

legitimate, in Table 4 we examine more sophisticated econometric evi-

dence that takes account of lags in the impact of money on nominal

GNP.

       A prominent feature in Table 1 is the steady acceleration of mone—

tary growth in successive business cycles beginning in 1961.         The

weighted average growth rates of money, velocity, and nominal CNP in

successive cycles were (in percent):
                                  14




                        Money          Velocity      Nominal GNP



              1958—61     1.9             3.3            5.2

              1961—70    4.4              2.7            7.1

              1970—75    6.2              3.1            9.3

              1975—80     7.5             3.3           10.8

              1980—82     6.1             1.5            7.6

Since velocity growth exhibited no significant change over these cycles,

except for 1980—82, the behavior of money can be blamed for the long—

term increase in nominal GNP growth and in the rate of inflation in the

1970s as compared to the 1950s and early 1960s. Thus a careful distinc-

tion must be made between the small role of money growth in contributing

to the short—run timing of individual cycles, and its large role in

contributing to overheating in the 1964—74 decade taken as a whole.

This evaluation must be qualified to the extent that supply shocks con-

tributed to the inflation of the l970s.     As pointed out later in this

section, part of the acceleration of money growth in 1975—80 may have

been a passive reaction to the 1973—74 supply shocks that forced the Fed

to make an uncomfortable choice between lower output and higher

inflation.

     The behavior of the inflation rate in column (6) averaged over all

cycles shows a striking countercyclical pattern, with an average growth

rate of 3.8 percent in expansions and 5.2 percent in recessions. An

examination of the individual cycles, however, suggests that the seven—

cycle average mixes up three quite different types of experience. The

recessions between 1949 and 1961, as well as the most recent 1980—82

episode, display the expected procyclical movement due to the role of
                                   15




 the output ratio in equation (4). The middle three cycles between 1961

 and 1980, however, exhibit a strong countercyclical pattern that helps

 to demonstrate the effect of the other two variables in that equation.

One of its key Implications, when joined with an adaptive type of expec-

tation formation, is that there will be a continuous upward adjustment

of the inflation rate when the output ratio remains above unity. This

gradual adjustment of inflation was mast obvious in the long 1961—70

cycle.   Because inflation expectations adapted with substantial inertia

to rapid nominal GNP growth, the economy experienced a period between

1964 and 1969 when the output ratio substantially exceeded 100 percent

and the actual unemployment rate fell substantially below the natural

rate of unemployment. The gradual upward adjustment of inflation con-

tinued into the 1969—70 recession, which witnessed faster inflation than

previous phases despite slower nominal GNP growth.     A complementary

explanation is that the slowdown in nominal GNP growth in 1969—70 was

the mildest of any of the postwar cycles, further inhibiting any de-

celeration of inflation.

     Finally, the post—1970 period demonstrates the effect of the re-

maining variable in equation (4), the supply shock proxy.   The 1970—75

and 1975—80 business cycles both ended with recessions that were trig-

gered by supply shocks and amplified by a slowdown in nominal GNP

growth. Between late 1972 and 1975 the relative price of oil increased

by 25 percent, and again by more than 40 percent between late 1978 and

late 1981.   The relative price of food increased by about 10 percent

between 1972 and 1974. Finally, the recession of 1973—75 was aggravated

by the extra inflation that occurred after the termination in May 1974

of the Nixon—era price control program, and as a result of the 1971—73
                                        16




devaluation of the dollar. As a result the inflation rate observed in

the   recession    phase of these two cycles was substantially higher than in

the expansion phase. The marked difference between the countercyclical

behavior of inflation in the 1973—75 and 1980 recessions, and its pro—

cyclical behavior in the 1981—82 recession, provides a strong confirma-

tion of the view that supply shocks matter and a refutation of those who

focus narrowly on prior fluctuations in the growth rate of the money

supply in explaining the inflation rate.

      There was an additional consequence of suppiy shocks. Partly as a

result   of cost—of—living escalators in wage coiltricts, supply shocks had
the effect of permanently raising the rate of inflation at any given
output   ratio.      This forced policymakers to choose between prolonged

recession and an acceleration in monetary growth to ratify the upward

ratchet of information caused by the supply shock. During the 1975—78

exoansion the choice was made to ratify the inflation rate.           In this

sense the postwar peak in the growth rates of         money and nominal GNP
during the 1975—80 cycle was not simply a perverse action     by   misinformed
policymakers, but rather an indirect consequence of the supply shocks
themselves.       This is a primary example of the role of aggregate supply

constraints as an influence on the conduct of monetary policy.


Lessons from the Postwar U. S. Experience

      This brief review of postwar U. S. business cycles suggests two

lessons that should guide the development of any new approach to dampen-

ing business cycles.

          1.   Because of inflation inertia, dampening cycles in real GNP

               growth requires dampening cycles in nominal GNP growth.
                                    17




         2.   Policymakers may be tempted to move the economy below the

              natural rate of unemployment to generate jobs or above that

              rate to stop inflation, but in doing either they only breed

              future instability. By allowing the economy to remain so

              far below the natural unemployment rate between 1964 and

              1969, policymakers of the 196Os indirectly created future

              business cycles by forcing the policymakers of the 1970s

              and 1980s to implement restrictive anti—inflationary demand

              management policies By allowing the economy to remain so

              far above the natural unemployment rate in 1982—83, current

              policymakers are breeding future instability.


          III. CHOICE OF THE OPTIMAL NOMINAL GNP GROWTH PATH

    The choice of a nominal GNP growth target for domestic monetary

policy, as opposed to the traditional monetary growth or interest rate

targets, has several advantages. Like money, nominal GNP is a nominal

variable and therefore an appropriate object of central bank concern.

Like monetary growth, nominal GNP growth places a lid on the inflation

rate and thus just as effectively avoids the disadvantages of nominal

interest rate targeting to which Friedman (1968) called attention. A

focus on nominal GNP growth rather than monetary growth centers the

attention of the central bank on offsetting shifts in velocity growth,

such as those which occurred in 1929—39 or 1981—83.       In a world of

velocity shifts both real output and inflation are more closely tied to

nominal GNP growth than to monetary growth, and thus nominal GNP

targeting allows the central bank to achieve more closely its ultimate

goal variables. Since there are time lags between changes in the direct
                                    18




control instruments of central banks and subsequent effects on nominal

CNP growth, it would be futile for central banks to attempt to offset

every uonthly or quarterly wiggle in velocity. Rather it is the histor—

[cal fact that velocity exhibits serially correlated fluctuations of

more than a year that justifies the concern with offsetting velocity

movements over that longer term horizon.


     Aggregate supply constraints make the choice of a nominal GNP

growth path both difficult and fraught with long—term dynamic implica-

tions. Only if the economy is initially operating at its natural output

level, the inflation rate is zero, and there are no supply shocks, can

the choice be issue—free.      Then nominal GNP growth is simply set to

equal natural real GNP growth, which ratifies the current regime of

stable prices, i.e., y = qN•   Ironically, the U. S. was actually in this

situation at the end of 1963, just before the famous Kennedy—Johnson

1964 tax cut, which was subsequently accommodated by an acceleration in

monetary growth.   An important lesson is suggested by the subsequent

five—year period of overheating with an output ratio above unity; econo-

mists were overly optimistic about the economy's sustainable output

level in 1964 and they may be overly optimistic again. Only by evaluat—

ing and continuously updating the best available historical and statis-

tical evidence call the central bank steer between the Scylla of over-

heating and the Charybdis of lost output. An additional lesson is that

the central bank must act nore cautiously when the economy is close to

the estimated natural output level than when far below that level.

    The next hypothetical situation to be considered is the same as in

the preceding paragraph, with output equal to its natural level and
                                      19




supply shocks absent, but now the inflation rate is some positive

number.   If this inflation rate is generally agreed to be above the

optimum inflation rate, the central bank faces the traditional tradeoff.

A reduction of adjusted nominal GNP growth (y — qN) below the rate of

inflation will——in the presence of inflation inertia——lead to a tern—

porary period of lower output and higher unemployment.        Whether this

sacrifice is worth making depends on (a) the social cost of lost output

and employment, (b) the social benefit of lower inflation, (c) the

social rate of time preference used to discount the permanent benefit of

lower inflation, and (d) the component of the lost output taking the

form of lost investment, which endows society with a semi—permanent loss

that depends on the average lifetime of capital goods.        This list of

considerations is traditional.    However, an extra non—traditional ele-

ment is the problem of future cyclical instability and overshooting that

results from a decision to push the economy away from its natural output

level for the purposes of fighting inflation. A specific illustration

of the problem is provided below from the U. S. initial conditions of

early 1983. The problem is serious enough to warrant serious considera-

tion of a policy that accepts ongoing inflation if the central bank

finds itself lucky enough to be in an economy currently at the natural

output level. Then the central bank would set its nominal GNP target at

the inflation rate that seems currently imbedded in expectations

(Eckstein's "core inflation rate," 1980) plus the growth rate of natural

real CNP, that is, y = p +       It   may be more effective in the long run

for the central bank to ratify an ongoing inflation and to lobby the

legislature for reforms (like indexed bonds and financial deregulation)

that reduce the costs of inflation, than to engage in a single—handed
                                   20




inflation—fighting restrictive policy.

     The level of difficulty increases when the economy is exposed to

adverse supply shocks, represented in equations (4) and (5) above by a

positive realization of the "z" variable. This pushes up the inflation

rate spontaneously without any required excess demand pressure and, if

nominal GNP growth is maintained constant, requires a corresponding

percentage decline in the output ratio.    The advantage of nominal GNP

targeting in the face of supply shocks is that it represents a compro-

mise solution in between the extreme alternatives of targeting real

output or inflation. To maintain constant real GNP would require mone-

tary accommodation of any resulting inflation that occurred, which might

be both substantial and permanent if there are (a) widespread cost—of--

living escalators in wage and price contracts, and/or (b) a permanent

decline in productivity and in natural real GNP resulting from the

supply shock. To maintain constant inflation requires that the central

bank reduce nominal GNP growth sufficiently to cause a recession that

fully offsets the inflationary effect of the supply shock.       In the

simple context of equation (5), it can be shown that the output

ratio (Q) must be allowed to decline by zt/b if any acceleration of

inflation is to be avoided, and this recession may be substantial if b

is a relatively small fraction.


Estimates of the Tradeoff Equation and the Natural Rate of Unemployment


     If the economy is initially operating at a significant distance

from the natural level of real GNP, then the central bank must have some

view as to the current value of that variable.     Recall that this is

defined as the level of real GNP that is compatible with steady
                                     2]




inflation in the absence of supply shocks.          Its estimation requires

fitting a regression equation in the general form of (4). My own work

(1982a) proceeds by estimating (4) with quarterly U. S. data in the

following specification which substitutes a demographically weighted

unemployment rate (U) for the output ratio (Q):


                                     + b(L)UW +   c(L)z   ÷ e.
              Pt     d0 +   a(L)pi                               (6)



Here the estimated coefficients written in the form a(L) are one—sided

polynomials in the lag operator, and e is an error term. A distrIbuted

lag on past actual inflation is used as a proxy for the expected rate of

inflation that appears in (4).   Conveniently the estimated a coeffi-

cients on the lagged inflation terms sum to unity over the 1954—80

sample period, and so the estimated version of (6) embodies the natural

rate hypothesis.    Extensive tests reject the hypothesis that the

constant term d0 or the unemployment coefficients (b1) have shifted over

the 1954—80 period, and so the estimates imply that the "no shock"

natural weighted unemployment rate is equal to —d0Ib.. The natural

unemployment rate for the official unweighted concept has gradually

shifted upward relative to the constant natural weighted unemployment

rate due to demographic shifts; values for the official natural rate

concept climb gradually from 5 percent before 1963 to 6 percent after

1975.6 Natural real GNP is then set equal to actual real GNP in periods

when actual unemployment was at the natural rate, and interpolated in

between. This yields the output ratio series shown in Table 1.




6The natural unemployment rate has risen far more In some other
countries. The German evidence is assessed in this framework in Franz
(1983).
                                                               22



        The central bank cannot accept such an estimate of the natural

unemployment rate as carved in stone. In addition to estimation errors,

unidentified factors can cause the natural rate to shift over time.

Thus an important step in planning future monetary policy must be to

monitor recent errors in the forecasting ability of an equation like

(6).     To allow such monitoring, I have been careful not to reestimate

(6) since early 1981. To test whether                                        errors       have been systematic and

significant since the end of the sample period in 1980, the estimated
        A   _Sç    ,,, i
                     &   LAS...   LAO C LA
                                             4-_S
                                             L LI    .1. LI A. C ¼_fl 0 L.   4--
                                                                             LII .-Sc1   ,4-4
                                                                                    .5. LAS   A-S,,
                                                                                            SCSI.. CLIII SCSI_C   c,-5,- 1QR1
                                                                                                                  SI_IA   5


1982,    using actual values of the independent variables but generating
its    own values, quarter—by--quarter, for the lagged inflation rate terms.
The result is the following Forecasting record:


                                      Four quarters Four quarters                                         Eight quarters
                                         of 1981       of 1982                                             of 1981—82

Actual inflation rate                               8.5                              4.9                              6.7
Predicted inflation rate                        7.5                                  5.1                              6.3
Error (actual — predicted)                          1.0                            —0.2                               0.4


Thus the actual inflation rate has turned out to be slightly higher than

predicted, indicating that, thus far in the prediction period, my 6.0

percent estimate for the natural unemployment rate may be a bit too

optimistic. This prediction record also has another important implica-

tion, that the relatively rapid deceleration of inflation observed in

1982    is not "surprising" and does not suggest any                                           important shift in the

economy     toward greater price flexibility as compared to the 1954—80
period.      There is no evidence that there has been any "rational expecta-

tions' or "credibility" effect that caused inflation to decelerate

faster than predicted by the inertia—prone history of 1954—80.

        While the evidence suggests that the "no shock" natural unemploy—
                                   23




rnent rate might be 6.5 rather than 6.0 percent, the band of uncertainty

surrounding this question is more important for policymaking in future

years than it is in 1983, with an unemployment rate around 10 percent.

Another mitigating factor that somewht eases the Fed's task is the

inertia of the inflation process itself.     If policy errors do cause

unemployment to slip half a point below the natural rate for six months

or a year, no great disaster will occur. Five years with unemployment

two percentage points below the natural rate in the l960s were required

to generate an acceleration of inflation from 1.5 percent in 1964 to 5

percent in 1969. More modest errors will have more modest consequences.


An Illustration of Alternative Nominal GNP Paths


     The difficulties of managing the economy when the initial unemploy-

ment rate is far away from the natural rate can be likened to the prob—

lem of a pilot in bringing an airplane in for a smooth landing on a

runway.    Here altitude corresponds to the unemployment rate, and the

runway corresponds to the natural unemployment rate. The problem is to

avoid crashing into the runway.    The worst thing the Fed can do is

choose a constant growth rate of nominal GNP and stick to it, for this

guarantees a crash.7

     This point is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows what happens

beginning in early 1983 in a simulation with my econometric inflation

equation (6) when the growth rate of nominal GNP is set at 8 percent

forever.    The economy's recovery is slow, inflation continues to




7Poole (1982, p. 592) in contrast recommends a monetary airplane which
requires no "pilot expertise" and instead runs in an "autopilot" or
"hands off" mode.
                       FIGURE
6




5




                            19S                              I 995
                      INFLATION RATE




                                       J...EGED
    a                                     D NO    RE.BOUND

                                          L    HALF REBOUND
    8                                     ><   FULL REBOUND


    7


    6




    I.
    I 9a3   1   as          19ES 1969 19O      1991   19S2    1   93
                     UNEMPLOTh4ENT RATE
                                   25




decelerate in response to economic slack, and by definition real GNP

growth speeds up.   It is as if the pilot had pointed the plane's nose

toward the runway and then had turned on the engines full throttle. The

lower frame of Figure 1 shows how the economy crashes through the

assumed 6 percent natural rate of unemployment in the period 1987—88,

and the upper frame shows how a companion airplane, the inflation rate,

takes off at the same time.

     The Fed's task is tougher than the pilot's, because there is no

chart that shows the exact altitude of the runway. The band of possible

outcomes in Figure 1 exhibits only one of the possible sources of uncer-

tainty, the likely future behavior of the main supply shock variables

(the relative prices of imports, food, and energy, as well as the

exchange rate). The pessimistic path assumes a "full rebound," that all

of those variables return to their values at the end of 1980 (i.e., that

the value of the dollar falls by about one—third in 1983—85 and that the

nominal price of oil rises to about $40 per barrel).     The optimistic

path assumes "no rebound" in these variables, and that they remain at

their values of late 1982.

     The maneuver necessary for the pilot to make a soft landing is

illustrated in Figure 2. Here the growth rate of nominal GNP starts out

at 10.5 percent, but in late 1985 is slowed suddenly to 8 percent. With

either the optimistic or pessimistic assumption about supply shocks, the

unemployment rate glides smoothly in to the assumed 6 percent natural

rate of unemployment.   And, as shown in the top frame, the inflation

rate (p) smoothly adjusts to the long run 5 percent rate that is com-

patible with an 8 percent nominal GNP growth rate (y) and a 3 percent

growth rate of natural real GNP (qN), since in the long run p = y —
                                26




                           FIGURE    2
       6




04
LaJ




0                                            LEGEND
                                             -
                                                       NO REBOUND
                                                 L
                                                       4r4
                                                 ><    FULL REBOUND
       2
            1S4. 1B5 19i 1987 19S 199 1990             1991   1992     1993
                           INFLATION RATE


      10
                                             J.EG END
      a                                                NO REBOUND
                                             -        - HALF REBOUND
      S
                                                 X FULL REBOUND

      7




      5


       1953 194     198S   1937 1255        1990       1991   192 1993
                      UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
                                       27




    The Fed must decelerate the growth rate of nominal GNP when the

economy nears its natural rate of unemployment. That is the prerequi-

site for a soft landing.         But a likely side effect of any attempt to

achieve a sudden slowing of nominal GNP growth is a sharp increase in

interest rates, and perhaps a recession during the transition period.

To minimize the danger of inducing this type of instability, the Fed

should plan to induce a rapid recovery when the economy is far from the

natural rate and gradually to taper the growth rate of nominal GNP from

then on. There is no compelling alternative. Rapid nominal GNP growth

maintained forever guarantees a crash landing.           But even moderate

nominal GNP growth maintained forever eventually leads to a crash land—

ing, as shown   in Figure   1.



                 IV. MANAGING MONETARY POLICY IN THE FACE
                        OF UNSTABLE VELOCITY GROWTH


     To this point most of the emphasis in this paper has been on the
influence of aggregate supply constraints on the choice of target paths
for nominal GNP growth. Figures 1 and 2 of the preceding section showed
that stable long—run growth of output without recurring oscillations

requires a nominal GNP path which is not constant but rather decelerates

as the economy nears its natural rate of unemployment. If the rate of

growth of Ml velocity were constant, then a policy of decelerating Ml

growth at the desired pace of nominal GNP deceleration would be ade-

quate.    If, in turn, the "uoney multiplier" (Ml/monetary base) were

constant, then a policy of decelerating the growth rate of the monetary

base would be adequate. The latter policy has recently been recommended

by prominent U. S. monetarists, including Milton Friedman, Karl Brunner,

Allan Meltzer, and William Poole.8
                                    28




      However, neither of the two required preconditions for targeting

the monetary base, constant growth in Ml velocity and in the money

multiplier, actually exists. Ml is flawed as a monetary target not only

because Ml velocity has been unstable and unpredictable, but also

because of multiplier instability.       In this verdict we follow Bryant

(1982, p. 599), who concludes that       ..   .the money stock cannot be an
instrument of monetary policy:     the Federal Reserve cannot control It

precisely from one short—run period to the next.         And growth in the

base is flawed as a target for the same reason, because instability in

velocity and the multiplier allows wide fluctuations in nominal GNP

growth to occur even in periods (like 1971—79) when base growth was

remarkably stable.

      While the instability of velocity growth does create a significant

problem for monetary policy, it is important to avoid exaggerating the

nature of the difficulty.     Some short—term fluctuations of velocity

growth are not only inevitable but impossible to forecast.         The best

forecasters have consistently missed the timing of cyclical peaks and

troughs connected with inventory accumulation and decumulation.          To

avoid   undue attention to nominal GNP changes caused by the short—term
inventory cycle, from this point on we exclude inventory changes from
the concept of nominal GNP.   In   the U. S. national accounting language,

GNP   less inventory change is   called final sales.




8See Friedman (1983a), Brunner (1981), Meltzer (1981), and Shadow Open
Market Committee (1983). Poole (1982, p. 593) recommends a policy of
"really stable growth in the nonborrowed monetary base."
                                     29




The Historical Behavior of Final Sales, Velocity and the Money
Multiplier

      Table 2 summarizes the historical U. S. behavior of the growth of

nominal final sales, key monetary concepts, and the level of short—term

interest rates over the period between 1953 and 1982. Four sub—periods

are chosen, with the first three divided into equal nine—year intervals

through 1979, and the last sub—period chosen to begin in October 1979 at

the time of the much—heralded change in Federal Reserve operating proce-

dures. Section A of the table exhibits average percentage growth rates

for nominal final sales and the monetary concepts and average percentage

levels for the nxninal and real Treasury bill rate.9

      The most striking aspect of section A is the common acceleration of

all nninal growth rates in the first three sub—periods, including

nominal final sales, the monetary base, and Ml.        The nominal Treasury

bill rate also increases over the same interval.          Average growth in

velocity was relatively stable over the first three sub—periods, while

growth in the money multiplier shifted from a small positive to a small

negative number in the early l960s.       Notable features of the last sub—

period beginning in 1979:Q4 include the pronounced drop in velocity

growth,  and the sharp increase in both the nominal and real Treasury
bill rate. There was almost no deceleration in Ml or base growth as
compared to the 1971—79 average rate.
      Section B of the table exhibits standard deviations of the same

variables,   calculated alternatively as one—quarter   changes and




9me  real interest rate is calculated as the nominal interest rate minus
an eight—quarter moving average of the  quarterly change in the personal
consumption deflator.
                                      30




                                   TABLE 2

                        Means and Standard Deviations of
          Growth Rates of Nominal Final Sales and Monetary Variables,
           and the Level of the Nominal and Real Treasury Bill Rate,
                               Selected Sample Periods



                                    1953:Q1     1962:Ql    1971:01    1979:Q3
                                   —1961:04    —1970:04   —1979:Q3   —1982:04


A.    Means

     1. Nominal Final Sales           4.6         7.0       10.1         8.3

     2. Monetary Base                 1.3         5.3        7.6         7.2

     3. Ml Multiplier                 0.4        —1.0       —1.0        —0.6

     4.   Ml.                          1.7        4.3        6.6         6.0

     5. Velocity (NFS/M1)              2.9        2.7        3.5         1.6

     6. Nominal Treasury Bill Rate 2.3            4.6        6.1        12.1

     7. Real Treasury Bill Rate       0.3         1.8       —0.1         3.8



B.    Standard Deviations (one—quarter/fourquarter)
     1. Nominal Final Sales          3.6/2.3    2.2/1/6    3.0/2.0      4.9/3.0

     2. Monetary Base                1.4/0.9    1.4/0.9    1.8/0.9      2.7/1.3

     3. Ml Multiplier                2.0/1.3    1.7/0.9    2.1/1.2      4.3/1.7

     4. Ml                           2.0/1.4    2.3/1.6    2.0/1.3      4.7/1.5

     5. Velocity (NFS/M1)            3.2/2.1    2.7/1.3    2.9/1.3      5.1/2.1

     6. Nominal Treasury Bill Rate 0.9            1.4        1.7          2.1

     7. Real Treasury Bill Rate        0.9        0.5        2.0          1.7
                                     31




four—quarter overlapping changes.         The latter measure smooths out

quarter—to—quarter noise in the data that the central bank can do little

to control and which have little effect on economic well—being.                    The

first three sub—periods exhibit few interesting signs of change.                   The

standard deviation of both nominal final sales growth and velocity

growth declined from the 1950s to the 1960s and l970s. The variables

showing the least variance were the growth rate of the monetary base,

particularly by the four—quarter—change criterion, as well as the two
4 -       -
              ,-s-                         -   4 ,1   4        4.,   l--.   ,,r4
of interest rates, both nominal and real, from the first to the third

sub—period.

      The relatively stable behavior of growth in the monetary base

requires more attention and comment, because growth in the base has been

frequently suggested as the central operating target for monetary

policy.        The historical record suggests that the Fed has in fact

maintained quite steady growth in the monetary base over long periods

without preventing continuous large fluctuations in the growth of

nominal final sales.       For instance, between 1954 and 1961 the four—

quarter rate of change of the monetary base never fell below 0.1 percent

nor rose above 2.2 percent in any single quarter. The same narrow range

was maintained between 1971 and 1979, when four—quarter base growth

never fell below 6.6 percent nor rose above 8.9 percent. Yet despite

this steady pace of base growth, four—quarter nominal final sales growth

varied widely, from —0.3 to 7.8 percent between 1954 and 1961, and from

6.8 to 14.3 percent between 1971 and 1979.            And, as Paulus (1982, p.

632) points out, "...even though base growth has been essentially

trendless over the decade, the core inflation rate moved from around S
                                     32



percent in the early seventies to almost       10 percent at the end of
1980.'     This examination of the historical record suggests that in fact

past changes in the monetary base seem to have had little relation to

changes in nominal final sales, except during the 1960s, when the

economy   made its transition from low to high growth rates of all nominal
variables.
     Much    attention has been directed   to the increased variance of

monetary   magnitudes after the change in Federal Reserve operating proce-
dures in October, 1979.       Monetarists have claimed that the Federal

Reserve did not, as often claimed, shift to monetarist" operating

procedures,    because this would have required reducing the variance of
monetary growth and increasing the variance of interest rates.       Their

claim seems validated in section B of Table 2, which shows that there

was no important change in the variance of interest rates (either

nominal or real) after 1979:Q3 as compared to 1971—79, but a huge

increase in the standard deviation of one—quarter changes in the

monetary base and in Ml.1°        Changes in nominal final sales and in

velocity also exhibit substantial increases in variance.

     But it is also clear from the table that the monetarist claim

results almost entirely from high—frequency quarter—to—quarter move—

ments. The standard deviation of four—quarter changes in Ml after 1979

was virtually the same as before 1979.      There were larger increases in

the standard deviation of four—quarter changes in the base and multi-

plier, but these must have been offsetting since they did not make Ml




     Friedman (1982) shows, however, that there was a marked increase in
the variance of long—term interest rates after 1979.
                                   33



more variable.    The biggest shift after 1979 was actually in the stan-

dard deviation of nominal final sales and velocity changes.           This

implies that much of the instability in the economy after 1979 was due

more to shifts in expenditure and money demand behavior than to insta-

bility created by the Fed's control of Mi.1'


Contribution of Monetary Variables to the Explanation of Nominal Final
Sales Growth


     Thus far this paper has contained two pieces of evidence that

fluctuations in the growth rate of Ml or of the monetary base have not

contributed much to the explanation of business cycles in nominal final

sales growth (which in turn, due to inflation inertia, have caused

business cycles in real output and employment).        The first was the

observation based on Table 1 that variations in Ml growth between

expansion and recession phases of the business cycle accounted for only

14 percent of variations in nominal GNP   growth,   and velocity accounted

for the remaining 86 percent. The second was the observation based on

Table 2 that smoothness of base growth in the l950s and 1970s relative

to nominal final sales growth suggested a small causal role for the base

in business cycles.      This section examines these assertions more

systematically.

     Granger (1969) and Sims (1972) have popularized statistical tests

to determine relations of exogeneity or temporal independence among

time—series variables.    One popular test is to regress a variable of

interest, in our case quarterly changes in nominal final sales, on its




111n fact Poole (1982) argues that the Fed did not change its operating
procedures after 1979 in a fundamental way.
                                     34


own lagged values and lagged values of another variable of interest,

e.g., changes in Ml or in the monetary base. The significance of the

contribution of the monetary variable can be determined through the use

of a F test that compares the complete equation with an alternative that

excludes the monetary variable (and thus includes only the lagged

dependent variable and a constant term). A more general form of the

test Is to include several lagged monetary variables and test for their

significance either individually or as a group.

     Tables 3 and 4 carry out such tests for the first three sub—sample

periods studied in Table 2.       The period after October, 1979, is ex-

cluded, because there are not enough available observations for the test

procedures to be used. Before we turn to measures of statistical sig-

nificance in Table 4, we calculate in Table 3 the change in the

percentage of nominal final sales growth variance that is explained when

alternative monetary variables are added to equations already containing

the lagged dependent variable.       In all cases the lagged dependent

variable and the alternative monetary variables are included as four

lagged one—quarter changes.

     The first line in Table 3 shows that serial correlation in the

quarterly    growth rate of nominal final sales explains about one—quarter
of its variance in the 1950s and 1960s, but virtually nothing in the
1970s.      Line 2a shows that the addition of lagged changes in Ml to an
equation    already containing the lagged dependent variable explains 9

percent of the variation in the 1950s, 22 percent in the 1960s, and 31

percent in the 1970s. This compares to the contribution of 14 percent

on average over cycle phases calculated .above in Table 1. The next two

lines contain an interesting result. Changes in the base contributed to

explaining    the variance of nominal final sales changes only in the
1960s,   with virtually no contribution in the 1950s and 1970s. Almost
                                    35




                                    TABLE 3

              Contribution of Alternative Monetary Variables
                to the Explanation of Ouarterly Changes in
                           Nominal Final Sales,
                          Selected Sample Periods



                                               1953 :Ql    1962:Ql    1971:01
                                              —1961 :04   —1970:Q4   —1979:Q3

Percentage reduction in unexplained
variance contributed by addition
of four lagged values of:

    1. Nominal final sales                     23.8        24.8        1.0


    2. Alternative Monetary Variables
        a. Ml changes (Ml)                      8.9        21.9       30.7

        b. Base changes (MB)                    5.6        18.6        3.5

        c. Multiplier changes (MN)              6.6        17.8       28.5
        d. Treasury bill rate (1)               5.7        10.6        1.2


    3. Combinations of Monetary Variables
        a. Ml, 1                               10.9        25.7       34.1
        b. MB, 1                               12.4        23.8        4.0
        c. MM, 1                                9.2        22.3       31.0

        d. MB, MM, 1                           26.3        34.8       48.3
                                   36



 all of the contribution of Ml in the 1970s (line 2a) can be traced to

 the behavior of the multiplier (line 2c). The small explanatory role of

 base growth in the l950s and 1970s confirms the point made in the

 previous section that the Federal Reserve has really already
experimented with maintenance of steady base growth without any success

in dampening the cyle.

     Line 2d indicates that the addition of the nominal Treasury bill

rate by itself contributes little to the explanation of sales changes.

Section 3 adds monetary variables in several combinations and confirms

the results of section 2. The addition of the interest rate on lines 3a

through 3c adds little to the corresponding contributions on lines 2a

through 2c. The greatest contribution of the monetary variables is made

when the base, multiplier, and interest rate are included together. The

fact that the contribution on line 3d is greater than on line 3a sug-

gests that the base and multiplier components of Ml contribute to the

explanation of sales growth with different coefficients, and so they are

treated as separate variables.

     Corresponding to this conclusion, Table 4 exhibits the significance

of each of four variables (changes in sales, the base, the multiplier,

and the level of the nominal interest rate) in contributing to the

explanation of each other's variance in the same sub—periods. The four

variables are estimated as a symmetric vector autoregressive model, with

four lagged values of each variable entering each equation. The table

lists significance levels rather than F ratios, and the variables that

are significant at the level of 10 percent or better are indicated by an

asterisk.

     Perhaps the most striking fact about Table 4 is simply that there

are very few asterisks. Another interesting result is that the three
                                     37




                                     TABLE 4

                   Significance Level of Contributions of
                 Ouarterly Changes of the Monetary Base,
                the Ml Multiplier, and Nominal Final Sales,
              and of the Level of Nominal Treasury Bills Rate
                          Selected Sample Periods



                             Significance Level of Contribution of
To Explanation of    Base            Multiplier    T.B. Rate      NFS

                                          (1 )        ( 2)        (3)(4)

Base
1953—61               .94                 .17         .29         .02*

1962—70               .95                 .16         .92         .19

1971—79               .44                 .13         .11         .15



Multiplier
1953—61                .94                .70         .75         .74

1962—70               .36                 .21         .06*        .69

1971—79                .77                .95         .08*         49


T.B. Rate
1953—61                .42                .57         .00*        .92

1962—70                .13                .03*        .46         .46

1971—79                .17                .29         .00*        .13


NFS
1953—61                .61                .40         .08*        .30

1962—70                .64                .44         .48         .11

1971—79                .17                .04*        .73         .18
                                       38



periods    appear to exhibit quite different significance levels. Starting

at the top of the table, the only variable making a significant contri-

bution to growth in the monetary base is growth in NFS         for    the first

period. This may imply that the Federal Reserve was sufficiently con-

cerned about stabilizing interest rates as to allow changes in the

monetary base to respond to prior changes in NFS. In the l970s the base

was influenced at close—to—significance levels by all three other

variables, the multiplier, the interest rate, and NFS.         In    the middle

period the base appears to have been completely exogenous and thus a

plausible candidate as the prime initiator of accelerating inflation.

This response of the base may not actually have been exogenous, but

rather an accommodation of fiscal deficits (not included in the table)

caused by the Kennedy—Johnson tax cuts and by Vietnam war spending.

       Although the multiplier appears to have been exogenous in the

1950s, after 1961 Its behavior reflects a significant influence of the

Treasury bill rate.     This may suggest a channel of causation by which

changes in the interest rate alter portfolios, in turn shifting average

reserve requirements and thus influencing the multiplier. The Treasury

bill rate seems to have been influenced mainly by its own past values,

but also by the multiplier in the 1960s. This interaction between the

interest    rate and the multiplier in the 1960s requires additional
research to sort Out   the   underlying causes.
       The last section of the table comes to the variable of central
interest,    changes in NFS.    Column (1)   confirms the conclusions of the

previous    section that there was no significant causal role          for the

monetary    base in the 1950s and 1970s. A new conclusion is         that there

was also    no significant explanatory role for the base in         the   1960s.
This   result seems hard to reconcile with the idea that acceleration in
                                      39



all nominal growth rates between the early and late 1960s was the source
of the inflation of the 1970s. It is interesting to note, in fact, that
in the 1960s the significance level of feedback from sales to the base
(0.19)    is greater than from the base to sales (0.64).

     The only monetary variables having significant explanatory power

for sales growth are the Treasury bill rate in the 1950s and the multi-

plier    in the 1970s.   Since multiplier movements in the 1970s are sig-
nificantly related    to the Treasury bill rate, it thus appears that the

latter plays a direct or indirect role In explaining sales growth in

both the 1950s and l970s. Sales growth seems to live a life of its own

in the 1960s, perhaps because of the omission of indicators of fiscal

policy.

     The results of this analysis differ substantially from a similar

investigation carried out by Cagan (1982). Cagan's equations are in the

same "Granger" format as Table 4, with the lagged dependent variable

included (two lags for Cagan, four in Table 4), but differ by including

only one monetary variable at a time (and by explaining changes in

nominal GNP rather than NFS).       His results differ across two sample

periods, 1953—67 and 1968—80.      In the earlier period he   finds that the
checkable    deposits component of Ml is the only monetary variable that

contains significant "advance information" about GNP movements, in the

sense that the addition of five lagged changes in deposits adds to the

fit at a high significance level.          In the latter period M2 displays

information not contained in checkable deposits or the monetary base.

Cagan speculates that substitutions among M2 components have become

larger, "reflecting no doubt the increase in level and variability of

interest rates" (p. 683).       In both periods, there is no significant
                                       40



advance information    in   the monetary base, reflecting what appears to be

a contemporaneous correlation between GNP and currency demand, thus

confirming our finding that the base contains no predictive power for

NFS changes.

     Cagan's finding the Ml contains advance information before 1968 and

M2 after 1968 does not contradict our view that neither monetary aggre-

gate is an appropriate operating target.          Our tests, which split Ml

between the base and multiplier changes, and which include as well the

level of the short—term interest rate, indicate that the main explana-

tory power of money comes from multiplier shifts that are associated

with changes in the interest rate.          These imply that control of base

growth will not prevent fluctuations in the growth rate of monetary

aggregates and NFS, and they also imply that portfolio shifts make Ml

unsuitable as an operating target. Although this paper does not test M2

explicitly, recent shifts in M2 velocity also appear to render it un-

suitable for monetary targeting (See Kopcke, 1983, and Tatom, 1983).


Implications of the Statistical Analysis

     The most important conclusion is that changes in the monetary base

appear to play no significant causal role in explaining changes in

nominal   final   sales during the 1953—79 period. Although estimated in a

very different format, these results thus seem to confirm the negative

results of Sims (1980) regarding the causal role of money.            Unlike

Sims', our conclusion is not dependent on the inclusion of the interest

rate.     And also a different emphasis here is in the lack of causal

influence of base changes; multiplier changes seem to play a significant

role, at least in the 1971—79 sub—period.         The major difference in the
                                     41



roles of the base and multiplier confirms the results of a seminal

recent paper by Stephen KIng (1983), who deserves credit for directing

my attention to the behavior of the two components of Ml growth.        It


also confirms the emphasis placed by Feilner (1982) and Bryant (1982) on

multiplier instability as a major source of changes in Ml)2


                V. IMPLEMENTING A NOMINAL FINAL SALES TARGET

       The literature on domestic monetary policy can be viewed as drift-

ing over a long period toward the conclusion that nominal spending

should be the central medium—term target of the Federal Reserve Board.

This conclusion has been reached by a "lesser of evils" process in which

alternatives have been gradually omitted from consideration.       First,

Friedman (1968) demolished the case for targeting nominal interest rates

by showing that this requires the central bank to accommodate any upward

shift in spending or downward shift in the demand for money, as well as

any    subsequent upward pressure on the nominal interest rate coming from
an upward adjustment in the expected rate of inflation. Some interest
rate    partisans have retreated from targeting the nominal rate to the

real rate. Real interest rates are hard to target because they are not

observable.     Further a real interest rate target leads to procyclical

monetary fluctuations, as demonstrated in undergraduate macro texts.

And it has the additional perverse effect of requiring the Fed to

institute a restrictive monetary policy in response to adverse supply

shocks. For instance, in 1974 the Treasury bill rate increased from 7.0




12Fellner (1982) attributes most of the variance in the multiplier to
shifts in the currency—deposit ratio.
                                    42



to 7.9 percent while the inflation rate in the GNP    deflator   soared from

5.8 percent to 8.8 percent, reducing the real interest rate from 1.2 to

—0.9 percent. A policy of stabilizing the real interest rate would have

required the Fed to boost the nominal Treasury bill rate by two

percentage points more than actually occurred, which in turn would have

required that, instead of merely bringing Ml growth to a halt between

April and October, 1974, the Fed would have been required to achieve

substantially negative Ml growth.

     The only advantage of real interest rate targeting, as pointed out

by William Poole (1970), is in a situation when the demand for money is

much more unstable than the demand for commodities. The period between

early 1981 and mid 1983 in the U. S., with unparalleled movements in

velocity as financial deregulation caused portfolio shifts, is a good

example of a situation when the Poole analysis would call for interest

rate stabilization. But Poole reaches his conclusion in a theoretical

model with fixed prices where the ultimate criterion is stabilization of

real GNP, and with fixed prices this criterion is equivalent to stabil—

izing nominal GNP.    Thus, even in a period of portfolio shifts and

unstable money demand, a nominal GNP or sales growth criterion can do as

well as a real interest rate criterion, without the disadvantages of (a)

the need to identify whether or not money demand is unstable, (b) an

undesirable tendency toward monetary accommodation in response to

increases in commodity demand, and (c) procyclical movements in monetary

growth that amplify the real output changes caused by supply shocks.

     The new element contained in this paper, building on and confirming

the work of Sims and King, is that neither Ml nor the monetary base is a

viable target for the central bank.      Any causative role for Ml or the
                                      43



base is limited to the period of the 1960s, when all nominal variables

accelerated together.       The significance tests of Table 4 find no

evidence that the acceleration of the base was temporally prior to that

in final sales. The only important role of Ml comes in the 1970s due to

changes in the multiplier, not the base, and the Fed does not control

the multiplier directly. In short, the famous monetarist recommendation

of maintaining steady growth in either the monetary base or in Ml has

little potential as a remedy for business cycles.           Because targeting
                                  —
                     Ot LUitU UUL db
£i1LLeb L ELS UJLLSL ¶__                   ___, LIUlUhI1i ,m
                                           WLJ ___.__i    tt'4r U SdLS tLUtLtb
                                                             —




as the least objectionable target.'3

Length of Horizon

     Since   1979 the Federal Reserve has adopted the practice of
targeting on   "Ml   growth cones," that is, ranges of the level of Ml that
begin at a single point at the end of one year and then extend out to

cover a considerable range by the end of the next year. The defect of

this procedure is that each year is considered one at a time, and no

effort is made to correct for drift. Thus, if the range for year "1"

were 4 to 8 percent, with a desired mean of 6, and if the actual outcome

by the end of year 1 were a growth rate of 9 percent, then the growth

cone for year 2 would begin 3 points (9—6) over the previous target.

     This type of drift could be avoided by planning ahead over a longer




'3A detailed consideration of other broader monetary aggregates, or a
credit target, is outside the scope of this paper. Targeting credit has
all the disadvantages of targeting nominal sales without any of the
advantages. Both credit and NFS are distant from the Fed's control
instruments, but nominal final sales is a variable of central policy
concern while no one cares directly about the level or growth rate of
total credit.
                                    44



horizon, e.g., ten years as in Figures 1 and 2.    The desired path for

growth rates over the next decade is then translated into a desired path

 for the level of nominal final sales. Thus any situation when the level

of NFS exceeds the target path would call for monetary restriction,

whether it occurs in the spring or the fall, and whether it occurs this

year or three years from now. There would be no jump to a new "growth

cone" at an arbitrary date.

     The entire growth path would be contingent on a continually updated

estimate of the economy's ultimate long—run target, the natural rate of

unemployment.   If an inflation equation like (6) above were to begin

underpredicting the rate of inflation, this would imply that the natural

rate of unemployment had begun to drift up, and that a lower NFS target

path would be appropriate.    The reverse could occur as well.   But the

crucial distinction here is that the path woulc not be revised in light

of misses" in tracking the desired path during a particular year, but

only if there is new information that the entire path should be revised

from beginning to end. I share Feliner's belief (1982, p. 642) that the

central bank should exhibit a "high degree of reluctance" to change the

NFS path, once it is set.
     There is an overlap between this paper and those of Feilner (1982)

and Meltzer (1981). They would set a target for the average growth in

nominal CNP over an entire business cycle but would not try to smooth

nominal GNP growth fluctuations within the business cycle.       Instead,

Meltzer would calculate the desired trend path of the monetary base from

historical trends in the multiplier and velocity and require the Fed to

maintain constant base growth as its prime objective.            Feilner

emphasizes the defects of base control, due to the instability of the Ml
                                     45



  multiplier, and prefers Ml as the operating objective (thus requiring

  movements in the base to offset movements in the multiplier).           The

  discussion in this paper starts from the same place, the choice of a

  path for nominal GNP (or NFS) over the business cycle, but pays atten-

  tion to the behavior of NFS growth within the cycle as well, on the

  grounds that historical trends in velocity have become a poor guide to

  the path of Ml required to achieve stable NFS growth.


      Ue LJL t'
  L&& T1..
  'T't_..




            Since quarterly changes in NFS tend to be erratic, a more appro-
  priate focus for the central bank would be changes in a longer—term

  moving average, say four—quarter rates of change.         This leads to the

  problem that there are lags between changes in the control instruments

  of the central bank and the reaction of NFS growth.            One possible

  solution would be to target forecasts for NFS growth over the subsequent

  four quarters.       Imagine that the desired growth path for the U. S. in

  1983 is 10.5 percent, as assumed in Figure 2.         As of July, 1983, the

  "central tendency" in the forecasts of Federal Open Market Committee

  members was for nominal GM? growth of 9.9 percent for 1982:Q4 to

  1983:Q4, and 9.5 percent for 1983:Q4 to 1984:Q4.14 In response to these

  forecasts, the Fed would have reacted by gradually allowing short—term

  interest rates to drift lower.          It would have ignored rapid observed

  growth rates in the monetary base and in Ml.            It might also have

  encouraged a depreciation in the exchange rate, since the high value of




14See U. S. Federal Reserve Board (1983), p. 5.
                                  46




the dollar appears to have been partly responsible for the slump in

velocity growth since mid—1981.

        The implication that in 1983 the Fed would have paid attention to

interest rates in the short run and ignored base growth reflects both

Poole's (1970) conclusion arid the results of Table 4. When the demand

for money is unstable, then controlling interest rates makes more sense

than controlling the base. Further, since 1962 interest rates (working

either directly or indirectly through the multiplier) appear to have had

more influence on final sales than changes in the monetary base.

Interest rates would be used only as a short—run indicator to help the

Fed guide the economy to its desired NFS path, and not as a medium—term

target. As the monetary stimulus is gradually reflected in an increase

in the forecast growth of NFS, then interest rates could be allowed to

rise.

        There would be nothing novel in the use by the Federal Reserve of

its own forecasts, since this is done already.      In fact, the Fed is

required to Congress to publish twice a year its outlook for nominal CNP

growth and other variables. What would be new about NFS targeting would

be a shift away from the Fed's tendency to "look at everything."

Instead, the Fed would look at the natural unemployment rate in the long

run, maintain the economy along a NPS path in the medium—run, and guide

the economy to that path in the short run by looking at the behavior of

interest rates, the monetary base (in periods of more quiescent money

demand behavior), and the exchange rate.      NFS growth would be trans-

formed from a variable that the Fed forecasts, as at present, into a

central objective of policy.
                                     47




      Some readers, like Feliner, may feel that it is impossible
for the Fed to lean against velocity changes within the duration of the

typical business cycle. The potential for the use of forecasts can be

assessed with the evidence that has been compiled over the past twelve

years by Stephen McNees.         For every quarter since 1971:Q2 he has

recorded the four—quarter--ahead forecast of nominal GNP change (and of

other aggregate variables as well) for five leading commercial fore-

casting models.    The value of these forecast changes in predicting

actual four—quarter changes in nominal GNP can be assessed by running a

regression in which the actual change is the dependent variable, and the

forecast made four quarters previous to that change is the right—hand

variable (a constant term is also included).            The coefficients and t—

ratios for such regression equations are shown here for three sample

periods:

             1972:Ql — 1976:Q4            0.56 (2.42)
             1977:Ql — 1981:Q4            0.50 (2.56)
             1977:Ql — 1982:Q4            0.28 (0.80)

     Thus the forecast changes do help to predict the actual changes,

with a coefficient of about one—half. The comparison of the second and

third sample periods indicates that forecasters made very serious errors

in forecasting nominal GNP growth in 1982, so that a central bank

reacting to stabilize forecasts made in late 1981 for late 1982 would

have been unable to counteract the decline in velocity growth that

actually occurred in 1982.   As the year 1982 proceeded, the level of

nominal GNP (and NFS) and the year—ahead forecasts thereof drifted

further and further below a stable growth path, and thus a central bank
                                      48



 operating to control a NSF target would have moved earlier to reduce

 interest rates.

        The 1982 forecasting failure does not detract from the value of

forecasts evident in the record for 1972—81. This record suggests that

a central bank operating during 1976—81 to maintain stable growth in NFS

at, say, 10 percent per annum would have moved much earlier toward

restrictive policy actions than actually occurred in the historical

record, for the McNees series shows that nominal GNP growth was forecast

to exceed 10 percent for thirteen successive four—quarter periods——those

ending In 1976:Q1 through 1979:Q1. It is this serial correlation in the

deviation of actual and forecast nominal GNP changes from their mean

value over the business cycle that supoorts an attempt by central banks

to control NFS rather than a monetary aggregate.'5


Objections to Targetin Nominal GNP Growth


        A wide range of objections has been raised to the use of nominal

GNP growth as the central medium—term operating target of the central

bank.      Some of these are included in the July, 1983, Congressional

testimony of Paul Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.6

Critics do not all share the same objections; some feel, for instance,

that nominal GNP targeting would give the Fed too much discretion, and

some feel that the Fed would be hamstrung with too little discretion.




'51n more detailed tests, Mayer (1983) also concludes that forecasts are
sufficiently accurate to allow the Fed to achieve a modest dampening of
the business cycle.


          testimony is included in U. S. Federal Reserve Board (1983).
                                      49



              1.   Too much or too little discretion? One view, currently

advocated by Milton Friedman, is that a central bank cannot be trusted

to engage    in the discretionary actions (e.g.,    changes in reserve growth)

that    would be required under a system of nominal GNP targeting. Central
bank    officials are viewed not as following       the rational precepts of

academic advisers, but rather as bureaucrats responding to short—run

pressures from within and outside their organization.            The Friedman

solution, shared by some other monetarists, is to tie the hands of the

irresponsible bureaucrats completely by limiting them to a simple rule,

e.g.,    his recent proposal for the Fed to make "$X hundred million of

open—market purchases every Monday.          The problem with this point of

view, already documented above, is that stable growth in the monetary

base has actually occurred in the past and has not prevented instability

in the growth rates of monetary aggregates and nominal spending.

        An   opposite criticism is suggested by        some Federal Reserve

officials,    including Chairman Volcker.    The Fed should continue to "look

at  everything," or, in Volcker's words, "Decisions on monetary policy
should take account of a variety of incoming information on GNP or its

components. . . . This simply can't be incorporated into annual numeri-

cal objectives."'7 Yet the present approach of looking at everything

has allowed the Fed in the past to allow nominal GNP growth          to drift
upward, as in the late 1960s and late 1970s, or to fall far below
anyone's objectives, as in 1982. Another response to this criticism is

that the central bank has no control over the division of nominal GNP

growth between inflation and real GNP       growth, and its proper business is



17U.    S. Federal Reserve Board (1983), p. 15.
to provide a 'nominal anchor" for the economy.
           2.    The Fed can't control nominal CNP. The linkages between

the Fed's direct control instruments (reserve growth and the discount

rate) and nominal spending are loose and lags are long.        In Voicker's

words, the channels of influence from our actions . .   . to   final spend-

ing totals are complex and indirect, and operate with lags, extending

over years. The attempt to 'fine tune' over, say, a six—month or yearly

period, toward a numerically specific, but necessarily arbitrary, short—

term objective could well defeat the longer—term purpose.'8          But a

nominal GNP growth target like that in Figure 2 is     not "arbitrary" or
"short   term" but rather is designed to promote the Fed's basic long—term

objective, which is achieving a soft landing that allows maintenance of

steady real growth with moderate inflation. The length of lags has been

exaggerated in some past research. Real activity responded within six

to nine nxnths to shifts in Federal Reserve policy in numerous past

episodes, including its tightening in 1966, 1969, 1974, and 1981, and

its loosening in 1967, 1971—72, 1975—76, and 1982.    By focussing on the

best current four—quarter ahead forecasts, the Fed could operate to

counteract some of the extreme periods of excessive or insufficient

nominal GNP growth. There is no need for the Fed to lean against short—

term within—year movements that cannot be forecast and that, if quickly

reversed, would have no adverse consequences.

            3.    Coordination with Fiscal Policy.   Ideally monetary and

fiscal policy would take coordinated action to achieve economic objec-

tives.   In some countries governmental institutions make this possible,




18U. S. Federal Reserve Board (1983), p. 14.
                                      )J.




and  there can be a single objective agreed upon by both monetary and
fiscal policymakers. An important criticism of nominal GNP targeting is
that it allocates too much responsibility to the central bank.    In the

chaotic and uncoordinated policy setting of the U. S., acceptance by the

Fed of sole responsibility for sustaining an economic recovery would

appear to remove the incentive for Congress to make difficult decisions

on the budget. Unfortunately, the built—in limitations of the American

constitutional system have already, for better or worse, handed

responsibility for macroeconomic policy to the Federal Reserve.


         4. Avoidance of Accountability. This criticism states that if

the central bank has a nominal CNP growth objective and misses its tar-

get, then it can avoid accountability by blaming other factors (fiscal

policy, swings in consumer attitudes, etc.). Yet this problem already

exists in the present system.     The Fed failed to prevent either an

undesired collapse of spending growth in 1982 or an explosion of double—

digit money growth in 1982—83.   It has already become expert in giving

excuses——in this case financial deregulation and portfolio shifts.

There will always be an irreducible minimum variance in velocity that

will prevent the Fed from achieving stable spending growth, no matter

whether its proximate operating target is the nonetary base, money

supply, or nominal spending itself.
                                52




Conclusion

     Nominal spending cannot be controlled precisely.     Forecasts are

imperfect and will occasionally lead the government astray.         The

ultimate goal of guiding the economy smoothly to the natural unemploy—

ment rate and then maintaining that rate involves an unobservable

variable that must be estimated, and any estimation procedure is open to

controversy.   Changes in institutions, for instance, can alter today's

parameter values from those observed during earlier years of the sample

period of estimation.

     The empirical work in this paper is limited to evidence for the

postwar United States. A parallel research effort will be required to

determine the procedures for the conduct of monetary policy that would

be optimal in other nations. The merits of controlling nominal GNP or

final sales growth, as opposed to the monetary base or a money supply

concept, depend partly on the historical record regarding the stability

of velocity and the "advance knowledge' regarding nominal GNP movements

contributed by monetary aggregates.   For instance, a target based on

forecasts of nominal final sales growth, rather than the actual outcome,

hinges on the availability of forecasts that actually make a positive

contribution to the prediction of nominal sales growth four quarters

ahead. In the absence of good forecasts a choice would have to be made

between targeting a moving average of actual nominal sales changes, a

monetary aggregate, or another concept like liquid assets or aggregate

credit.
                                   53




                                REFERENCES



Barro, Robert J., and Rush, Mark (1980), "Unanticipated Money and

      Economic Activity," in S. Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and

      Economic Policy, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 23-

      48.

Brunner, Karl (1981), "The Case Against Monetary Activism,"Lloyd's Bank

      Review, no. 139, (January), pp. 20—39.

Bryant, Ralph C. (1982), "Federal Reserve Control of the Money Stock,"

      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 14, no. 4 (November),

      pp. 597—625.

_______   (1983), Controlling Money: The Federal Reserve and Its Critics,
      (Washington: Brookings Institution).

Cagan, Phillip (1982), "The Choice among Monetary Aggregates as Targets

      and Guides for Monetary Policy," Journal of Money, Credit and

      Banking, vol. 14, no. 4 (November), pp. 661—86

Eckstein, Otto (1980), Core Inflation, (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice—

      Hall).

Feliner, William (1982), "Criteria for Useful Targeting: Money versus

      the Base and Other Variables," Journal of Money, Credit and

      Bankin&, vol. 14, no. 4 (November), pp. 641—660.

Franz, Wolfgang (1983), "The Past Decade's Natural Rate and the Dynamics

      of German Unemployment: A Case Against Demand—Policy," European

      Economic Review, May.

Friedman, Benjamin M. (1982), "Federal Reserve Policy, Interest Rate

      Volatility, and the U. S. Capital Raising Mechanism," Journal of

      Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 14, no. 4 (November), pp. 721—45.
                                      54




Friedman, Milton (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy," American

      Economic Review, vol. 58, pp. 1—17.

      —    (1970), "A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis," Journal
      of Political Economy, Vol. 78, No. 2 (March/April), pp. 221—2.

________   (1983a), "Monetary Policy and Economic Conditions," unpublished
      memorandum, January 14.

_______ (1983b), "Is the Summit Worth the Climb?" Newsweek, May 30, p.
      33.

Gordon, Robert J. (1975), "The Demand for and Supply of Inflation,"

      Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 18, pp. 807—36.

_______    (1981), Macroeconomics, second edition (Boston: Little, Brown &
      Co.). Japanese and Italian editions, 1982.

________ (1982a), "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural

      Rate of Unemployment," in M. N. Baily, ed., Workers, Jobs, and

      Inflation    (Washington: Brookings Institution), pp. 88—157.
_______ (l982b),    "Price Inertia and   Policy Ineffectiveness in the United

      States,"   Journal of Political Economy, vol.   90,   pp. 1087—1117.
________ (1982c),    "Why   U. S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs from
      that   in Britain and Japan," The Economic Journal, vol. 92,

      no. 365, pp. 13—44.

Granger, Clive W. J. (1969), "Investigating Causal Relations by

      Econometric Models and Cross—Spectral Methods," Econometrica, vol.

      37   (July), pp. 424—38.
Hamada, Koichi and    Kurosaka, Hoshio (1983),     "The Relationship Between

      Production and Unemployment in Japan: Okun's Law in a Comparative

     Perspective," presented at the International Seminar on Macro-

     economics, Paris, June.
                                      55



King,   Stephen R. (1983), "Interest Rates and the Influence of Money on

        Output and Prices," NBER Conference on Macroeconomics, Cambridge,

        Ma., July.

Kopcke, Richard W. (1983), "Must the Ideal 'Money Stock' Be Con-

        trollable?" New England Economic Review, (March/April), pp. 6-1O.

Mayer, Thomas (1983), "Forecast Errors and the Efficacy of Counter—

        cyclical Policy," University of California at Davis, Research

        Program   in Applied Macroeconomics and Macro Policy Working Paper
        No. 2, June.
Meltzer, Allan H. (1981), "Consequences of the Federal Reserve's Re—
        attachment to Free Reserves," paper presented at the Western
        Economic Association Meetings, July.

Mishkin, Frederick (1982), "Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter: An

        Econometric Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90,

        no. 1, pp. 22—51.

Paulus, John D. (1982), "Comment on 'Federal Reserve Control of the

        Money Stock,'" by Ralph C. Bryant, Journal of Money, Credit and

        Banking, vol. 14, no. 4 (November), pp. 626—31.

Poole, William (1970), "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in

        a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics,

        vol. 83 (May), pp. 197—216.

______ (1982), "Federal Reserve Operating Procedures," Journal of Money,
        Credit and Banking, vol. 14, no. 4 (November), pp. 575—596.

Reder, Melvin W. (1948), "The Theoretical Problems of a National Wage—

        Price Policy," Canadian Journal of Economics and Political

        Science, February, pp. 46—61.
                                     56




Sargent, Thomas 3., and Wallace, Nell (1975), "Rational Expectations,

      the Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply

      Rule," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 83, P. 241—57.

Shadow Open Market Committee (1983), "PolIcy Statement and Position

      Papers," Working paper, University of Rochester Graduate School of

      Management, March 6-7.

Sims, Christopher A. (1972), "Money, Income and Causality," American

      Economic Review, vol. 62 (September), pp. 540—52.

________ (1980), "Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
      Monetarism Reconsidered, American Economic Review, vol. 70, no. 2

      (May), pp. 250—7.

Tatom, John A. (1983), "Money Market Deposit Accounts, Super—NOW5 and

     Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, vol.

      65, no. 3 (March), pp. 5—16.

U. S. Federal Reserve Board (1983), Monetary Policy Objectives for 1983

      (Washington, July 20).
