                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 IDENTIFYING INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP EFFECTS IN THE PRESENCE OF SORTING:
                 A NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS APPLICATION

                                            Patrick Bayer
                                           Stephen L. Ross

                                        Working Paper 12211
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12211


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2006




The authors are grateful to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut
for financial support. We are especially thankful to Steven Durlauf for extensive comments on an earlier
draft and to William Brock, Fernando Ferreira, Yannis Ioannides, Albert Saiz, Holger Sieg, Todd Sinai,
and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, NYU, Penn-Wharton, and Wisconsin for many helpful comments
and suggestions. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center (BRDC). The research
results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, any other agency
of the U.S. Government or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was screened to
insure that no confidential data are revealed.

© 2006 by Patrick Bayer and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Identifying Individual and Group Effects in the Presence of Sorting: A Neighborhood Effects
Application
Patrick Bayer and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 12211
May 2006, Revised February 2009
JEL No. J41,R14

                                              ABSTRACT

Researchers have long recognized that the non-random sorting of individuals into groups generates
correlation between individual and group attributes that is likely to bias naïve estimates of both individual
and group effects. This paper proposes a non-parametric strategy for identifying these effects in a model
that allows for both individual and group unobservables, applying this strategy to the estimation of
neighborhood effects on labor market outcomes. The first part of this strategy is guided by a robust
feature of the equilibrium in vertical sorting models - a monotonic relationship between neighborhood
housing prices and neighborhood quality. This implies that under certain conditions a non-parametric
function of neighborhood housing prices serves as a suitable control function for the neighborhood
unobservable in the labor market outcome regression. This control function transforms the problem
to a model with one unobservable so that traditional instrumental variables solutions may be applied.
In our application, we instrument for each individual’s observed neighborhood attributes with the average
neighborhood attributes of a set of observationally identical individuals. The neighborhood effects
model is estimated using confidential microdata from the 1990 Decennial Census for the Boston MSA.
The results imply that the direct effects of geographic proximity to jobs, neighborhood poverty rates,
and average neighborhood education are substantially larger than the conditional correlations identified
using OLS, although the net effect of neighborhood quality on labor market outcomes remains small.
These findings are robust across a wide variety of specifications and robustness checks.


Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

Stephen L. Ross
1. Introduction
        Economists often study behavior and outcomes in empirical settings in which individuals have
sorted into groups, where a group might be a school, neighborhood, occupation, interpersonal
relationship, correctional or treatment program. In these settings, it is well known that sorting generates
correlation between individual and group attributes (some of which are likely to be unobserved) leading
to potentially serious biases in naïve estimates of the effects of individual and group attributes on
individual outcomes. The resulting biases are likely to be especially severe in the estimation of social
interactions (peer effects) among individuals in the same reference group, and, as a result, the
identification problem created by endogenous group formation has received extensive attention in that
literature (Manski (1993), Moffitt (2001), Brock and Durlauf (2001)).
        In this paper, we take up the general problem of identifying the effect of individual and group
attributes on individual outcomes in a model that allows for both individual and group unobservables.
When both types of unobservables are present, the identification problem created by non-random sorting
is especially severe because any variable that affects sorting over groups will generally, by construction,
be correlated with either the individual or group unobservable (or both). As a result, many common
empirical strategies that are designed to deal with the presence of one type of unobservable often neglect
the presence of the other, thereby not addressing or possibly even exacerbating the corresponding biases.
        To see this, consider a specific estimation technique that is used commonly in the literature: the
inclusion of group fixed effects in the individual outcome regression (i.e., embedding the group
unobservable in a fixed effect). While it is often argued that this approach eliminates biases resulting
from across-group sorting, thereby providing unbiased estimates of the effect of observable individual
attributes, this is generally not the case. The problem is that non-random sorting induces correlation
between the group fixed effects and both the observed and unobserved individual attributes. In a selective
hiring or matching process (e.g., teachers to schools, individuals to colleges, doctors to residency
programs, individuals to occupations), one might expect, for example, higher ability students and teachers
to be matched to better schools based on unobserved tastes or rationing leading to a positive correlation
between school fixed effects and the individual component of the error term.2 As a result, one might
expect the school fixed effects in an achievement regression estimated by OLS to be overstated and the
estimated effects of observed measures of individual ability and teacher skills to be attenuated.3
        That OLS estimation of a group fixed effects specification does not eliminate biases related to
sorting is obvious if one considers a setting with only two potential groups. This places the problem

2
  In a related example, see Rothstein’s (2008) analysis of bias in teacher fixed effect estimates in value added
models of education production due to systematic sorting of students into classrooms.
3
  It is not uncommon to see group fixed effects used in estimation for environments where sorting across groups is
expected. Examples include the inclusion of occupation fixed effects in wage regressions, school fixed effects in
models of teacher productivity, and neighborhood fixed effects in hedonic price regressions.

                                                        1
squarely in the treatment effects literature, where the group fixed effect becomes the treatment effect and
the identification problems related to non-random selection are well known.4 Treated individuals should
be similar in their actual propensity to receive treatment compared to the sample as a whole and so any
within group differences in observables should be negatively correlated with unobservables.
Unfortunately, most of the solutions to the identification problem created by non-random selection
proposed in the treatment effects literature, such as the availability of an instrument that predicts selection
into treatment but does not affect individual outcomes, do not translate easily into settings where the
number of groups can number in the hundreds or thousands.5 To apply a classic instrumental variables
approach in settings where the number of groups is large would require either a correspondingly large
number of instruments or an instrument that varied across both individuals and groups.6
         The goal of this paper is to provide a general and practical non-parametric solution to the
identification problem induced by the presence of both individual and group unobservables in settings
where the number of groups is large. To make the discussion of the identification problem and our
proposed empirical methodology concrete, we consider a specific application: the estimation of the effect
of individual and neighborhood attributes on labor market outcomes in a setting where individuals sort
over the neighborhoods within a large metropolitan area. Previous strategies for identifying the effect of
neighborhood on individual outcomes include examination of data arising from social experiments
including the provision of housing vouchers (Popkin et al. (1993), Katz et al. (2001), Ludwig et al.
(2005)) and the demolition of public housing complexes (Oreopolous (2003), Jacob (2005)), aggregating
up to levels such as the metropolitan area where residence might be plausibly viewed as exogenous
(Evans et al. (1992), Cutler and Glaeser (1997), Ross (1998), Weinberg (2000, 2004), Ross and Zenou (In
Press), Card and Rothstein (2007), Ananat (2007)), and recently examining spatial variation in
neighborhood exposure at very detailed levels of geography presumably because housing markets are
quite thin at that level (Grinblatt et al. (2004), Ioannides and Zabel (2008), Bayer et al. (In Press)).
         Our proposed solution to the core identification problem driven by sorting exploits a robust
implication of vertical models of jurisdictional sorting like Epple and Platt (1998) and Epple and Sieg




4
  See, for example, Heckman (1979) and the large subsequent literature on selection.
5
  See, for example, Heckman and Vytlacil (2001) or Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996) for a discussion of the
application of instrumental variables to selection problems with few choices. Other (non-IV) solutions that have
been proposed to identify models with a small number of groups (e.g., “identification at infinity” Heckman (1990))
also do not extend practically to settings with many groups because the corresponding requirements on the data
(e.g., distinct values of covariates that lead to universal selection into each group) also increase proportionally with
the number of groups.
6
  Geweke, Gowrisankaran, and Town (2003) provides a nice example of the use of an instrument that varies across
both individuals and groups in a context where the number of groups is large. Specifically, they use the distance
between an individual’s residence and each hospital in the individual’s metropolitan area to instrument for hospital
indicator variables in a mortality regression.

                                                           2
(1999),7 namely that there is a monotonic relationship between the price of group membership, in our case
residing in a neighborhood, and group or neighborhood quality. Under conditions that we make explicit
below, this implies that a non-parametric function of price serves as a suitable control function for the
group or neighborhood unobservable in an individual outcome equation.8,9 By including this control
function in the outcome regression as a proxy for the group component of the error term,10 we transform
the problem into a more standard selection problem with a single individual-specific component of the
error term.11     The essential advantage of this control function approach is that it reduces the
dimensionality of instrumental variables problem when the number of groups is large. Now, instead of
requiring as many instruments as groups, the needed number of instruments is only the number of
observed group or neighborhood attributes (including the housing price control function). Instruments are
required in this case to address the likely correlation of the observed neighborhood (group) attributes and
the remaining individual component of the unobservable. In principle, our model might be adapted to any
sorting problem where membership in the group is rationed via a market price of some sort, such as
occupational choice where occupational attributes are capitalized into wages.
         In the context of our neighborhood effects application, we develop instruments for neighborhood
attributes by assigning each individual in the sample to a cell based on her observable characteristics. We
then instrument for each individual’s own neighborhood attributes with the average neighborhood
attributes of those individuals in the same cell.                Averaging neighborhood attributes over all
observationally equivalent individuals is assumed to remove any idiosyncratic portion of the sorting of
individuals into neighborhoods associated with an individual’s unobservable attributes. Similar cell based
identification strategies have been used as instruments in other contexts, see for example Dahl (2002) on


7
  This model and its predecessors has been used or extended in theoretical settings by Epple, Filimon, and Romer,
(1984, 1993), Epple and Romer (1991), Epple and Romano (1999), Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998) and
Benabou (1993, 1996) and applied in empirical settings by Epple, Romer, and Sieg (2001), Sieg, Smith, Banzhaf,
and Walsh (2004), Walsh (2005) among others. See Ross and Yinger (1999) for a review of papers that apply this
sorting model within local public finance.
8
  Note that monotonic relationship may not hold explicitly once one allows for horizontal sorting as in the models
developed by Nechyba (1997, 1999), Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2005), Bayer and Timmins (2005, 2006),
Ferreira (2003) and Ferryera (2003).
9
   In addition to the residential sorting context, this solution should be applicable in any setting where the price of
entry into a group is available (e.g., wages, college tuition) or where groups can be quality rank-ordered in some
way.
10
    Petrin and Train (2005) use this strategy to control for product unobservables in the differentiated products
demand literature, although it is motivated there primarily as a computational tool in a standard instrumental
variables context.
11
    Specifically, this strategy implements the general observation made in Brock and Durlauf (2006) that a control
fiunction can be used to deal with the group unobservable in an individual outcome equation. Ioannides and Zabel
(2004) use such a control function in their work on housing demand. Of course, in their model, demand depends
explicitly on price and a separate control function is included to break the correlation between price and
unobservable determinants of demand. In relation to their work, our contribution is the specific idea to use
neighborhood housing price as a control function for unobserved neighborhood quality in an individual outcome
equation.

                                                          3
the Roy model and French (2005) and French and Jones (2008) on retirement behavior. Notice also, that
this approach amounts to using a fully non-parametric sorting model to predict each individual’s
neighborhood attributes given her observable characteristics. Brock and Durlauf (2001, 2002, 2005) have
recommended the use of such non-linearities arising from discrete choices for identification in models of
social interactions.12,13
         In this way, the approach that we propose for addressing the identification problem induced by
non-random sorting into many groups consists of two key features: the use of a control function for the
group component of the error term and the development of suitable instruments to address the remaining
correlation between the individual component of the error term and any observed group characteristics
(including the control function).      We carefully describe the conditions under which our proposed
approach provides a coherent solution to the identification problem as well as circumstances under which
this approach does not work in the paper. We also include a detailed analysis of the robustness of our
results to alternative assumptions in the context of our neighborhood effects application.
            For our application, we use the confidential Long Form data from the 1990 Decennial Census for
the Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area. In examining the impact of neighborhoods on labor market
outcomes, we focus on the influence of spatial access to jobs and neighborhood socioeconomic
characteristics on individual labor market outcomes. These neighborhood attributes have received a great
deal of attention in the previous literature. We estimate models for six different labor market outcomes, a
number of subsamples based on education, gender, and family structure, and a variety of empirical
specifications designed to isolate the impact of each of the three parts of our proposed identification
strategy.
         Our results imply that the direct impact of geographic proximity to jobs, neighborhood poverty
rates, and college-educated neighbors is substantially larger than the conditional correlations identified
using OLS. These findings are robust across a wide variety of specifications and robustness checks.
Interestingly, while geographic proximity and neighborhood poverty rates have the anticipated positive
and negative impacts on labor market outcomes respectively, exposure to college-educated neighbors also
has a significant negative effect. We discuss potential explanations for this finding below. Thus, taken
together, our results imply that the relationship between neighborhood attributes and labor market
outcomes is quite complex and as a whole our results are consistent with small and even negative net
effects of a traditional notion of neighborhood ‘quality’ on the labor market outcomes.


12
   Also see Bayer and Timmins (2006) and in the context of the identification of hedonic models by Ekeland,
Heckman, and Nesheim (2004), Bajari and Benkhard (2005) and Bajari and Kahn (2005) and of the identification of
peer effects in education by Calvo-Armengo, Patacchini and Zenou (In Press) and Patacchini and Zenou (2008).
13
   In addition to the two-part strategy outlined here, we also address additional issues related to neighborhood
attributes endogenously determined by the sorting process (e.g., neighborhood socioeconomic characteristics)
below.

                                                       4
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple vertical sorting
model and examines the resulting biases in ordinary least squares analyses of the effect of individual and
group attributes on individual outcomes, as well as discusses existing effects attempts to identify
neighborhood effects in the context of the model. Section 3 presents our two-part estimation strategy for
obtaining consistent estimates in the presence of both individual and group unobserved attributes. Section
4 reviews the literature concerning neighborhood effects on labor market outcomes, discusses the data,
sample, and specification of variables used to describe households and neighborhoods, and presents the
results. Section 7 concludes.




2. Identifying Individual and Group Effects in the Presence of Sorting
        This paper posits a world where neighborhoods generate benefits for individuals that might or
might not be reflected in their outcomes and individuals sort across neighborhoods trading off the benefits
offered by each neighborhood against the price required for access to that neighborhood. In such a world,
attributes of both individuals and neighborhoods that affect the sorting process or outcomes may be
unobserved to the econometrician.                         Most existing research explicitly considers only an individual
unobservable, only a location unobservable or does not make a clear distinction, and yet the interplay of
these two unobservables is crucial in understanding the bias arising in any study of neighborhood effects.
        The equation that we are interested in estimating can be written as:


(1)     yij = yˆ i + # 2 X j + " j + ! ij = #1 Z i + $ i + # 2 X j + " j + ! ij



where i indexes individuals, j indexes neighborhoods, yij is the individual outcome of interest, Zi, ωi, are
observed and unobserved individual attributes respectively, and Xj, ξj are observed and unobserved
neighborhood attributes, respectively. For the purposes of developing the sorting model, we assume that
ŷi or "1 Z i + !i represents an individual’s permanent income and εij represents short-run, transitory shocks

to earnings or labor market outcomes.


Moment Conditions. At this point, we propose two apparently strong moment conditions in order to
first expositionally simplify the presentation, second focus on the estimation bias caused by sorting
without the additional identification issues arising from other sources of endogeneity, and finally to
demonstrate the complex patterns of correlation that arise from sorting even with fairly strong moment




                                                                                  5
conditions. Specifically, we assume that the covariances between observed and unobserved attributes are
equal to zero in the distributions of individuals and neighborhoods:14



(2)
         (i)      [        ]
                 E " j | X j = 0;
         (ii )   E [!i | Z i ]= 0;


         A key restriction imposed by these conditions, specifically 2(i), is that the neighborhood or group
variables do not include aggregations of the individual attributes for people who select into a group.
Otherwise sorting based on individual observables over group unobservables would violate condition 2(i).
In a neighborhood effects application, this restriction would require that variables like percent poverty or
share of residents with a college education be excluded from the specification of equation (1). Therefore,
it is important to note that this restriction is made only to simply the current exposition and is relaxed later
in a later section.
         However, throughout the paper, we will continue to assume that the only source of correlation
between place observables and unobservables is the aggregation of individual attributes based on the
sorting of those individuals. In effect, we are estimating reduced form estimates of the relationship
between neighborhood variables and outcomes that are not biased by sorting. This assumption in
Equation (2.i) simply makes explicit an assumption that is made implicitly in the vast majority of the
empirical literature on peer and neighborhood effects. Even when peers or neighbors are randomly
assigned, the researcher must always select a subset of potentially interesting attributes among those
available in the data to include in the analysis, and. unless the research design also generates quasi-
random variation in a particular peer or neighbor characteristics these attributes are bound to be correlated
with the unobservables of the randomly assigned peers,
         To see this point in the context of the existing peer effects literature, consider the well-known
paper Sacerdote (2001). In that paper, Sacerdote uses the random assignment of roommates in the first
year at Dartmouth College to test whether college GPA is affected by a roommate’s prior achievement in
high school. While random assignment ensures that the estimated effect is not driven by the non-random
selection of one’s peers, there is nothing that precludes the observed correlation of outcomes with
roommate’s achievement from being driven by unobservable roommate attributes, such as athletic
participation or experience with drinking or drugs. Smilarly, in the neighborhood effects literature, Katz,
Kling and Liebman (2001) use the randomization implicit in the Moving to Opportunity (MTO)
experiment, in which residents in public housing were randomly selected to receive a housing voucher

14
   These assumptions of exogeneity are standard when ever an individual makes a causal interpretation of the
estimated conditional correlation between an observed outcomes and control variables. While not uncontroversial,
these assumptions seem reasonable in an analysis intended to examine the additional bias that might arise due to
sorting.

                                                       6
allowing them to move to a better neighborhood. Random assignment allows the authors to convincingly
evaluate whether the receipt of the voucher altered individual outcomes. But if one is interested in
assessing how exactly the program/neighborhood change affected outcomes – i.e., what it was about the
change in neighborhood (or other features of the program for that matter) that caused the change in
outcomes, additional assumptions like (2.i) must be made.15
         Next, focusing on equation (2.ii), this assumption requires that the covariance between observed
and unobserved individual attributes is zero in the population. Before discussing the particular merits of
this assumption, it is important to first point out that the identification of neighborhood effects does not
rely on this assumption.        Our IV strategy explicitly breaks the correlation between neighborhood
attributes and individual unobservables regardless of whether the individual unobservable is the
unobservable associated with equation (1) or a reduced from unobservable. Thus, if we were only
interested in obtaining consistent estimates of neighborhood effects – which is the central focus of our
application – we could relax assumption (2.ii) and still get consistent estimates of neighborhood effects.
         More generally, we are really estimating a reduced-form model of the effects of individual
attributes on outcomes in our current application. For example, our estimate of the effect of individual
education on outcomes would include the impact due to the correlation of education and unobserved
ability purged of any bias arising from the systematic sorting of individuals into neighborhoods.
Naturally if one wished to use our technique to estimate a causal effect of education on labor market
outcomes, one would need to isolate quasi-random variation in educational attainment, and more
importantly if such variation were available our model can be easily generalized to allow the use of such
variation to identify causal impacts of individual attributes.16
         Finally, in terms of the model, the important point is that even when only exogenous attributes are
considered in (1), non-random sorting will generally imply correlation between all individual and
neighborhood attributes, thereby creating correlation between any observed attributes and the composite
error term in (1). To see why non-random sorting gives rise to such correlations, it is helpful to write
down a simple modification of the vertical sorting model developed by Epple and Platt (1998) and Epple
and Sieg (1999).



15
   This can be seen clearly in a follow-on paper on MTO by Kling and Ludwig (2007). In that paper, they test
whether the neighborhood crime rate affects individual criminal activity. Naturally, the neighborhood crime rate
may be correlated with a wide variety of other neighborhood characteristics, which is why the researchers include
other control variables such as share minority and poverty rate, but such controls only represent a fraction of the
neighborhood variables with which crime rates may correlate.
16
   In the context of the Census, there is a variable that many authors have used to instrument for education -- the
timing of birth within a year (i.e., exact birth date). Therefore, if we were interested in obtaining a causal estimate
of the effect of education on labor market outcomes, we could in fact use the timing of birth as an instrument. The
resulting coefficient estimate would control for both the self-selection of additional years of schooling plus the effect
of neighborhood sorting.

                                                           7
A Simple Model of Residential Sorting.                                  Consider a closed metropolitan area consisting of J
neighborhoods with a finite number of houses available in each neighborhood. Exogenous neighborhood
attributes Xj and ξj are distributed such that (2.i) holds. The population of the metro area consists of I
individuals, which is also assumed to equal the total number of houses available in the metropolitan area.
Individual i has individual characteristics Zi and ωi distributed such that (2.ii) holds.
         Given the structure of equation (1), it will be helpful to characterize the neighborhood
contribution to the individual outcome y as:


(3)      # j = "2 X j + ! j


It is this neighborhood quality index θj for which individuals will implicitly be willing to pay a higher
price of entry pj to enter a given neighborhood j.17
         Individuals sort across neighborhoods based on their permanent income trading off between the
outcome of interest ! j , which may affect both earnings and other intangible benefits of residing in a

neighborhood, and the price of purchasing housing in neighborhood j, pj. Specifically, write individual
utility V from choosing neighborhood j as a function of expected income, the neighborhood quality index,
and the price of housing:


(4)               (                         ) (
         Vij = V yˆ i + ! j ,! j , p j | yˆ i = f yˆ i ,! j , p j   )

where an individual’s taste for the non-labor market benefits offered by the neighborhood quality index
may vary with permanent income.18


Structure of Equilibrium. Decisions in the model are driven by the trade-off between neighborhood
quality and neighborhood housing prices, p. In equilibrium, the price of entry into each neighborhood
adjusts so as to ration the quality of the neighborhood good θj available there. To derive predictions
about the structure of the equilibrium, it is helpful to make the following single-crossing property on
preferences:




17
   In Section 4 below, we consider generalizations of this simple sorting model to cases where individuals value
more about neighborhoods than the direct effect of neighborhood on income or earnings.
18
   The model could readily be generalized to allow for a separate individual-specific taste parameter. This extension
would yield very similar results as long as permanent income and the taste parameter are positively correlated as is
typically presumed in the literature on neighborhood effects.

                                                                           8
         d2p
(5)            >0
         d!dyˆ


This single-crossing property implies that as an individual’s permanent income increases, the slope of the
indifference curve between the price of entry into the neighborhood p and the consumption of the
neighborhood good θ decreases, ceteris paribus.




         Given this single-crossing assumption, a sorting equilibrium exists and satisfies a number of
useful properties (Epple and Platt, 1998).19 Figure 1 provides a graphical depiction of the equilibrium,
showing how individuals sort themselves across neighborhoods with increasing values of the
neighborhood good θJ >θJ-1 > ... >θ2 >θ1.             The vertical axis indicates an individual’s observable
permanent income βXi, while the horizontal axis depicts unobserved permanent income ωi. The diagonal
lines in the figure characterize the boundaries in (βXi) - ωi space that divide the set of individuals that
choose one neighborhood versus another.20 For expositional purposes, the graph is drawn assuming a




19
   This single crossing condition implies that single crossing conditions hold for (βXi) and ωi, which are equivalent
to the two single crossing conditions in Epple and Platt (1998).
20
   The additive relationship between (βXi) and ωi assures that these boundary indifference curves are straight,
parallel lines, but in more general models these lines may not be either straight or parallel.

                                                         9
finite support for both observable and unobservable components of permanent income although this is not
required.
        A key property of the equilibrium is that individuals are conditionally stratified across
neighborhoods. That is, conditional on the observable component of permanent income (βXi), individuals
are stratified across neighborhoods on the basis of the unobserved component ωi and vice versa.          The
first of these results can be seen in Figure 1 by considering individuals with a given value of the observed
permanent income (βXi) and moving horizontally across neighborhoods. In this case, any individual A
with unobservable permanent income greater than individual B chooses a neighborhood with at least as
great a value of θ. Likewise, the second stratification result can be seen by conditioning on unobservable
permanent income and moving vertically across neighborhoods.


Implications of Equilibrium Structure for Estimating the Outcome Equation. When combined with
the exogeneity assumptions in (2), these stratification results give rise to a number of additional properties
of the sorting equilibrium that are relevant for the estimation of equation (1).
        Most obviously, the model ensures permanent income (observed and unobserved components)
and neighborhood quality (observed and unobserved components) are positively correlated. From the
point of view of estimating equation (1), the implication is that sorting induces a positive correlation
between the unobserved neighborhood quality and the observed component of permanent income:


(6i)         [                 ] [                            ]
        Cov yˆ i$ j | X j , !i = E ( #1 Z i ')" j | X j , !i > 0;


and likewise between individual error term and observed neighborhood quality:


(6ii)        [                  ] [                            ]
        Cov yˆ i ,$ j | Z i , ! j = E ( # 2 X j ' )"i | Z i , ! j > 0;


These correlations imply that OLS estimates of the coefficients in equation (1) will generally be biased.
        A second less obvious property that follows from the model is that conditional on neighborhood,
observable and unobservable components of permanent income are negatively correlated:


(7)     Cov[( " ' X i ), !i | ji ]= E [( " ' X i )!i | ji ]< 0


This property follows directly from the fact that (βXi) and ωi are uncorrelated in the population and the
stratification properties mentioned above, which ensure that the boundaries between neighborhoods in
(βXi) - ωi space are downward sloping. Given this negative within neighborhood correlation, it is easy to

                                                                         10
see that including neighborhood fixed effects when estimating equation (1) via OLS does not solve the
problem. In the simple model specified here, it is easy to see that such an approach would bias the
coefficients on observed individual attributes towards zero. For example, Fu and Ross (2007) find that
the inclusion of Public Use Microdata Area fixed effects, which are large, heterogenous areas containing
100,000 or more individuals, attenuates estimates on education variables in wage equations by over 10
percent and leads to a 50 percent or more increase in estimated agglomeration economies due to sorting
on unobserved productivity attributes.


Identifying Neighborhood Effects Models. Because sorting induces the rich pattern of correlation
between observables and unobservables shown in equations (6.i), (6.ii), and (7), the identification of
individual and neighborhood (group) effects in equation (1) is a fundamentally difficult problem. In this
paper, we seek to provide a general solution to this identification problem in the context of a fully-
specified model of sorting and outcomes. To put our proposed solution in context, we now present a brief
review of other recent approaches to identifying neighborhood effects, noting their strengths and
limitations. We defer a detailed review of the previous literature on the effect of neighborhood on labor
market outcomes until Section 4 of the paper.
        The identification of neighborhood effects is a difficult problem without a completely general
solution. An important line of recent research seeks to identify neighborhood effects by isolating a
random component of neighborhood choice induced by special social experiments. Popkin et al. (1993)
pioneered this approach using data from the Gautreaux Program conducted in Chicago in the late 1970's,
which gave housing vouchers to eligible black families in public housing as part of a court-imposed
public housing de-segregation effort. Similarly, Oreopolous (2003) and Jacob (2005) study the impact of
re-locations arising from administrative assignment to public housing projects in Toronto and from the
demolition of the public housing projects in Chicago, respectively. Most notably, Katz et. al. (2001) and
Ludwig et al. (2005) have used the randomized housing voucher allocation associated with the Moving
To Opportunity demonstration (MTO) to examine the impact of re-location to neighborhoods with much
lower poverty rates on a very wide set of individual behavioral outcomes including health, labor market
activity, crime, education, and more. Especially in the case of MTO, the advantages of this approach are
clear – the randomization inherent in the program design ensures a clean comparison of treatment and
proper control groups.
        There are, however, important limitations in the extent to which the treatment effects identified
through re-location are informative about the nature of general forms of neighborhood effects per se.
First, individuals studied must be eligible for a re-location program in the first place; this typically implies
that the resulting sample is special (i.e. so as to be a resident in public housing) and may not be as
sensitive to neighborhood effects as other individuals (Weinberg, 2005). Second, the experimental design

                                                      11
involves re-location to new neighborhoods that are, by design, very different from baseline
neighborhoods; this implies that the identified treatment effect measures the impact of re-locating to a
neighborhood where individuals initially have few social contacts and where the individuals studied may
be very different than the average resident of the new neighborhood. In this way, the treatment effects
identified with this design are necessarily a composite of several factors related to significant changes in
neighborhoods that are not easily disentangled (see Moffitt (2001) for a detailed discussion).
         A second broad approach seeks to deal with the difficulties induced by correlation in unobserved
attributes at the neighborhood level by aggregating to a higher level of geography. Evans, Oates, and
Schwab (1992), Cutler and Glaeser (1997), Ross (1998), Weinberg (2000, 2004), Ross and Zenou (In
Press), Card and Rothstein (2007), and Ananat (2007) identify the effect of location on outcomes using
cross-metropolitan variation. For example, Cutler and Glaeser (1997) analyze the impact of segregation
within a metropolitan area on a variety of outcomes including education, labor market activity, and
teenage fertility, and Evans, Oates and Schwab use metropolitan area poverty rates as an instrument for
neighborhood level poverty. Again, the advantages of this approach are clear – aggregation certainly
eliminates the problem of correlation in unobservables among neighbors (although potential correlation in
unobservables at the metropolitan level becomes an issue). The effects identified through aggregation,
however, include not only the average neighborhood effects operating in a metropolitan area but also any
broader consequences of living in a segregated or high poverty metropolitan area. 21 Thus, the strict
interpretation of the estimated effects as neighborhood effects requires the assumption that metropolitan
segregation does not directly affect outcomes.22
         A third approach examines the impact of immediate neighbors on an indiviual’s outcomes after
controlling for this individual’s presence in a broader neighborhood (Grinblatt et al. (2004), Ioannides and
Zabel (2008), Bayer et al. (2008)). The key identifying assumption underlying this design is that there is
no correlation in unobserved individual attributes across nearby neighbors, due perhaps to the thinness of
the housing market (i.e., that it is difficult to select the particular block that one would like to live on)
after controlling for the propensity to reside in a given neighborhood. For example, Bayer, Ross, and
Topa (In Press) use detailed Census microdata to compare the propensity of individuals who reside on the
same census block to work together relative to the likelihood of working together for individual residing
in nearby blocks or in the same block group.23 Accordingly, the methodology is designed to capture very


21
   More residentially segregated metropolitan areas might be associated, for example, with increased racial taste-
based discrimination in the labor market, in the application of criminal justice, etc. due to decreased levels of regular
inter-racial contact in residential neighborhoods.
22
   It is important to point out that Cutler and Glaeser (1997) do not claim that the effects identified in their analysis
are strictly neighborhood effects.
23
   Bayer et. al. (In Press) explicitly emphasizes this variation as the source of variation, but Grinblatt et al. (2004)
and Ioannides and Zabel (2008 both rely on similar variation with Grinblatt et al. examining the influence of car
consumption of an individual’s closest 10 neighbors conditioning on the car consumption of the next 40 neighbors

                                                          12
local social interactions that might significantly affect outcomes (e.g., through job referrals) but whose
influence decays very quickly with distance. This approach will not capture effects that arise over
broader areas, such as the influence of employment access, crime, institution based networks such as
schools and churches, or spatially based perceptions of economic opportunities on employment outcomes.
As a result, such studies may substantially understate the impact of neighborhood social interactions on
individuals’ outcomes.
         The vertical sorting model that we described above provides a useful framework for
understanding the existing literature. The key feature of the model is that it contains two sources of error
over which individuals sort, both individual- and neighborhood-specific components. In this context, the
requirements for a proper instrument for either the observed individual or neighborhood attributes are
severe. An instrument for a given neighborhood attribute must be correlated this neighborhood attribute
and yet be uncorrelated with both the individual and neighborhood unobservable.                        These three
requirements generally cannot hold simultaneously in observational data from a sorting equilibrium as
any variable that is uncorrelated with the individual unobservable will only be correlated with
neighborhood choice by affecting sorting over both observed and unobserved location attributes.24
         In light of this general problem, the existing studies discussed above develop empirical designs
intended to provide a variable that is correlated with an individual’s exposure to location attributes for
reasons that are independent of the individual’s sorting behavior (experimental treatment, exogenous
residence in metropolitan areas, or random block-level sorting arising from a thin housing market).
Simply put, these approaches attempt to isolate variation in local attributes that arises due to factors
outside the individual’s control.
         But these designs in turn limit the researchers’ ability to isolate and identify the effects of various
neighborhood factors on current residents. By systematically addressing the sources of sorting bias in a
population of current neighborhood residents, the goal of this paper is to provide a more detailed and
complete picture of the influence neighborhood on resident outcomes albeit with newly imposed
assumptions concerning the structure of the underlying sorting problem. Specifically, unlike most of the
studies above, this study is intended to capture the overall effect of neighborhood variables on a
representative population in their equilibrium locations. Moreover, our approach generates a substantial
amount of identifying information for relatively large population-based samples. Therefore, unlike the
studies above that rely on across-metropolitan variation or small experimental samples and so are only



and Ioannides and Zabel estimating a selection model at the census tract level and identifying the impact of an
individual’s 10 closest neighbors’ housing consumption based on the tract selection model and the attributes of those
10 closest neighbors.
24
   Likewise, any variable that is uncorrelated with the neighborhood unobservable can only be correlated with
neighborhood observables if it is correlated with individual unobservables that influence sorting.

                                                         13
able to examine one or two variables of interest, our study is able to examine the effect of a larger variety
of neighborhood variables on individual outcomes.


3. Proposed Solution
         Given the complex correlation patterns between the observed and unobserved components of
equation (1), we propose a two-part estimation strategy. The core identification problem is that multiple
unobserved factors can explain the same observed individual location decisions. For example, an
individual that has observable characteristics that would normally be associated with high permanent
income might reside in a neighborhood that looks to be low quality on the basis of observables either
because (i) the neighborhood has unobserved features that are very attractive or (ii) the individual’s actual
permanent income is much lower than what the individual’s observable attributes would suggest.
         The key insight that we draw from the sorting model is that this apparent ambiguity can be
resolved by using information on neighborhood housing prices. If the neighborhood in question has high
housing prices, the natural conclusion is that neighborhood is attractive for unobserved reasons, but if
prices are low the only way to explain the observed locational choice is through the individual’s
unobservable. In this way, our strategy is to use a flexible function of housing prices as a proxy for the
unobserved portion of neighborhood quality in (1). This reduces the problem to a more traditional
selection problem based on individual unobservables, which we address using a standard instrumental
variable technique to break the correlation between neighborhood attributes and individual
unobservables.25
         In this section we provide the details of this estimation strategy for our particular application. We
then extend the analysis to allow for endogenous neighborhood attributes such as the socioeconomic
characteristics of one’s neighbors. Finally, we conclude this section by considering generalizations of the
simple sorting model presented above and discussing the extent to which the estimation strategy can be
extended in those circumstances.


General Treatment of Price as a Control Function . To illustrate this two-part solution, we begin by
considering the problem described in condition (6.i) above: the correlation of observable individual
attributes with unobserved neighborhood attributes. In this case, it turns out that a second property of the
sorting equilibrium suggests a natural fix. In particular, Epple and Platt (1998) prove that neighborhoods



25
   This solution requires that the supply elasticity of group openings be constant across groups. In the neighborhood
effects model, the supply elasticity of housing must be constant across neighborhoods, which suggests that price
might not be a suitable control function for an analysis including exurban and rural areas with high elasticities of
supply. In our application, we focus on the Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is heavily developed with
little opportunity for the construction of new housing.

                                                         14
 with increasing values of θJ > θJ-1 > ... >θ2 >θ1 are also ordered monotonically in terms of neighborhood
 housing prices: pJ >pJ-1 > ... >p2 >p1.
         This monotonicity condition implies that there exists a function f such that θ =f(p). Thus, a non-
 parametric function of neighborhood housing prices can serve as a perfect control function for θ in
 equation (1):


 (8)      y ij = # 1 Z i + f ( p j ) + "i + ! ij


 Given a consistent estimate of f(p) and the additive separability assumptions of the labor market model in
 equation (1), β2 can then be recovered from a simple regression of f(p) on X:


 (9)      fˆ ( p j ) = " 2 X j + # j



 A difficulty remains, however, if equation (8) were estimated via OLS: namely the correlation of f(pj)
!
 with ωi. The remaining correlation between the observed and unobserved portion of equation (8) is due
 directly to the stratification result in the sorting model: simply put, individuals with high permanent
 income have a strong taste for the outcome of interest and choose higher quality neighborhoods and, as a
 result, the direct effect of unobservable individual attributes bias the estimation of equation (8). But this
 correlation leads to a standard endogeneity bias that can be addressed by finding an instrument that is
 correlated with the price of an individual’s neighborhood but not with the individual’s unobserved
 attribute. In the next section, we describe our proposed solution to this problem for our particular
 application. The key insight to take away from the analysis of the sorting equilibrium is that prices can
 serve as a control function for the neighborhood component of the unobservable in the outcome equation
 (1), thereby reducing the identification to the more manageable one of dealing with a single unobservable.


 Implementing the Control Function. In practice, we make two key modifications when including a
 control function in equation (9). First, we include a linear function of housing price rather than a non-
 linear function. This simplification has the advantage of placing the estimations for our example into the
 relatively straightforward world of two-stage least squares rather than considering estimation of non-
 parametric instrumental variables models.
         Second, instead of generating a control function for the full neighborhood quality index θ, we
 instead focus on developing a control function for just the unobservable, leaving β2Xj in the main
 estimating equation. This relaxes the vertical assumption that is imposed by our model in that preferences
 need only be homogeneous over the neighborhood unobservable not for neighborhood quality overall.

                                                      15
Specifically, we estimate a control function for ξj as the average residual for each neighborhood arising
from a simple housing price equation estimated for the entire metropolitan area, see also Seig, Smith,
Banzhaf, and Walsh (2002). The housing price (pij) can be described by


(10)      pij = "1Wij + " 2 X j + ! j + uij


where Wij is a vector of housing unit attributes. Controlling for housing characteristics absorbs out any
aspect of prices that are explained by housing attributes. We do this because we think housing attributes
are a dimension of prices that are unlikely to contribute directly to labor market outcomes. We then
estimate:


(11)     yij = $1 Z i + $ 2 X j + $ 3 #ˆ j + "i + ! ij



where we must deal directly with the correlation of Xj and !ˆ j with ωi.26


Instrumenting for Neighborhood Attributes. To address this correlation we want to instrument for Xj
and λj with a portion of observed neighborhood attributes that are uncorrelated with an individual’s own
unobserved attribute. We propose to use a function of the average values of observed neighborhood prices
for families with the same observable characteristics Zi as instruments: E[ X j , !ˆ | Z ] . The logic behind

these instruments is that (i) the instruments should be predictive of location because similar individuals
should make very similar location choices if they face the same opportunity set (metropolitan housing
market), and (ii) the instruments should not be correlated with the individual’s unobservable because they
are based entirely on individual observables that have already been included directly in the labor market
equation.27
         Most individual and family attributes, such as parent’s education, or family size, are discrete in
nature. For the purpose of developing these instruments, we organize individuals into homogenous cells
based on all possible permutations of the discrete observable attributes that explain an individual’s
outcomes in the labor market. Specifically, the mean neighborhood exposure within an individual’s cell

26
   As in equation (11), the neighborhood attributes including unobserved neighborhood attributes are assumed to
enter the housing price equation (10) in an additively separable manner. This simplification yields tractable
estimation equations and assures that our empirical results are driven strictly by our exclusion restrictions rather than
any specific functional form assumptions.
27
   In principle, one might imagine that individuals in the same cell are similar on unobserved features, such as ability
or tastes, so that the cell members location choices are driven by unobservables that are similar to the unobservables
that drive the individual’s location choice. This possibility is ruled out, however, by the assumption in equation (2)
that individual observables are uncorrelated with individual unobservables.

                                                          16
is used to instrument for the individual’s actual exposure to various neighborhood attributes. The reader
should note that an individual’s actual location attributes are always excluded from the calculation of the
cell exposure rates applied to a specific individual.28 Dahl (2002) develops instruments using a similar
approach based on state of birth and individual attributes for estimating a Roy model, and recent dynamic
programming applications (Gourinchas and Parker (2002), French (2005), French and Jones (2008)) use
very similar sets of instruments. In practice, these cell means are quite predictive of the attributes of an
individual’s actual neighborhood suggesting that are instruments have sufficient power.
         A couple of additional features about this instrument are worth noting.                 First, notice that

E[ X j , !ˆ | Z ] are essentially nonparametric predictions of the observed and unobserved quality of

neighborhood that an individual with a particular set of characteristics Z would choose. In this way, our
IV approach amounts to using a fully non-parametric sorting model to predict each individual’s
neighborhood attributes given her observable characteristics. This empirical strategy exploits the non-
linearities inherent in the sorting process.        That such non-linearities could serve as the basis for
identification of individual outcome equations in the presence of sorting has been key insight of the work
by Brock and Durlauf (2001, 2002, 2005) and has been exploited in closely related work by Bayer and
Timmins (2006). Ekeland, Heckman, and Nesheim (2004), Bajari and Benkhard (2005) and Bajari and
Kahn (2005) use similar sources of identification in the estimation of hedonic models.
         Second, notice that in a single metropolitan housing market this expectation relies on non-
linearities.   If Z were allowed to enter (1) completely flexibly, the instrument would contain no
independent variation. In the application that follows, which is based on data from a single large
metropolitan area, the independent variation in our instrument derives from the fact that we
simultaneously use multiple household characteristics to define the cells upon which our instruments are
based. At the same time, we include each type of characteristic (e.g., education, household structure) only
directly in the outcome equation (1). The effect of neighborhood would be unidentified if the outcome
model included a fixed effect for each of cell of observationally equivalent individuals. It is important to
point, however, that the method that we propose here could easily be extended to multiple metropolitan
areas. In that case, even if fixed effects were included directly in (1) for each household category upon
which the instrument was based, the instrument would have independent variation due to variation in
average location decisions made by identical household types in different metropolitan markets.29




28
    One might worry that we include individuals residing in the same neighborhood as the individual when
calculating the predicted neighborhood attributes to use as instruments. In fact, the opposite is true excluding such
individuals would create a negative correlation between the instrument and the individual’s unobservables that
determine neighborhood choice.
29
   For an example, see Ross and Zenou (In Press).

                                                        17
Allowing for Endogenous Neighborhood Attributes. A final endogeneity issue arises in our application
because some of the neighborhood attributes that we would like to consider are endogenously determined
by the sorting process itself. Specifically, in our baseline specifications, we include measures of the
average educational attainment and percent of households in poverty within the neighborhood in equation
(1). Re-writing equation (10) and (11) here to explicitly include neighborhood averages of certain
individual attributes Z j gives:



(12)     pij = "1Wij + " 2 X j + " 3 Z j + ! j + uij
          !


(13)     yij = $1Z i + $ 2 X j + $ 3 Z j + $ 4#ˆ j + "i + ! ij



Since the sorting process generates a correlation between Zi and ξj it follows immediately that Z j and ξj

will be correlated in an analogous way in equation (12). To estimate equation (12) therefore, we develop
instruments for neighborhood demographic variables using the composition of neighborhoods with
                                                                                               !
similar fixed or exogenous attributes, such as the employment access of the location or the physical
quality of the housing stock in the neighborhood. Since neighborhood attributes tend to be continuous
variables, a distance measure is developed to characterize the degree of similarity between

neighborhoods. The instruments for each Z jm are a weighted average of the Z km ’s for neighborhoods

that are similar to neighborhood j with the weight based on the degree of similarity or proximity (inverse
of the distance in attribute space). Specifically,

         )
(14)     Z j = Meank#" ! jm ( Z k W ( X j , X k ))


where W represents a weighting function based on a non-parametric kernel smoother, such as the tri-cubic

kernel where    W ( X j , X k ) = (1 ! ( D( X j , X k ) / DMax ) 3 ) 3 , D is a distance function, and Dmax is the
maximum distance over which neighborhoods will be considered, see McMillen (1996). The instrument

is exogenous to Z j given the exogeneity of Xj.30 31


30
   The cubic spline requires the specification of a maximum distance at which all locations beyond that distance
have zero weight. This distance was chosen for each block group so that ten percent of all block groups are used to
calculate the average for a given block group. Results are very similar using twenty or five percent of all block
groups. Naturally, the block group itself is not included in this weighted average.
31
   Again, as in the use of aggregation to form instruments for the earlier part of our estimation strategy, the use of
aggregation in a single metropolitan housing market again implies here that the independent variation in our

                                                                 18
         Having estimated equation (12), we then estimate equation (13) using the same strategy outlined
in the previous sub-section, forming instruments based on average neighborhood attributes for households
in the same cell for both exogenous and endogenous neighborhood attributes.


Generalizing Our Simple Sorting Model. A key assumption underlying the simple sorting model that
we outlined in Section 3 is that individuals are 1. homogeneous in their preferences for neighborhood
quality after conditioning on permanent income and 2. neighborhood quality can be characterized by a
single dimension that affects both labor market outcomes and the utility derived from residing in the
neighborhood in the same way.
         Relaxing the first assumption creates a situation where individuals will sort across communities
based on their preferences. Certainly, if individuals sort over preferences for neighborhood quality, the
observable portion of permanent income, and the unobservable portion of permanent income, a more
complex sorting pattern will emerge. However, as long as preferences are positively correlated with
permanent income, sorting over communities based on preferences will simply reinforce the implications
of sorting over communities based solely on permanent income.
         The second assumption is crucial since it is for this reason that a flexible function of
neighborhood housing prices makes a perfect control function for θ, the neighborhood contribution to the
production of y. To the extent that households instead value multiple dimensions of neighborhood quality,
a flexible function of neighborhood housing prices will no longer serve as a perfect control function for θ.
         So, how severe of a problem is this second assumption for our proposed methodology? The first
thing to note is that if other dimensions of neighborhood quality that affect household consumption are
observable, they can be first conditioned out of neighborhood housing prices in a first stage hedonic price
regression.32 This is the reason, for example, that we condition on housing attributes in estimating
equations (10) and (11) and separately estimate the effect of observed neighborhood attributes on labor
market outcomes.       In our application, the model need only be one-dimensional in the unobserved
neighborhood attributes.33 If, on the other hand, households value another dimension of neighborhood
quality that is unobserved, the control function approach that we propose will no longer work perfectly.
In that case, our proposed method will work only as well as housing prices are indeed correlated with that



instrument derives from nonlinearities. It is again important to point, however, that the method that we propose here
could easily be extended to multiple metropolitan areas, where again independent variation in the instrument would
arise naturally due to across market variation. See the Identification sub-section below for more discussion of this
point.
32
   If these other neighborhood attributes are exogenous, this first stage regression can be estimated via OLS. If they
are endogenous, instruments would need to be used in the first-stage regression analogous to those discussed in the
previous sub-section of the paper.
33
   If the theoretical model were to hold over all attributes, observable and unobservable, the coefficients in the price
and outcome equations must be same, at least within a scalar multiple.

                                                          19
aspect of neighborhood quality that affects the outcomes of interest. In our application, we seek to
control directly for a wide enough set of variables that affect housing prices but not labor market
outcomes (e.g., housing attributes) in the estimation of the first-stage hedonic price regression so that this
issue is not first-order.


Robustness and Identification. It is important that the reader be aware of the strengths and limitations
of this identification strategy. The instruments used for neighborhood contribution in both the labor
market outcome and housing price/rent models make intuitive sense. In the individual sample, the
exposure of observationally equivalent individuals are used to instrument for the individual’s exposure to
specific neighborhood attributes, and similarly the demographic composition of neighborhoods with
observationally similar environmental variables, primarily housing stock composition, is used to
instrument for a neighborhood’s demographic composition in the sample of housing units. Since these
instruments are based on observable characteristics of individuals and neighborhoods, they should be
orthogonal to individual and neighborhood unobservables, respectively.
         As discussed earlier, the instruments exploit the highly non-linear relationship that is likely to
arise between observable attributes and sorting outcomes. The models are identified because some non-
linear terms are excluded from the second stage labor market and housing price regressions. We attempt
to address concerns with this identification strategy in a number of ways. First, the labor market models
are expanded to include important non-linearities, e.g., the interaction of gender with family structure.
Further, we rerun the analyses dropping individuals with high levels of human capital with the
expectation that these individuals benefit less from neighborhood level information on the labor market.
Both of these changes substantially modify the variation in the data that indentifies the estimated
coefficients for neighborhood variables, and we would expect the results to be unstable and move in
unexpected directions in response to these changes. Similarly, we conduct additional analyses that
control for the actual neighborhood housing stock composition in the housing price and labor market
equations.    As above, we would expect spurious estimates to be quite sensitive to including such
variables, which are likely to soak up a substantial amount of information associated with neighborhood
unobservables. These tests are analogous to standard overidentification tests.34
         We also posit that the influence of neighborhood on household capital income is likely to be
much smaller than the neighborhood effect on labor market outcomes. We regress outcomes concerning
capital income on the same set of individual and neighborhood variables using both ordinary least squares

34
   Overidentification tests implicitly test whether models based on subsets of exclusion restrictions can be
distinguished statistically from a model that uses all exclusion restrictions. If so, one or more of the identifying
restrictions represent misspecifications of the second stage model. In our case, we are eliminating exclusion
restrictions by including more information in the model, as well as by dropping sets of observations that provide
additional identifying information in order to test whether the empirical estimates are robust.

                                                        20
and our instrumental variables specification. If our identification strategy is valid, we would expect that
neighborhood variables exhibit a high correlation with capital income using OLS models due to sorting,
but much smaller effects using our IV specification.
        Finally, the reader should be aware of the implications of the key exogeneity assumptions made
in equation (2). The exogeneity assumption for individual variables Zi is fairly straight forward and well
understood in the literature. The impact of an individual variable like education level is likely to capture
the influence of both education and any individual unobserved attributes, such as motivation, that are
correlated with education. The exogeneity assumption for neighborhood variables is similar for a variable
that is considered fixed Xj. For example, good job access may be correlated with some negative aspects of
neighborhood quality, and therefore capture both positive effect of job access and the ambiguous effect of
the portion of unobserved neighborhood quality that is correlated with job access in the population of
neighborhoods.


4. An Empirical Example: The Effect of Neighborhood on Labor Market Outcomes.
        Before presenting the results of our analysis, we begin with a brief summary of the results of
previous studies have examined the relationship between neighborhood environment and employment
outcomes. This summary serves the dual purposes of putting our own results in context and helping to
explain our choice of the variables on which we focus describing our results.
        The spatial mismatch hypothesis, first proposed by Kain (1968), has spawned innumerable
studies that find that job access is positively correlated with employment and/or labor market earnings.
Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist (1990) and Raphael (1998), for example, find that youth residing far from
suburban areas where low skill jobs tend to be locatedand where new jobs tend to be created had worse
employment outcomes. Other research has centered on the impact of the characteristics and behavior of
neighbors on labor market outcomes. Case and Katz (1991), for example, find a correlation between
youth idleness and the idleness of neighbors, while O’Regan and Quigley (1998) find that youth are more
likely to be high school dropouts and unemployed when they reside in high poverty neighborhoods.
Weinberg, Reagan and Yankow (2004) find that people who move to neighborhoods with worse attributes
have worse employment outcomes, and Ioannides and Zanella (2008) find that movers choices are
consistent with neighborhoods having an impact children’s outcomes 35
        Many scholars have suggested job market referrals or information networks as an important
factor behind such neighborhood effects.36 Rees and Schultz (1970), Corcoran et al. (1980), Holzer

35
   These papers represent a small sample of very large literatures. For broader surveys of these literatures, see
Durlauf (2004), Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist (1998), Ellen and Turner (1997), and Mayer (1996)
36
   The use of informal channels such as referrals by employers can be rationalized as a means to reduce the
uncertainty regarding the quality of a prospective employee. Montgomery (1991) was the first to formally model a
labor market in which both formal and informal hiring channels coexist. Focusing more closely on the information

                                                       21
(1988), Blau and Robbins (1990), Blau (1992), Granovetter (1995), Addison and Portugal (2001) and
Wahba and Zenou (2003) all document the importance of referrals and other informal hiring channels in
the labor market, using both U.S. and non-U.S. data. A number of these studies including Holzer (1988)
and Blau and Robbins (1990) find that informal referrals are more productive than more formal methods
in terms of job offer and acceptance probabilities. Additional studies including Datcher (1983), Devine
and Kiefer (1991), Marmaros and Sacerdote (2002), and Loury (2004) find evidence that use of informal
networks increases the quality of the match as captured by job tenure or earnings.37
        Further, this literature suggests that the effect of referrals varies considerably across different
demographic groups. In terms of intensity of usage, workers with less education and located in high
poverty rate neighborhoods are more likely to use informal contacts (Elliot, 1999), men use referral
networks more intensively than women (Corcoran et al., 1980), and Hispanic men use networks more
intensively than non-Hispanic white men (Smith, 2000). The productivity of networks also appear to
differ across groups with high success rates observed for men relative to women (Bortnick and Ports,
1992) and blacks relative to whites (Bortnick and Ports, 1992; Korenman and Turner, 1996; Holzer
(1987). In addition, Bayer, Ross, and Topa (2004) find that both college educated workers and high
school drop-outs benefit less than high school graduates from block level employment referrals.38 They
also find that workers with children of similar age are more likely to successfully share employment
referral information, and married women are least likely to successfully share employment referral
information with each other. Ioannides and Loury (2004) provide a detailed review of this literature.
        A relationship between labor market outcomes and neighborhood attributes may exist for a
variety of reasons and may reflect multiple causal mechanisms.                 The most commonly discussed
mechanisms in the literatures cited above involve information barriers to job search and the significance
of informal job market referrals. Residential locations that are far from employment concentrations or
have high concentrations of individuals who are not strongly attached to the labor market may provide job
searchers with little opportunities for mentoring or for gathering information concerning potential job
openings. On the other hand, a high quality neighborhood may provide the individual with neighborhood
amenities that are complementary to leisure or may expose individuals to lower risk of adverse events that


exchange among workers, Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2002) analyze an explicit network model of job search in
which agents receive random offers and decide whether to use them themselves or pass them on to their unemployed
contacts depending on their own employment status and current wage.
37
   See Elliot (1999) and Loury (2003) for counter examples where the use of informal networks led to lower wages.
Of course, the lower wages may be associated with increased match quality on desirable job attributes causing the
individual to accept a lower wage as a compensating differential.
38
   This finding also is consistent with assortive models of social interactions where non-college graduates use
informal networks intensively, but college graduates are not part of that network. See Bertrand, Luttmer, and
Mullainathan (2000), Aizer and Currie (2004), Arcidiacono and Vigdor (2004), and Weinberg (2005) for similar
examples relating to welfare participation, prenatal care use, social interactions at elite universities, and social
interactions among high school students, respectively.

                                                        22
influence labor market productivity or behavior. For example, Kling, Liebman and Katz (2005) find that
moving to a low poverty rate neighborhood improves the mental and physical health of housing voucher
recipients in the Moving to Opportunity Study (MTO). In fact, the MTO study findings also suggest that
there could be multiple mechanisms at work in the relationship between neighborhood and labor market
outcomes.    MTO implies substantial neighborhood effects on health for voucher recipients, but no
influence on labor market outcomes while many studies document a positive influence of mental and
physical health on labor market outcomes.39 The results from MTO and studies of health and the labor
market can only be consistent if there are other influences of neighborhood poverty among MTO
recipients that depress labor market activity.
        Drawing on the existing literature, we first focus on three core variables: employment access
drawing on the spatial mismatch literature, percent poverty which is a standard measure of neighborhood
quality, and percent of college graduates which was intended to proxy for the density of human capital in
the neighborhood, but appears to capture either non-linearities in neighborhood referrals or unobserved
neighborhood amenities that are associated with a demand for leisure. In addition, we also extend the
model to consider the effect of minority and immigrant population shares.


Sample, Control Variables, and Geography The sample of prime age adults (age 25 to 59) are
drawn from confidential Long Form files of the 1990 Decennial Census for the Boston
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).             The sample drops a small number of non-Hispanic
individuals whose race is not defined as white, African-American, or Asian and Pacific Islander,
as well as households residing in census tracts where employment access is not defined resulting
in a sample of approximately 178,000 individuals.40
        The bulk of the analysis considers three variables to describe labor market outcomes: labor force
participation last week, average number of weeks worked last year conditional on working any weeks,
and average hours worked per week last year conditional on having worked at least 40 weeks per year. 41
Three additional labor market variables are also considered that are likely to be behaviorally related to the
preceding variables:     whether the individual worked any weeks last year, employment last week
conditional on being a participant in the labor market, and hours worked last week if employed, see Table

39
   For some recent examples, See Smith (2003, 1999), Case, Lubotsky, Paxson (2002), Ettner, Frank, Kessler
(1997).
40
   The sample contained approximately 700 non-Hispanic individuals who did not fit into one of these racial
categories. About 250 individuals resided in block groups where employment access is not defined. See Bayer,
Ross, and Topa (2004) for more details on the confidential census data.
41
   The last two variables are truncated creating the potential for sample selection bias. As discussed above, our
empirical estimates are intended to represent reduced form estimates purged of bias due to sorting and the estimates
on neighborhood variables are consistent regardless of any selection or endogeneity bias in the estimates on
individual attributes.

                                                        23
1.   It also should be noted that the exact sample for individual outcome variables varies because
individuals are dropped from the analysis sample when an outcome is imputed.
         For the purpose of describing employment outcomes as well as identifying observationally
equivalent individuals, adults in the sample are described by series of categorical control variables (Z)
capturing the individual’s education (4), age (3), race and ethnicity (4), household structure (6), gender
(2), and immigration status (3) where the numbers in parentheses represent the number of categories. The
labor market models also contain key interactions of gender with marital status and presence of children
to address well-known aspects of female labor force participation in the United States. These variables
are also used to create categories based on all permutations of the categorical variables giving rise to
1,718 cells. All prime age adults that belong to the same cell ( ! ) as the individual (excepting the
individual and their family members of course) are used to calculate average neighborhood attributes.
The sample contains households falling into 1,632 cells, and after dropping cells with less than 10
households to reduce measurement error the final sample contains households in 996 cells.                        This
restriction reduces the sample by less than 3,000 individuals and has no effect on any of the empirical
results presented in the paper.
         Each household and its members reside in a housing unit, and the location of that unit is geo-
coded to one of approximately 2,600 census block group in the Boston Metropolitan Area. The
neighborhood is described by the following block group characteristics:                 percent of households in
poverty, percent of individuals who are college graduates, percent individuals who are disadvantage
minorities (African-American or Hispanic), and percent of individuals who were not born in the U.S.; as
well as a job access measure calculated at the census tract level. The job access measure is based on an
average of jobs in the same age and education category as the individual where the average is weighted
based on the average commute time between the individual’s residence and potential employment
locations. The weights are based on the coefficient estimates arising from a gravity model, see O’Reagan
and Quigley (1998).42
         A proxy for unobserved neighborhood attributes is calculated as the block group mean residual
from a housing price hedonic regression. These residuals are obtained by regressing the logarithm of
house price and/or rent (depending upon whether owner-occupied or not) on the physical attributes of
each unit: number of bedrooms, number of rooms, age of the unit, whether the unit is single family,
whether a multi-family with 10 to 19 units, and whether multi-family with 20 or more units, as well as the


42
   The gravity model is estimated by regressing the logarithm of the number of workers commuting between two
locations on the logarithms of the workers at the origination, of the jobs at the destination, and of the commute time
between those locations. Typically, location combinations are dropped when no flows are observed between two
locations, which can lead to a noisy measure of employment access at the census tract level. In order to mitigate this
noise, we use the logarithm of one plus the flows and impute commute times using a non-parametric kernal
smoother based on the cubic spline.

                                                         24
neighborhood composition variables described above.43 As discussed earlier, the neighborhood
composition arises from a household sorting process and is endogenous to location unobservables.
Therefore, the housing price/rent equation is estimated using instrumental variables, and the instruments
are constructed as weighted averages of the demographic composition of similar neighborhoods based on
the following neighborhood housing stock variables: percent owner-occupied units, percent single family
units, percent large multi-family units (greater than 20 units), percent 1 bedroom or studio units, percent 4
plus bedroom units, average age of housing stock, presence of group quarters, as well as employment
access are used as instruments.


Baseline Models Table 2 presents the results for the OLS and IV estimations of the relationship between
individual and neighborhood attributes and being in the labor market, weeks worked last year if working
last year, and average hours worked per week if worked at least 40 weeks last year, respectively. 44 The
specifications presented control for individual attributes plus employment access, poverty rate, and
percent of residents who graduated with a college degree from a four-year institution.                      The IV
specification also includes a control for neighborhood unobservables based on housing prices and rents in
each block group.45
        Focusing on the estimates for neighborhood variables, the estimated impact of neighborhood
attributes are substantially larger than the OLS estimates.               Specifically, the positive impact of
employment access increases dramatically for all three employment outcomes so that a one standard
deviation increase in employment access implies a two percentage point increase in the likelihood of
labor force participation, a one and a third of a week increase in number of weeks worked in a year, and a
two and a half hour increase in hours worked per week. The negative impact of a one standard deviation
increase in the poverty rate is a seven percentage point lower labor force participation rate and one week
less work during the year with the impact on hours being positive and statistically insignificant. The
neighborhood unobservables are also associated with more labor force participation, weeks, and hours.
        The percent college educated is negatively associated with all three outcomes. This finding is


43
   The model is fully interactive allowing all coefficients on hedonic attributes to vary by owner-occupancy, and the
logarithmic transformation allows the difference between monthly flows (rent) and value (house value) to be
captured by the owner-occupancy dummy. A common dummy variable is estimated for each neighborhood using all
housing units in that neighborhood whether rental or owner-occupied. The use of a common variable to capture
neighborhood quality regardless of owner-occupancy status seems reasonable given the small geographic area
considered implying that all housing units that share a fixed effect are located in close proximity with each other.
44
   The estimates for individual attributes also appear reasonable. Focusing on labor force participation, males have
higher participation rates, participation falls between 45 and 59, participation rises with education, increases for
married males especially with kids, and decreases for married females especially with young children.
45
   As mentioned earlier, the expected neighborhood exposure based cell averages is quite predictive of an
individual’s actual neighborhood exposure suggesting that our instruments have sufficient power. As discussed
earlier, several robust checks, comparable to overidentification tests, are conducted in order to assess whether our
estimates are robust to eliminating various sources of identifying information.

                                                        25
consistent with previous findings that labor market referrals are used less intensively by individuals with
higher levels of education (Ioannides and Loury, 2004) and that college educated individuals may both
benefit less from and contribute less to informal job networks (Bayer, Ross, and Topa, 2004).
Alternatively, percent college educated may capture local amenities that are complementary to leisure and
non-market home production activities. For example, individuals residing in locations with neighbors
who have a higher level of education may simply enjoy working less and spending more time at home.
As discussed, this explanation might help explain why Moving to Opportunity finds a positive impact of
neighborhood on health, but no impact of neighborhood on labor market outcomes. Presumably, the
lower poverty rates lead to superior health outcomes and an associated increase in labor market potential,
but the exposure to more college educated individuals decreases labor market outcomes.
        The finding that OLS estimates of neighborhood effects are biased downwards is consistent with
the hypothesis that individuals with poor unobservables in terms of labor market outcomes compensate
for these unobservables by sorting into locations with better employment prospects. Specifically, the bias
in OLS is consistent with neighborhood quality being negatively correlated with individual unobserved
attributes that contribute to labor market success. In the neighborhood effects literature, researchers have
often expected to find positive selection where high quality workers reside in high quality locations.
While this view makes considerable sense when considering the demand for neighborhood amenities
related to quality of life, it is less clear that positive selection will arise on variables that impact labor
market participation, such as employment access or the quality of informal job networks. High skill
workers with strong attachment to the labor market may be less willing than workers with weak labor
market attachment to give up neighborhood quality of life amenities in exchange for access to urban
environments with good labor market information and low job search costs.
        Table 3 presents the results for alternative education subsamples with the first panel presenting
the full sample results and the next two panels containing subsamples after dropping individuals with
four-year college degrees or dropping individuals with two or more years of college, respectively. The
effect of employment access and poverty on labor force participation increases in magnitude as high
human capital individuals are eliminated from the sample.             This pattern should be expected if the
influence of employment access and poverty on labor force participation is driven primarily by
neighborhood contributions to job networks. Similarly, the effect of poverty on weeks worked increases
in magnitude, and the effect of poverty on hours becomes negative but is still insignificant.46 On the other
hand, the negative effect of employment access on weeks per year and hours per week worked is quite
stable as college educated workers are dropped from the sample. This result is not very surprising. The


46
  This suggests a larger positive effect of poverty on hours for the college educated. This finding may represent a
neighborhood amenities story with high education individuals disliking spending time at home when they reside in
high poverty rate neighborhoods and responding to this dislike by working more hours.

                                                        26
models are estimated for people who are already in the labor market so that the influence of job access is
likely to represent costs associated with commuting to an existing job. Commuting costs are often
primarily time costs, which actually rise with human capital levels.47 Table 4 presents a similar exercise
dropping white collar workers and shows that the importance of employment access for labor force
participation is larger for non-white collar workers.
        The negative effect of percent college educated on labor force participation falls for lower skill
populations. This effect might be expected to increase in magnitude if this relationship was driven by the
availability of job market referrals since non-college graduates would appear to be least likely to benefit
from referrals provided by college graduates. The decline in the variable’s effect for populations with
lower human capital may reflect a lower demand for these neighborhood amenities among low human
capital individuals and therefore less substitution towards leisure among non-college educated. Again,
Table 4 mirrors the results for education with non-white collar workers experiencing a smaller negative
relationship between the presence of college graduates in a neighborhood and labor force participation.
        Table 5 presents estimates for subsamples based on gender and family structure. The table
focuses on a series of subsamples that are designed to represent increased attachment to the labor market
by first dropping married females with children from the sample, then dropping all married females, and
finally dropping all females from the sample and focusing only on prime-age males. The results are quite
striking. All estimates for the four neighborhood variables decline in magnitude and many become
statistically insignificant suggesting that women and especially married women are driving our findings.
As in Tables 3 and 4, this table further supports the idea that neighborhoods matter most for the labor
market activity of individuals who are not strongly attached to the labor market.


Decomposing the Effects of the Identification Strategy            Table 6 presents the estimates on the
neighborhood variables for a series of specifications. The first column presents the results from OLS, and
the second column presents the results from a second stage estimation where the neighborhood fixed
effects from labor market models are regressed upon neighborhood variables. The third column contains
estimates for a simple instrumental variable model where the three neighborhood variables are predicted
using the expected exposure level based on observationally equivalent individuals. The final three
columns add a housing price residual from a simple housing price hedonic using ordinary least squares,
instrument for that residual based on observationally equivalent individuals, and finally instrument for an
unbiased residual arising from using IV in the housing price/rent model.
        The main conclusion arising from this table is that the increase in the importance of neighborhood
variables arises from instrumenting for those variables in order to break the link between those

47
  See Ross and Zenou (2004) for a study that examines the relationship between commute time and labor market
outcomes.

                                                        27
neighborhood variables and the individual unobservable. The two stage fixed effect estimates look
nothing like the results from the IV specification, and the IV specifications are broadly similar in terms of
the effect of observed neighborhood attributes. In addition, the housing price residual does not matter
until an instrument is used to break the correlation between those neighborhood unobservables and
individual unobservables. The overall effect of neighborhood appears to be smaller in the final IV
specification as compared the intermediate IV specifications suggesting that the effect of neighborhood
may in some cases be overstated when the model does not correctly control for sorting over location
specific unobservables.
        As discussed earlier, these findings are consistent with a compensation strategy where individuals
with lower likelihoods of employment seek out neighborhoods that provide the best opportunity for
employment. Of course, the negative correlation between individual labor market unobservables and
neighborhood contribution to labor market outcomes may be driven by tastes over neighborhood
attributes. For example, individuals with poor labor market unobservables may also exhibit the weakest
preference for positive amenities associated with neighborhoods that have poor job access or attract a
large number of college graduates based on their housing stock, and as a result these individuals reside in
neighborhoods that provide better job market opportunities. On the other hand, the influence of location
unobservables appears to arise from positive selection where individuals with high taste observables
reside in neighborhoods with positive neighborhood unobservables in terms of labor market outcomes.


Exploring Neighborhood Determinants Table 7 presents a series of specifications starting with no
neighborhood controls except for the housing market residual and then expanding the list of controls to
add poverty, employment access, percent with a four-year college education, percent disadvantaged
minorities, and finally percent not born in the United States in sequence. A unique set of neighborhood
housing price residuals is constructed for each specification where the residual is conditional on the same
set of neighborhood controls that were included in the labor market equation. For example, in the no
neighborhood control specification, the housing price regression contains no neighborhood controls, and
the housing price residual captures the net impact of all aspects of neighborhood quality that are reflected
in housing prices.
        The key finding of a large negative impact of poverty on labor force participation and weeks
worked is quite robust across specifications. The estimated coefficients are similar in magnitude whether
or not the specification includes employment access and percent college educated and the magnitude
increases with the inclusion of the share minority and immigrant because those neighborhood variables,
especially share immigrant, appear to be associated with higher levels of work on all three measures.
Neighborhoods with a high share of immigrants may provide especially fertile ground for job referrals
and other aspects of the informal job search process. The positive impact of employment access on weeks

                                                     28
worked and hours appears robust, but the magnitude declines as the share minority and immigrant
variables are included. Employment access appears to have no impact on labor force participation after
including the minority and immigration composition variables.48 The negative relationship between
percent college educated and labor market outcomes is very stable for all three outcome variables.
         The estimated coefficient on neighborhood quality is much smaller in magnitude for all three
labor market outcomes and negative for weeks and hours worked in the model that does not contain any
other neighborhood variables. In this model, the neighborhood quality variable captures the net effect of
neighborhood given the correlation between different factors that arise in equilibrium, and this net affect
appears to be smaller than the individual effects of neighborhood attributes and ambiguous in sign. In
equilibrium, the share of college graduates is negatively correlated with poverty rates, and yet both
variables reduce the rate and intensity of labor force participation. In practice, they likely cancel out
leading to little net influence of neighborhood quality (as captured by price) on labor market outcomes.
Once the college degree variable is included, the sign on the housing price residual is consistently positive
and the estimated magnitudes are quite stable. Whether the variable captures the low referral contribution
of college graduates or consumption amenities that increase the demand for leisure, the inclusion of this
variable separates two sets of neighborhood unobservables that are both positively correlated with price
based measures of neighborhood quality, but have conflicting impacts on labor market outcomes.


Additional Validation and Robustness Efforts Table 8 presents estimates of the relationship between
capital income and neighborhood variables in order to see whether our identification strategy implies
unrealistically large impacts of neighborhood attributes on capital income. Such findings would suggest
that our identification strategy is flawed. Capital income is very noisy and attempts to estimate linear
models of capital income did not provide credible estimates on individual attributes. For example, these
analyses found no statistically significant relationship between age or education and capital income. In
order to mitigate the effect of noise in the self-reported capital income, we focus on three binary
variables, which were defined as zero if the individual had between zero capital income and some positive
threshold, one if they had capital income above that threshold, and missing if capital income is not
reported, imputed or negative. The three thresholds used are $0, $1,000, and $3,000.
         Employment access, percent college educated, and in some cases poverty are all correlated with
capital income as indicated by the simple OLS regressions. The estimates on neighborhood variables
from the instrumental variable specifications are always statistically insignificant and almost always
smaller that the estimates arising from OLS. The one exception is the coefficient on poverty in the model

48
  The fact that the employment access estimates may not be robust to the inclusion of additional neighborhood
variables should not be surprising. Remember, unlike the neighborhood demographic composition variables, job
access is assumed exogenous to neighborhood unobservables, which will lead bias due to omitted minority and
immigration variables if job access is correlated with omitted neighborhood variables that attract those populations.

                                                         29
for whether capital income is above $3,000. Even for this estimate, the magnitude of the effect is quite
small with a one standard deviation in poverty leading to a less than one percent change in likelihood of
having capital income above $3,000.49
        Table 9 presents the results for three alternative indicators of labor market outcomes: whether
worked any weeks last year, whether employed last week, and number of hours worked last week if
employed. These variables parallel the three dependent variables used for most of the analysis with
worked last year capturing behaviors related to labor force participation, employed last week capturing
the risk of unemployment that might reduce the number of week worked in any year, and hours last week
capturing behaviors similar to those captured by average hours worked per week last year. The first panel
contains the results for the original three outcome variables and the second contains the results for these
three alternative variables.    The estimated effects of neighborhood attributes based on the original
variables and based on the alternative dependent variables are quite similar.50
        Table 10 incorporates a control for the quality of the housing stock in a neighborhood, which is
an aggregation of the same housing stock variables used to instrument for neighborhood composition
variables. The original IV specification and the specification that includes this control for housing stock
are shown side by side. A quick comparison confirms that the magnitudes of all estimated coefficients
are quite stable to the inclusion of a housing stock control into both the labor market and housing
price/rent models. The reader should note that the model includes the actual housing stock rather than an
instrument based on the exposure of observationally equivalent households. The inclusion of the housing
stock control is intended to assure that the housing price residual is identified by unexplained variation in
housing prices rather than a housing stock exclusion restriction, and the large and significant coefficient
estimate on housing stock represents sorting bias rather than any direct effect of neighborhood housing
stock on labor market outcomes.51


5. Summary and Conclusions
        In this paper, we consider the general problem of identifying the effect of individual and group
attributes on individual outcomes in a model that allows for both individual and group unobservables.
We begin by using a simple vertical model of sorting to highlight the complex set of correlations that
arise even in a simple model of residential location choice. We then offer a non-parametric solution to


49
   A reader might question whether the increasingly positive coefficient on poverty in the IV specification might
represent a trend and become large and significant for higher thresholds. We examined models with higher capital
income thresholds and did not find any such trend.
50
   The participation and hours variables are directly comparable to each other in magnitude. The estimates in the
employment and weeks worked equations are not, but one can verify that the relative magnitudes of the coefficient
estimates from the two models are quite close.
51
   Results are also robust to a model that instruments for housing stock, and in that model housing stock is not
statistically significant.

                                                       30
this identification problem that is grounded in the structure of vertical sorting equilibria. In particular, we
exploit the monotonic relationship between neighborhood housing prices and neighborhood quality in
equilibrium to show that a flexible function of neighborhood housing prices serves as a suitable control
function for the neighborhood unobservable in the labor market outcome regression. By including this
control function, we eliminate the group unobservable from the regression, thereby reducing the problem
to a more standard selection problem with a single individual-level unobservable.
        To address this more standard selection problem, we use aggregation to develop suitable
instruments for both exogenous and endogenous group attributes. Instrumenting for each individual’s
observed neighborhood attributes with the average neighborhood attributes of a set of observationally
identical individuals eliminates the portion of the variation in neighborhood attributes due to sorting on
unobserved individual attributes.
        To illustrate our proposed methodology, we estimate a wide variety of labor market models using
confidential data on the Boston Metropolitan Area from the 1990 census long form. We find that
neighborhood has large and complex affects on labor market outcomes. Employment access, low levels
of poverty, a low fraction of college graduates, and high levels of unobserved neighborhood attributes are
all associated with higher levels of labor force participation, greater number of weeks worked in a year,
and with the exception of poverty greater average number of hours worked per week. The estimated
effects of neighborhood variables are economically meaningful with for example a one standard deviation
increase in employment access leading to approximately a four percentage point increase in labor force
participation in the subsample of individuals who have never attended college. Moreover, the estimated
effects are substantially larger than estimates arising from ordinary least squares suggesting that
individuals with a lower likelihood of obtaining employment have sorted into locations with superior
labor market opportunities potentially to compensate for their poor unobservables. It is notable that the
core results in the paper are robust across many outcomes variables and a wide variety of specifications.
        As expected, the positive impact of low neighborhood poverty rates and good job access on labor
force participation increases as high human capital individuals or white collar workers are deleted from
the sample. The existing literature suggests that these individuals are least likely to benefit from informal
labor market referral networks. On the other hand, the positive impact of good job access on the intensity
of labor force participation as captured by weeks per year and hours per week does not change as the
human capital level of the sample falls. This finding may in part be due to the fact that high human
capital individuals have a high cost of time and therefore may substitute away from work as commutes
increase. The effects over gender are even more striking all findings decline in magnitude and many
become statistically insignificant as married women and eventually all women are deleted from the
sample. Overall, the results indicate that neighborhood effects are most important for individuals with
weak attachment to the labor market, especially married women.

                                                      31
        While the effect of individual variables appears large, the net effect of neighborhood quality is
actually quite small as illustrated by the model that just includes one variable for neighborhood quality.
This finding appears to be driven by the strong negative effect of the percent of college graduates in a
neighborhood on labor market outcomes. Neighborhoods with low poverty rates and other attributes that
positively impact labor market outcomes appear correlated with the percent of college graduates in
equilibrium. These competing effects lead to small and sometimes negative relationships between
overall neighborhood quality and various labor market outcomes, which is consistent with findings in the
Moving to Opportunity program that improvements in neighborhoods quality had little or no impact on
earnings.    Moreover, these findings help explain a puzzle in the MTO results. Voucher recipients in
MTO experience improved health outcomes, but do not experience the improvement in labor market
outcomes often associated with improvements in physical and mental health. The positive effects of
improved health on labor market potential may have been counteracted by other influences of
neighborhood that lead to reduced labor supply.
        These findings suggest that a richer understanding of the relationship between neighborhood and
economic self-sufficiency is required to address the high unemployment rates and low incomes occurring
in poor, central city neighborhoods. High poverty rate neighborhoods appear to have a large negative
affect on labor market outcomes, especially for low human capital populations. This large effect might be
attributable in part to the negative impacts of high poverty locations on health and emotional well being
found in the Moving to Opportunity program. Future mobility programs should take into account the
possibility that small net effects of neighborhood quality hide large positive and negative impacts on labor
market outcomes. For example, the potential negative impact of moving on informal referral networks
may in part be offset by increased provision of formal job search support.


References

Addison, John T. and Pedro Portugal. 2002. Job Search Methods and Outcomes. Oxford Economics
        Papers, 54 (3), 505-33.
Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie. 2004. Networks or Neighborhoods? Correlations in the Use of Publicly-
        Funded Maternity Care in California. Journal of Public Economics, 88 (12), 2573-85.
Ananat, Elizabeth. 2007. The Wrong Side(s) of the Tracks: Estimating the Causal Effects of Segregation
        on City Outcomes. NBER Working Paper #13343.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin. 1996. Identification of Causal Effects Using
        Instrumental Variables Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434), 444-455.
Arcidiacono, Peter and Jacob Vigdor. 2004. On the Value of Inter-Racial Contact and Affirmative Action
        as a Means to Achieve It. Duke University unpublished manuscript.
Bajari, Patrick, and Lanier Benkard. 2005. Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Consumers and
        Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach Journal of Political Economy, 113(6),
        1239-76.




                                                    32
Bajari, Patrick, and Matthew Kahn. 2005. Estimating Housing Demand with and Application to
        Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 23(1), 20-
        33.
Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, Kim Rueben. 2005. An Equilibrium Model of Sorting in an Urban
        Housing Markets. NBER Working Paper No. 10865
Bayer, Patrick, Stephen L. Ross, Giorgio Topa. In Press. Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal
        Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy,
Bayer, Patrick and Christopher Timmons. 2005. On the Equilibrium Properties of Locational Sorting
        Models. Journal of Urban Economics, 57(3), 462-77.
Bayer, Patrick and Christopher Timmons. 2006. Estimating Equilibrium Models of Sorting across
        Locations. Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Benabou, Roland. 1993. The Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production. Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 108(3), 619-52.
Benabou, Roland. 1996. Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of
        Community Structure and School Finance, American Economic Review, 86(3), 584-609.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2000. Network Effects and Welfare
        Cultures. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 1019-55.
Blau, David and Phillip Robbins. 1990. Job Search Outcomes for the Employed and Unemployed.
        Journal of Political Economy, 98 (3), 637-55
Blau, David. 1992. An Empirical Analysis of Employed and Unemployed Job Search Behavior, Industrial
        and Labor Relations Review, 45, 738-52.
Bortnick, Steven and Michelle Ports. 1992. Job Search Methods and Results: Tracking the Unemployed,
        Monthly Labor Review, 115(12), 29-35.
Brock, William A. and Stephen N. Durlauf. 2006. Identification of Binary Choice Models with Social
        Interactions. Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Brock, William A. and Stephen N. Durlauf. 2005. A Multinomial Choice Model with Social Interactions. In
        L. Blume, S. Durlauf eds., The Economy as and Evolving Complex System III, Oxford: Oxford
        University Press: New York, 175-206
Brock, William A. and Stephen N. Durlauf. 2002. A Multinomial Choice Model of Neighborhood Effects.
        American Economic Review, 92, 298-303.
Brock, William A. and Steven N. Durlauf. 2001. Discrete choice with social interactions. Review of
        Economic Studies, 68, 235-260.
Calvo-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew O. Jackson. 2004. The Effects of Social Networks on Employment
        and Inequality, American Economic Review, 94 (3), 426-54.
Calvo-Armengol, Antoni, Eleonora Patacchini and Yves Zenou. In Press. Peer Effects and Socail
        Networks in Education, Review of Economic Studies.
Card, David and Jesse Rothstein. 2007. Racial Segregation and the Black-White Test Score Gap, Journal of
        Public Economics,
Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
        Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths. NBER Working Paper No. 3705.
Case, Anne C., Darren Lubotsky, Chris Paxson. 2002. Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The
        Origin of the Gradient. American Economic Review, 92, 1308-1334.
Corcoran, Mary, Linda Datcher and Greg Duncan. 1980. Information and Influence Networks in Labor
        Markets, in Five Thousand American Families: Patterns of Economic Progress, edited by Greg
        Duncan and James Morgan, 7, 1-37, Ann Arbor, MI: Institute For Social Research.
Cutler, David and Edward Glaeser. 1997. Are Ghettos Good or Bad? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        112, 827-872.
Dahl, Gordon. 2002. Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple Markets.
        Econometrica, 70, 2367-420.
Durlauf, Steven. 2004. Neighborhood Effects. In The Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
        Volume 4: Cities and Geography, edited by V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse. Elsevier Science/North
        Holland

                                                  33
Devine, Theresa and Nicholas Kiefer. 1991. Empirical Labor Economics: The Search Approach, New
         York: Oxford University Press.
Ekeland, Ivar, James Heckman, and Lars Nesheim. 2004. Identification and Estimation of Hedonic
         Models. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1.2), S60-S108.
Elliot, James. 1999. Social Isolation and Labor Market Isolation: Network and Neighborhood Effects on
         Less-Educated Workers. Sociological Quarterly, 40 (2), 199-16.
Epple, Dennis. 1987. Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand and Supply Functions for
         Differentiated Products. Journal of Political Economy, 95(1): 59-80.
Epple, D., R. Filimon, and T. Romer. 1984. Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Towards an
         Integrated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice. Journal of Public Economics, 24, 281-
         304.
Epple, D., R. Filimon, and T. Romer. 1993. Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System of
         Communities with Property Taxes. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 23, 585-610.
Epple, Dennis and Glen J. Platt. 1998. Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy when
         Households Differ in Both Preferences and Incomes. Journal of Urban Economics, 43, 23-51.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano. 1998. Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers,
         and Peer-Group Effects. American Economic Review, 88(1), 33-62.
Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer. 1991. Mobility and Redistribution, Journal of Political Economy,
         99(4), 828-58.
Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer and Holger Sieg. 2001. Interjurisdictional Sorting and Majority Rule: An
         Empirical Analysis. Econometrica, 69(6), 1437-55.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg. 1999. Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal of
         Political Economy, 107, 645-681.
Ellen, Ingrid and Margery A. Turner. 1997. Does Neighborhood Matter? Assessing Recent Evidence.
         Housing Policy Debate, 8, 833-866.
Ettner, Susan L., Richard G. Frank, and Ronald C. Kessler. 1997. The Impact of Psychiatric Disorders on
         Labor Market Outcomes. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51, 64-81.
Evans, Willian, Wallace Oates, and Robert Schwab. 1992. Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Study of
         Teenage Behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 10, 966-991.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. 1996. Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of
         Public Education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 135-164.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson. 1998. Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic
         Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform. American Economic Review, 88(4), 813-
         33.
Ferreira, Fernando. 2003. You Can Take It with You: Transferability of Proposition 13 Tax benefits,
         Residential Mobility, and Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities. University of Pennsylvania
         unpublished manuscript.
Ferreyra, Maria. 2003. Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in Multi-District Economies.
         Carnegie-Mellon University unpublished manuscript.
French, Eric. 2005. The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply and Retirement Behavior.
         Review of Economic Studies, 72, 395-427.
French, Eric and John Bailey Jones. 2008. The Effects of Health Insurance and Self-Insurance on
         Retirement Behavior. SUNY Albany Working Paper.
Fu, Shihe and Stephen L Ross. 2007. Wage Premia in Employment Clusters: Agglomeration or Worker
         Heterogeneity. University of Connecticut Working Paper.
Geweke, John, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town 2003. Bayesian Inference for Hospital Quality
         in a Selection Model. Econometrica Vol 71, pp. 1215-48.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1995. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Seppo Ikaheimo. 2004. Interpersonal Effects in Consumption:
         Evidence from the Automobile Purchases on Neighbors. NBER Working Paper #10226.


                                                  34
        Heckman, James. 1979. Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica, 47(1),
        153-162
Heckman, James. 1990. Varieties of Selection Bias. American Economic Review. 80: 313-18.
Heckman, James and Edward Vytlacil. 2001. Local Instrumental Variables,. in Nonlinear Statistical
        Inference: Essays in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, C. Hsiao, K. Morimune, and J. Powell (editors),
        (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Holzer, Harry. 1987. Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment. American Economic Review,
        77(3), 446-52.
Holzer, Harry. 1988. Search Method Use by Unemployed Youth. Journal of Labor Economics, 6(1), 1-
        20.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith. 2000. The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: A Review of Recent Studies and Their
        Implications for Welfare Reform. Housing Policy Debate, 9, 849-892.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith. 1992. Job Accessibility and the Employment and School Enrollment of Teenagers.
        Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Ihlanfeldt, Keith and David Sjoquist. 1990. Job Accessibility and Racial Differences in Youth
        Employment Rates. American Economic Review, 80, 267-276.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Linda Datcher Loury. 2004. Job Information Networks, Neighborhood Effects,
        and Inequality. Journal of Economic Literature, 42, 1056-93.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Giulio Zanella. 2008. Neighborhood Effects and Neighborhood Choice:
        Testing Necessary Condtions. Working Paper.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Jeffrey Zabel. 2008. Interactions, Neighborhood Selection and Housing
        Demand. Journal of Urban Economics, 63, 229-52.
Jacob, Brian. 2004. Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence from Public
        Housing Demolitions in Chicago, American Economic Review, 94(1), 233-58.
Kain, John. 1968. Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization.
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82, 175-197.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey Kling and Jeffrey Liebman. 2001. Moving To Opportunity in Boston: Early
        Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 607-54.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
        Effects. NBER Working Paper No. 11577.
Kling, Jeffrey, and Jens Ludwig. 2007. Is Crime Contagious? Journal of Law and Economics, 50, 491-
        518.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female
        and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment. Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 120, 87-130.
Korenman, Sanders and Susan Turner. 1996. Employment Contacts and Minority-White Wage
        Differences. Industrial Relations, 35 (1), 106-22.
Loury, Linda Datcher. 2003. Some Job Contacts are More Equal Than Others: Earnings and Job
        Information Networks. Tufts University, unpublished manuscript.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, and Joshua Pinkston. 2005. Housing Mobility Programs and Economic Self-
        Sufficiency: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 131-
        56.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: the Reflection Problem. Review of
        Economic Studies, 60, 531-542.
Marmaros, David and Bruce Sacerdote 2002. Peer and Social Networks in Job Search, European
        Economic Review, 46, 870-879.
Mayer, Christopher. 1996. Does Location Matter? New England Economic Review, May/June, 26-40.
Moffitt, Robert. 2001. Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria and Social Interactions. In Social
        Dynamics, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Montgomery, James D. 1991. Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic
        Analysis. The American Economic Review, 81(5), 1408-18.


                                                  35
Nechyba, Thomas. 1999. School Finance Induced Migration and Stratification Patterns: the Impact of
         Private School Vouchers. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 1.
Nechyba, Thomas. 2000. Mobility, Targeting, and Private School Vouchers. American Economic Review,
         90(1): 130-46.
O’Regan, Kathy and John Quigley. 1998. Teenage Employment and the Spatial Isolation of Minority and
         Poverty Households. Urban Studies, 35, 1187-1205
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2003. The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood. Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1533-75.
Patacchini, Eleonora and Yves Zenou. 2003. Juvenile Delinquency and Conformism, working paper
Petrin, Amil and Kenneth Train. 2002. Omitted Product Attributes in Discrete Choice Models. University
         of California-Berkeley unpublished manuscript.
Popkin, Susan J., James E. Rosenbaum and Patricia M. Meaden. 1993. Labor Market Experiences of
         Low-Income Black Women in Middle-Class Suburbs: Evidence from a Survey of Gautreaux
         Program Participants. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12, 556-73.
Raphael, Steven. 1998. The spatial mismatch hypothesis and black youth joblessness. Journal of Urban
         Economics 43, pp. 79-111.
Rees, Albert and George P. Schultz. 1970. Workers and Wages in an Urban Labor Market, Chicago:
         Univ. of Chicago Press.
Ross, Stephen L. 1998. Racial Differences in Residential and Job Mobility. Journal of Urban Economics,
         43, 112-36.
Ross, Stephen L. and John Yinger. 1999. Urban Public Finance. In The Handbook of Regional and Urban
         Economics, Volume 3: Applied Urban Economics, edited by Paul Cheshire and Edwin S. Mills.
         Elsevier Science/North Holland.
Ross, Stephen L. and Yves Zenou. In Press. Shirking, Commuting and Labor Market Outcomes.Regional
         Science and Urban Economics.
Rothstein, Jessie. 2008. Student Sorting and Bias in Value Added Estimations: Selection on Observables
         and Unobservables. Princeton University Working Paper.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001, Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates.
         Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2), 681-704.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzaf and Randall Walsh. 2002. Interjurisdictional Housing
         Prices in Locational Equilibrium. Journal of Urban Economics. 52 (1), 131-153.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzaf and Randall Walsh. 2004. Estimating the General
         Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods. International
         Economic Review. 45(4), 1047-77.
Smith, James P. 1999. Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets. Journal of EconomicsPerspectives, 13(2), 145-
         166.
Smith, James P. 2003. Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events. NBER Working Paper No.
         10063.
Wahba, Jackline and Yves Zenou. 2003. Density, Social Networks and Job Search Methods: Theory and
         Application to Egypt, CEPR Working Paper #3967.
Walsh, Randall. 2004. Endogenous Open Space Amenities in a Locational Equilibrium. CEA Working
         Paper No. 04-03, February.
Weinberg, Bruce. 2004. Testing the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis Using Inter-city Variations in Industrial
         Composition. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 34(5): 505-32.
Weinberg, Bruce. 2005. Social Interactions and Endogenous Association. Ohio State University,
         unpublished manuscript.
Weinberg, Bruce. 2000. Black Residential Centralization and the Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis. Journal
         of Urban Economics, 48, 110-34.
Weinberg, Bruce, Patricia Reagan and Jeffrey Yankow. Forthcoming. Do Neighborhoods Affect Hours
         Worked: Evidence from Longitudinal Data. Journal of Labor Economics.
Zax, Jeffrey and John Kain. 1991. Commutes, Quits, and Moves. Journal of Urban Economics, 29, 153-
         65.

                                                  36
Zenou, Yves. 2000. Unemployment in Cities. In Economics of Cities: Theoretical Perspectives, edited by
       J. Huriot and J. Thisse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                                 37
Table 1: Variable Names, Description, Means, and Standard Deviations
Variables         Variable Description                                            Means
Respondent Outcome Variables
Labor Force       One if respondent was working or looking for work at the time     0.854
Participant       of the Census Survey                                             (0.352)
Weeks Worked      Total number of weeks worked last year; missing if no weeks      40.105
Last Year         worked last year                                                 19.228)
Weekly Hours      Average number of hours worked per week last year; missing       34.388
Last Year         if worked less than 40 weeks last year                          (17.635)
Worked Last       One if respondent worked any weeks last year                      0.856
Year                                                                               (0.350)
Employed Last     One if respondent was employed last week, zero if                 0.811
Week              unemployed and a labor force participant, missing otherwise      (0.390)
Hours Worked      Number of hours worked last week; missing if not employed        32.551
Last Week         last week                                                        19.750)
Positive Capital  One if respondent has positive capital income; missing if         0.453
Income            capital income negative, imputed or not reported                 (0.498)
Capital Income    One if respondent has positive capital income; missing if         0.307
>1000             capital income negative, imputed or not reported                 (0.461)
Capital Income    One if respondent has positive capital income; missing if         0.268
>3000             capital income negative, imputed or not reported                 (0.443)
Notes: Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.




                                                 38
Table 1: Variable Names, Description, Means, and Standard Deviations (Continued)
Variables          Variable Description                                              Means
Categorical Respondent Control Variables
Male               One if respondent male (omitted category female)                   0.482
                                                                                     (0.499)
Age 35-44          One if respondent between 35 and 44 years of age (omitted          0.317
                   category 25 to 34 years)                                          (0.465)
Age 45-59          One if respondent between 45 and 59 years of age                   0.302
                                                                                     (0.459)
Black              One if respondent non-Hispanic Black (omitted category non-        0.047
                   Hispanic white)                                                   (0.210)
Hispanic           One if respondent Hispanic                                         0.033
                                                                                     (0.178)
Asian              One if respondent Asian or Pacific Islander                        0.029
                                                                                     (0.167)
No High School     One if respondent did not graduate from high school (omitted       0.099
                   category high school graduate)                                    (0.298)
Some college       One if respondent finished at least two years of college but       0.247
                   does not have four year degree                                    (0.431)
College            One if respondent gradudated with a four year college degree       0.404
                                                                                     (0.490)
Single             One if respondent single and not living with family (omitted       0.224
Independent        category married not residing with own children under age 18)     (0.417)
Single parent      One if respondent is a single parent residing with their minor     0.094
                   child                                                             (0.291)
Single w/ family   One if respondent is single and living with family members         0.051
                   other than their children                                         (0.219)
Married w/         One if respondent is married and residing with their minor         0.179
6<=kids<18         children, but no children less than 6                             (0.383)
Married w/         One if respondent married residing with own child under 6          0.187
kids<6             (omitted category married with no children)                       (0.390)
Married Female     Interaction between marital status and respondent female           0.321
                                                                                     (0.467)
Married Female     Interaction between marital status, respondent female, and         0.184
w/ kids<18         residing with own minor children                                  (0.387)
Married Female     Interaction between marital status, respondent female, and         0.093
kids<6             residing with own child who is under the age of six               (0.291)
Non-US born        One if respondent is U.S. citizen not born in the U.S. (omitted    0.065
                   category born in the U.S.)                                        (0.247)
Non-US Citizen     One if respondent is not a U.S. citizen                            0.072
                                                                                     (0.259)
Notes: Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.




                                                   39
Table 1: Variable Names, Description, Means, and Standard Deviations (Continued)
Variables         Variable Description                                                      Means
Neighborhood Level Variables
Employment        gravity model based index using non-parametrically smoothed                1.051
Access            estimates of commuting time between census tracts                         (0.067)
Percent Poverty   Percent of households in poverty within a census block group               0.051
                                                                                            (0.065)
Percent College   Percent of prime age individuals (age 25-59) with a four year college      0.401
Graduate          degree within a census block group                                        (0.210)
Housing Price     Mean of housing price residual from metropolitan wide housing price        0.005
Residual          hedonic that controls for the three block group attributes listed above   (0.067)
Percent Minority Percent of households in census block group headed by either an             0.084
Disadvantage      African-American or Hispanic respondent                                   (0.177)
Percent Not       Percent of prime age individuals in census block group who were not        0.069
Born US           born in the United States                                                 (0.061)
Housing Stock     Housing stock index using mean housing stock attributes of each block      0.215
Index             group using the hedonic price estimates on those mean attributes          (0.167)
Notes: Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.




                                                  40
Table 2: Models of Labor Models Outcomes
Variables           Labor Force Participant   Weeks Worked Last Year   Weekly Hours Last Year
                       OLS       Final IV         OLS      Final IV      OLS         Final IV
                                   Model                    Model                     Model
Male                  0.022         0.018       -0.549       -0.573       2.664         2.626
                      (8.12)        (6.60)       (5.39)      (5.43)    (28.21)       (27.10)
Age 35-44             0.001         0.009        0.721         1.014    -0.534         0.050
                      (0.36)        (3.59)       (8.77)     (10.95)     (6.81)         (0.58)
Age 45-59             -0.053        -0.040       0.571       1.096       -1.569       -0.578
                     (22.05)      (11.77)        (6.51)      (9.06)    (19.03)         (5.63)
Black                 0.031          0.098       0.352       -0.018     0.707         -1.266
                      (5.90)       (10.70)       (1.94)      (0.06)     (4.45)         (4.68)
Hispanic             -0.010         0.034       -0.365       -0.670     0.151         -1.423
                      (1.43)        (3.74)      (-1.48)     (-2.12)     (0.65)        (-4.83)
Asian                -0.041        -0.028       -0.042       -0.093     0.611         -0.074
                     (-4.55)       (-3.05)      (-0.17)     (-0.35)     (2.31)        (-0.28)
No High School        -0.087        -0.076      -1.271       -1.535     0.010         -0.799
                    (-20.44)      (-16.14)      (-8.52)     (-9.02)     (0.08)        (-5.85)
Some college           0.052         0.054       0.580       1.023      0.411           1.262
                     (20.69)      (17.43)        (6.58)      (9.06)     (5.04)       (12.31)
College                0.082         0.097       0.672       1.989        1.874         4.025
                     (33.70)      (14.28)        (7.90)      (8.12)     (23.01       (17.89)
Single                -0.035       -0.039        -1.253      -1.516      -1.627        -2.611
Independent          (12.34)        (8.74)     (11.43)       (9.20)    (13.96)       (16.49)
Single parent         -0.060        -0.049       -2.563       -2.565     -3.595        -3.751
                     (16.56)      (11.10)      (17.26)      (14.50)    (28.23)       (25.58)
Single w/ family      -0.148        -0.126       -3.443       -3.446     -4.082        -4.517
                     (25.83)      (20.97)      (17.66)      (16.63)    (22.54)       (23.50)
Married w/            0.015         0.023        0.581       0.788      1.068           1.564
6<=kids<18            (6.34)        (8.09)       (6.14)      (7.49)     (9.70)       (13.18)
Married w/           -0.003         0.006        0.771       0.945      1.072           1.465
kids<6                (1.15)        (2.36)       (7.89)      (8.89)     (9.57)       (12.17)
Married Female        -0.117        -0.118       -2.650       -2.543     -4.506        -4.363
                     (27.77)      (27.69)      (17.99)       (17.01    (30.99)       (29.47)
Married Female        -0.059        -0.059       -3.565       -3.518     -6.551       -6.485
w/ kids<18           (12.20)      (12.10)      (20.65)      (20.34)    (36.33)         (3.00)
Married Female        -0.162        -0.162       -3.108       -3.167     -2.604        -2.696
kids<6               (29.24)      (29.11)      (14.49)      (14.72)    (12.25)       (12.68)
Non-US born           0.017         0.013        0.513          0.40    0.971          0.583
                      (4.12)        (2.90)       (3.63)      (2.53)     (6.83)         (3.77)
Non-US Citizen       -0.020        -0.034        -1.857       -2.082    0.309         -0.472
                      (3.91)        (6.00)     (10.66)      (10.15)     (1.95)         (2.59)
Employment            0.006         0.308        1.769      19.156      -1.501        36.068
Access                (0.32)        (2.02)       (2.83)      (3.41)     (2.68)         (7.42)
Percent Poverty       -0.528       -1.055      -11.176     -14.709      -3.550         6.027
                     (20.62)        (8.29)     (15.03)       (3.18)     (5.14)         (1.52)
Percent College       -0.099       -0.434        -2.397    -13.929      1.264        -17.186
Graduate             (15.01)        (9.71)     (12.26)       (8.62)     (6.11)       (11.93)
Housing Price                       0.514                    7.270                    11.685
Residual                            (9.48)                   (3.76)                    (7.33)

                                              41
Notes: The first, third and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
census block group. The second, fourth, and sixth columns contain the estimates from the multi-stage
instrumental variables analysis where averages for cells of observationally equivalent individuals are used
as instruments for neighborhood attributes including the housing price residual and standard errors are
clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown in parentheses.




                                                    42
Table 3: Labor Market Models for Subsample with Lower Education Levels
                     Labor Force Participant      Weeks Worked Last Year            Weekly Hours Last Year
                        OLS          Final IV         OLS          Final IV            OLS          Final IV
                                      Model                         Model                            Model
                                                 Full Sample
Employment             0.006          0.308          1.769          19.156            -1.501         36.068
Access                 (0.32)         (2.02)         (2.83)         (3.41)            (2.68)         (7.42)
Percent Poverty        -0.528         -1.055        -11.176        -14.709            -3.550          6.027
                      (20.62)         (8.29)        (15.03)         (3.18)            (5.14)         (1.52)
Percent College        -0.099         -0.434          -2.397       -13.929            1.264         -17.186
Graduate              (15.01          (9.71)        (12.26)         (8.62)            (6.11)        (11.93)
Housing Price                         0.514                         7.270                            11.685
Residual                              (9.48)                        (3.76)                           (7.33)
             Sample After Dropping All Respondents with Degrees from Four Year Colleges
Employment            -0.004          0.424          2.616          17.239            -3.901         44.459
Access                 (0.19)         (2.08)         (3.82)         (2.37)            (6.00)         (7.42)
Percent Poverty        -0.578         -1.203        -10.010        -11.284            -3.020         -0.160
                      (19.75)         (7.66)        (11.52)          (2.01             (4.01         (0.03)
Percent College        -0.092         -0.225         -1.671        -14.480            -0.403        -16.394
Graduate              (10.37)         (2.94)         (6.26)         (5.39)            (1.56)         (7.39)
Housing Price                         0.522                         11.163                           11.468
Residual                              (7.78)                        (4.58)                           (5.90)
               Sample After Dropping All Respondents with Two or More Years of College
Employment            -0.044          0.704          3.457          14.367             -4.701        32.041
Access                 (1.59)         (2.28)         (3.82)         (1.30)            (5.95)         (3.59)
Percent Poverty        -0.604         -1.533         -9.034        -20.073            -2.104         -7.825
                      (17.59)         (7.00)         (7.97)         (2.53)            (2.41)         (1.19)
Percent College       -0.063          -0.188         -0.635        -16.547            0.156          -8.290
Graduate               (4.96)         (1.38)         (1.65)         (3.47)            (0.44)         (2.10)
Housing Price                         0.480                         12.046                            7.121
Residual                              (5.57)                        (3.74)                           (2.88)
Notes: The first panel replicates results from Table 2 while the next two panels present results for
subsamples that omit individuals with four year college degrees or two or more years of college,
respectively. The first, third and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
census block group. The second, fourth, and sixth columns contain estimates for the multi-stage
instrumental variables analysis with standard errors clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown in
parentheses.




                                                    43
Table 4: Labor Market Models for Non-White Collar Subsample
                           Labor Force        Weeks Worked Last Year Weekly Hours Last Year
                           Participant
                       OLS        Final IV         OLS        Final IV         OLS           Final IV
                                   Model                       Model                          Model
                                             Full Sample
Employment            0.006        0.308          1.769        19.156         -1.501          36.068
Access                (0.32)       (2.02)         (2.83)       (3.41)         (2.68)          (7.42)
Percent Poverty       -0.528       -1.055       -11.176       -14.709         -3.550           6.027
                     (20.62)       (8.29)        (15.03)       (3.18)         (5.14)          (1.52)
Percent College       -0.099       -0.434         -2.397      -13.929          1.264         -17.186
Graduate             (15.01        (9.71)        (12.26)       (8.62)         (6.11)         (11.93)
Housing Price                      0.514                        7.270                         11.685
Residual                           (9.48)                      (3.76)                         (7.33)
                         Sample After Dropping All White Collar Employees
Employment            0.033        0.599          1.833        19.695         -3.140          40.048
Access                 (2.01       (3.92)         (2.59)       (2.85)         (4.76)          (7.05)
Percent Poverty      -0.304        -0.715       -11.077       -11.635         -3.592           4.826
                     (14.16)       (5.71)        (12.42)       (2.07)         (4.58)          (1.05)
Percent College      -0.061        -0.225        -2.349       -13.342         -0.108         -15.812
Graduate              (9.22)       (4.41)         (9.04)       (6.12)         (0.43)          (8.57)
Housing Price                      0.288                       10.563                         10.586
Residual                           (5.56)                      (4.56)                         (5.79)
Notes: The first panel replicates results from Table 2 while the next panel presents results for a
subsample that omits individuals in occupations classified as managerial and professional specialty
occupations (000-199). The first, third and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors
clustered at the census block group. The second, fourth, and sixth columns contain the estimates for the
multi-stage instrumental variables analysis with standard errors clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown
in parentheses.




                                                     44
Table 5: Labor Market Models with Gender and Family Structure Subamples
                           Labor Force         Weeks Worked Last Year Weekly Hours Last Year
                            Participant
                       OLS         Final IV         OLS       Final IV           OLS          Final IV
                                    Model                       Model                           Model
                                              Full Sample
Employment            0.006          0.308          1.769      19.156          -1.501          36.068
Access                (0.32)         (2.02)        (2.83)       (3.41)          (2.68)          (7.42)
Percent Poverty       -0.528         -1.055       -11.176      -14.709         -3.550            6.027
                     (20.62)         (8.29)       (15.03)       (3.18)          (5.14)          (1.52)
Percent College       -0.099         -0.434         -2.397     -13.929          1.264          -17.186
Graduate             (15.01          (9.71)       (12.26)       (8.62)          (6.11)         (11.93)
Housing Price                        0.514                       7.270                         11.685
Residual                             (9.48)                     (3.76)                          (7.33)
                     Sample After Dropping All Married Women with Children
Employment           -0.023          0.300          0.560      10.518          -2.464          14.477
Access                (1.23)         (1.88)        (0.83)       (1.82)          (4.36)          (2.82)
Percent Poverty      -0.548          -1.283       -11.728      -19.112         -4.700            3.751
                     (21.49)         (9.60)      (14.178)       (3.97)          (6.48)          (0.89)
Percent College      -0.075          -0.582        -2.180      -14.357          1.747          -13.214
Graduate             (11.61)        (12.45)       (10.72)       (8.49)          (8.29)          (8.66)
Housing Price                        0.468                       4.176                           4.029
Residual                             (8.39)                     (2.12)                          (2.43)
                              Sample After Dropping All Married Women
Employment           -0.029          0.180          0.155        0.363         -3.068           -4.176
Access                (0.38)         (1.09)        (0.21)       (0.06)          (5.00)          (0.78)
Percent Poverty      -0.577          -1.349       -12.153      -10.489         -5.263          17.288
                     (21.93)         (9.64)       (14.90)       (2.07)          (6.72)          (3.94)
Percent College      -0.049          -0.273        -1.853       -5.916          2.287            1.394
Graduate              (7.65)         (5.63)        (8.80)       (3.28)          (9.95)          (0.84)
Housing Price                        0.473                       4.699                           4.680
Residual                             (7.98)                     (2.27)                          (2.71)
                                   Sample After Dropping All Women
Employment           -0.053          -0.218        -0.812       -4.658         -4.036          -11.178
Access                (2.83)         (1.26)        (1.12)       (0.68)          (5.82)          (1.68)
Percent Poverty      -0.429          -0.290       -12.042       -5.867         -4.966          20.916
                     (14.21)          (2.01       (12.45)        (1.01          (4.84)          (3.94)
Percent College      -0.037          -0.017        -1.257       -7.434          3.131            2.438
Graduate              (5.17)         (0.33)        (5.35)       (3.57)         (11.43)          (1.20)
Housing Price                        0.073                       2.534                          -0.779
Residual                             (1.01)                     (0.94)                          (0.33)
Notes: The first panel replicates results from Table 2 while the next three panels present results for
subsamples that omit married women with children, married women, and all women from the sample,
respectively. The first, third and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
census block group. The second, fourth, and sixth columns contain the estimates for multi-stage
instrumental variables analysis with standard errors are clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown in
parentheses.




                                                    45
Table 6: Incremental Modification of Specification
Models                     OLS         Fixed             IV          IV with         IV for       Final IV
                                      Effects      Neighborhood      Housing       Housing         Model
                                      Second         Controls          Price          Price
                                        Stage                        Residual      Residual
                                             Labor Force Participant
Employment                 0.006       0.027            0.620           0.601        1.461          0.308
Access                    (0.32)       (1.28)          (4.18)         (4.05)         (8.93)         (2.02)
Percent Poverty            -0.528      -0.523           -1.674         -1.665         -2.250       -1.055
                         (20.62)      (30.66)         (13.65)        (13.52)        (16.82)         (8.29)
Percent College            -0.099      -0.091          -0.251         -0.221          -0.866       -0.434
Graduate                  (15.01      (14.02)          (6.30)         (5.57)        (12.36)         (9.71)
Housing Price                                                         -0.062           0.696        0.514
Residual                                                              (9.07)        (11.68)         (9.48)
                                            Weeks Worked Last Year
Employment                -1.501       1.011          43.157          43.568        52.121         36.068
Access                    (2.68)       (0.84)           (9.01         (9.10)         (9.72)         (7.42)
Percent Poverty           -3.550      -42.043          -6.902         -7.159       -13.454          6.027
                          (5.14)      (43.32)          (1.99)         (2.06)         (3.53)         (1.52)
Percent College            1.264       1.251          -12.892        -13.490       -19.426        -17.186
Graduate                  (6.11)       (3.40)          (9.60)        (10.08)         (9.02)        (11.93)
Housing Price                                                         1.301          7.243         11.685
Residual                                                              (7.03)         (3.86)         (7.33)
                                            Weekly Hours Last Year
Employment              1.769          -1.925         23.570          23.066        31.185         19.156
Access                  (2.83)         (1.84)          (4.29)         (4.20)         (5.10)         (3.41)
Percent Poverty        -11.176         -32.24         -22.723        -22.413       -28.302        -14.709
                       (15.03)        (37.98)          (5.36)         (5.28)         (5.90)         (3.18)
Percent College         -2.397         4.073          -11.251        -10.521         -16.80       -13.929
Graduate               (12.26)        (12.64)          (7.83)         (7.31)         (6.69)         (8.62)
Housing Price                                                         -1.601         6.147          7.270
Residual                                                              (8.70)         (2.87)         (3.76)
Notes: The first and second columns contain OLS and block group fixed effect estimates with standard
errors clustered at the census block group. The third column contains estimates for a simple instrumental
variable model where the three neighborhood variables are predicted using means from cells of
observationally equivalent individuals. The final three columns add the housing price residual from a
simple, OLS housing price hedonic as a control, instrument for that residual based on cell means, and
finally instrument for a residual arising from using IV in the housing price model. Standard errors are
clustered at the cell for IV estimates. The results for the three dependent variables are presented in the
three panels, and T-statistics are shown in parentheses.




                                                   46
Table 7: Final IV Model for Alternative Sets of Neighborhood Controls
Models              Housing          Poverty      Poverty and         Plus     Plus Percent      Plus
                       Price                      Employment       Percent       Minority     Percent not
                    Residual                        Access         College    Disadvantaged     born in
                       Only                                        Graduate                      U.S.
                                           Labor Force Participant
Employment                                          -0.166           0.308       0.226          -0.039
Access                                               (1.11)          (2.02)      (1.47)         (0.24)
Percent Poverty                        -1.226       -0.905           -1.055      -1.435          -1.772
                                     (11.81)         (7.11)          (8.29)      (9.27)        (11.19)
Percent College                                                      -0.434      -0.435         -0.361
Graduate                                                             (9.71)      (9.68)         (8.12)
Percent Minority                                                                 0.186          0.053
Disadvantage                                                                     (4.43)         (1.22)
Percent Not Born                                                                                1.268
US                                                                                              (7.49)
Housing Price         0.308            0.106         0.259           0.514        0.586         0.526
Residual              (9.90)          (3.45)         (6.24)          (9.48)      (10.59)        (9.27)
                                          Weeks Worked Last Year
Employment                                           3.779          19.156        17.570        12.808
Access                                               (0.71)          (3.41)       (3.11)        (2.20)
Percent Poverty                      -11.556        -9.154         -14.709       -23.654       -28.957
                                      (3.31)         (2.00)          (3.18)       (4.31)        (5.21)
Percent College                                                    -13.929       -13.863       -12.735
Graduate                                                             (8.62)       (8.58)        (7.85)
Percent Minority                                                                    4.20        1.892
Disadvantage                                                                       (3.01        (1.28)
Percent Not                                                                                     21.906
Born US                                                                                         (4.24)
Housing Price        -1.577           -3.217         0.303           7.270       8.628          7.794
Residual             (1.60)           (3.11)         (0.21)          (3.76)      (4.38)         (3.88)
                                          Weekly Hours Last Year
Employment                                          20.378          36.068        34.843        28.495
Access                                               (4.47)          (7.42)       (7.14)        (5.64)
Percent Poverty                      13.136          8.823           6.027        -0.474        -7.005
                                      (4.39)         (2.25)          (1.52)       (0.10)        (1.43)
Percent College                                                    -17.186       -17.202       -15.898
Graduate                                                            (11.93)      (11.88)       (10.97)
Percent Minority                                                                  2.995         0.094
Disadvantage                                                                      (2.35)        (0.07)
Percent Not                                                                                     28.035
Born US                                                                                         (5.89)
Housing Price        -3.830           -1.890         0.454          11.685       12.837         12.136
Residual             (4.19)           (1.86)         (0.36)          (7.33)      (7.84)         (7.16)




                                                   47
Notes: The estimation results are based on the final IV model used in Tables 2 through 5. Column 1
presents a model that only controls for the housing price residual, and columns 2 and 3 present results
including neighborhood poverty levels plus employment access for column 3. The next three columns
add neighborhood controls for share four year college graduate, share African-American or Hispanic, and
share not born in the U.S. The housing price residual in each model only conditions on the neighborhood
controls used for that particular model. The three dependent variables are presented in the three panels,
and T-statistics are shown in parentheses.




                                                   48
Table 8: Relationship between Neighborhood and Capital Income
Variables               Positive Capital            Capital Income Above           Capital Income Above
                             Income                          $1,000                        $3,000
                       OLS         Final IV           OLS           Final IV        OLS           Final IV
                                    Model                            Model                         Model
Employment            0.143          0.079           0.159           0.034         0.158           0.045
Access                (3.82)        (0.41)           (4.70)          (0.19)        (5.19)          (0.26)
Percent Poverty       -0.127        -0.058          -0.042           0.065         0.012           0.152
                      (3.33)        (0.38)           (1.22)          (0.46)        (0.38)          (1.10)
Percent College       0.084          0.051           0.043           .0002         0.026           -0.034
Graduate              (6.40)        (0.88)           (3.63)          (0.01         (2.40)          (0.64)
Housing Price                       -0.004                           0.038                         0.058
Residual                            (0.06)                           (0.64)                         (1.01
Notes: This tables presents estimates for whether the individual have positive capital income or not,
capital income above $1000 per year or not, and capital income above $3,000 per year. The first, third
and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the census block group. The
second, fourth, and sixth columns contain estimates for the multi-stage instrumental variables analysis
with standard errors clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown in parentheses.




                                                     49
Table 9: Core and Supplemental Models of Labor Models Outcomes
                                         Core Labor Market Outcomes
                     Labor Force Participant      Weeks Worked Last Year            Weekly Hours Last Year
                       OLS         Final IV           OLS          Final IV            OLS          Final IV
                                    Model                           Model                            Model
Employment             0.006         0.308           1.769          19.156            -1.501         36.068
Access                (0.32)         (2.02)          (2.83)         (3.41)            (2.68)         (7.42)
Percent Poverty        -0.528        -1.055        -11.176         -14.709            -3.550          6.027
                     (20.62)         (8.29)         (15.03)         (3.18)            (5.14)         (1.52)
Percent College        -0.099        -0.434           -2.397       -13.929            1.264         -17.186
Graduate              (15.01         (9.71)         (12.26)         (8.62)            (6.11)        (11.93)
Housing Price                        0.514                          7.270                            11.685
Residual                             (9.48)                         (3.76)                           (7.33)
                                   Supplemental Labor Market Outcomes
                        Worked Last Year           Employment Last Week            Hours Worked Last Week
                       OLS         Final IV           OLS          Final IV            OLS          Final IV
                                    Model                           Model                            Model
Employment            -0.004         0.647           0.013          0.362             -1.324         44.266
Access                (0.25)         (3.98)          (1.17)         (3.10)            (2.20)         (8.34)
Percent Poverty        -0.661        -1.308          -0.146         -0.337            -4.498          1.906
                     (24.91)         (9.46)          (9.14)         (3.32)            (5.86)         (0.42)
Percent College        -0.067         -0.603         0.009          -0.258            0.646         -19.296
Graduate             (10.45)        (12.59)          (2.63)         (7.96)            (2.89)        (12.25)
Housing Price                          0.704                        0.201                            12.920
Residual                            (11.70)                         (4.92)                           (7.27)
Notes: The first panel presents the core results from Table 2 while the second panel presents results based
on the following alternative dependent variables: whether worked at all last year, whether employed last
week conditional on labor force participation, and average hours worked last week conditional on being
employed. The first, third and fifth columns contain OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the
census block group. The second, fourth, and sixth columns contain estimates for the multi-stage
instrumental variables analysis with standard errors clustered at the cell. T-statistics are shown in
parentheses.




                                                    50
Table 10: Incorporation of Neighborhood Housing Stock Controls
Variables          Labor Force Participant  Weeks Worked Last Year              Average Hours per Week
                                                                                         Last Year
                      Final IV     Control for     Final IV     Control for      Final IV       Control for
                       Model        Housing         Model         Housing          Model         Housing
                                      Stock                        Stock                           Stock
Employment              0.308         0.591         19.156         20.941          36.068         38.235
Access                 (2.02)         (3.84)        (3.41)         (3.68)          (7.42)         (7.70)
Percent Poverty        -1.055         -1.079       -14.709        -14.580          6.027           5.862
                       (8.29)         (8.60)        (3.18)         (3.18)          (1.52)         (1.49)
Percent College        -0.434          -0.633      -13.929        -15.650         -17.186        -19.122
Graduate               (9.71)        (12.36)        (8.62)         (8.97)         (11.93)        (11.92)
Housing Stock                         0.622                        4.350                           5.021
Index                                (10.21)                       (2.25)                         (2.58)
Housing Price           0.514           0.595       7.270          8.277           11.685         12.564
Residual               (9.48)        (11.43)        (3.76)         (4.48)          (7.33)         (8.14)
Notes: The first, third and fifth columns contain estimates from our standard multi-stage instrumental
variables analysis, and the second, fourth, and sixth columns contain estimates for models that also
include a housing stock quality index based on the same housing stock variables used to instrument for
the neighborhood composition variables and the coefficients estimated on those variables in the housing
price hedonic. The model includes the actual housing stock variable rather than an instrument based on
the exposure of cells of observationally equivalent households in order to control for neighborhood
unobservables that might correlate with housing stock. T-statistics are shown in parentheses.




                                                    51
