                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ARE VALUATION EFFECTS DESIRABLE FROM A GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE?

                                         Pierpaolo Benigno

                                        Working Paper 12219
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12219


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2006




I am grateful to Gianluca Benigno, Refet Gurkaynak, Philip Lane, Ken Rogoff, Luca Sessa, Cedric
Tille, Mike Woodford, seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, ECB, IMF, John Hopkins University,
the Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Policy and the conference on ?New Perspective on
Financial Globalization? at the IMF for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Pierpaolo Benigno. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Are Valuation Effects Desirable from a Global Perspective?
Pierpaolo Benigno
NBER Working Paper No. 12219
May 2006, Revised June 2007
JEL No. F32,F41,F42

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent studies have emphasized the role of valuation effects due to exchange rate movements in easing
the process of adjustment of the external balance of a country. This paper asks to what extent valuation
effects are desirable from a global perspective as a mean to achieve an efficient allocation of resources.
In a frictionless world, it is desirable to have large movements in prices and exchange rates. But once
a small concern for price stability is introduced not only should prices be stabilized but also the response
of the exchange rate should be muted. There is a minor role for valuation effects that depends both
on the size and composition of assets and liabilities.

Pierpaolo Benigno
Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche e Aziendali
Luiss Guido Carli
Via Tommasini, 1
 00162 Rome - Italy
and NBER
pbenigno@luiss.it
      The analysis of the external imbalances of a country has recently become
a compelling subject of research for the historically high current account
deficits recorded in the US economy together with the increasing worsening
of its net foreign asset position.1
      The current paradigm to think about the external balance of a country is
the so-called “intertemporal approach to the current account”. According to
this theory, the external adjustment of a country occurs through movements
in the trade balance, as a consequence of changes in the allocation of real
quantities and equilibrium relative prices.2
      This approach misses an important channel of adjustment, a financial one,
since it assumes that the portfolio return is not varying over time and neglects
the heterogenous composition of the financial instruments that are part of
the portfolio of a country. Even if there are no changes in the borrowing
decisions of a country, the net foreign asset position can change because the
market value of the stock of assets and liabilities varies. Movements in the
nominal exchange rate are an important source of these valuation eﬀects.
      This paper analyzes the extent to which the valuation channel due to
the exchange rate is desirable from a global welfare perspective. The main
finding is that whereas in a frictionless world valuation eﬀects are of impor-
tant magnitude once a small concern for price stability is introduced they are
less desirable and play a minor role. The prescription for adopting inflation-
targeting regimes that results from current monetary models is strong enough
to dominate other objectives like the world distribution of wealth through
valuation eﬀects.
      The issue of desirability has been neglected by the current literature.
Studies as Gourinchas and Rey (2005, 2006), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005,
2006) and Tille (2003, 2004), have documented that in the recent experi-
  1
      See Clarida (2006) for a collection of works on the subject.
  2
      This is the approach taken by Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2005).



                                                 1
ence of the US economy valuation eﬀects have accounted for a large fraction
of the changes in the international investment position of the country and
have concluded that a depreciation of the US dollar can ease the real adjust-
ment needed to reduce the external imbalances.3 As pointed out by Obstfeld
(2004), a theory in which financial adjustments and in particular exchange
rate movements are important in determining the frontier of the feasible allo-
cation of quantities and relative prices can raise the tempting argument that
exchange rates adjust to sustain any real allocation achieved. They can even
balance any current imbalance with the risk of being at the end destabilizing
for the economy.
      Desirability puts discipline on the allocation of consumption and relative
prices that should be of interest by focusing on which movements in exchange
rates are compatible with that real allocation.
      To address this issue, we propose a two-country model in which each coun-
try is specialized in the production of a bundle of goods. In the benchmark
case, there are no frictions except for the ex-ante incompleteness of financial
markets. In particular it is assumed that each country can only borrow in
a risk-free nominal bond denominated in its currency and lend in a risk-free
nominal bond denominated in the other country’s currency.
      In a frictionless world, exchange rate and assets movements are desirable
for achieving the eﬃcient allocation of resources across countries. In a rough
quantitative experiment we find that they should be of important magnitude
compared with that of the shocks. For a 1% permanent increase in pro-
ductivity, the exchange rate should appreciate by 5.5% and the net foreign
asset position worsen in the amount of 3% of gross domestic product for the
country that experiences the increase in productivity. However, once a small
degree of price friction is introduced that implies an average duration of price
contracts just above the unit interval (3 months), producer prices should be
stabilized even following permanent shocks. Moreover the short and long-
run responses of the exchange rate are substantially dampened and reduced
  3
      See also Blanchard et al. (2005) and Cavallo and Tille (2006).



                                                 2
to one tenth of the magnitude we observe in the frictionless-case economy.
Valuation eﬀects are less desirable.
      This paper further contributes to the current literature by revisiting the
implications of the theory of the “intertemporal approach to the current
account” on the mechanism of adjustment following permanent or transitory
shocks with the twist of valuation eﬀects.
      Following a permanent productivity shock in one country, the intertem-
poral approach to the current account would suggest that the consumption
of the country that experiences the favorable shock increases proportionally
without any changes in the net-foreign asset position.4 Instead, global ef-
ficiency would require a transfer of real wealth to the other country. In a
frictionless world valuation eﬀects work in this direction: an appreciation of
the nominal exchange rate acts as a negative financial shock that reduces the
portfolio return of the country with the high productivity. This channel is
strong enough to worsen in a permanent way its net foreign asset position
and results in a permanent transfer of wealth to the other economy. Through
this mechanism consumption can also increase abroad.
      Following a temporary shock, the classic theory would suggest that the
country aﬀected by the shock accumulates net foreign assets that allow to
spread across time the temporary increase in wealth and achieve higher pro-
file of consumption in future periods. Instead, a global optimum requires
on one side that there is no intertemporal propagation of the shock and on
the other side that consumption should temporarily increase abroad. This is
possible if the country with the high productivity experiences also a negative
financial shock that distributes the additional real wealth to the other coun-
try. Again an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate would work for this
end. In contrast with the permanent-shock case, the net foreign asset posi-
tion improves in the short run and returns immediately back to the initial
value.5
  4
      This example considers a model with fixed capital stock.
  5
      In the main text, we discuss also the dynamics following shocks that influence con-
sumption preferences.


                                                3
        There has been a recent interest on the analysis of valuation eﬀects from
the view of micro-founded models. Tille (2005) presents a richer structure
of financial markets, but in which the only focus is on monetary shocks
and on how valuation eﬀects aﬀect their transmission mechanisms. Kollman
(2003) studies the welfare eﬀects of alternative, but sub-optimal, monetary
policy regimes in a quantitative business cycle model of a two-country world.
Ghironi et al. (2005) analyzes the impact of valuation eﬀects on the cross-
holdings of equity. Devereux and Saito (2005) presents a tractable portfolio
model that emphasizes the interaction between monetary policy and the cur-
rent account for hedging purpose from a positive point of view.
        The structure of this work is the following. Section 1 presents the model
economy, studies the eﬃcient allocation and its implementation with decen-
tralized markets. Section 2 discusses the response of prices, exchange rates,
and assets following permanent productivity or preference shocks. Section 3
extends the benchmark model adding price rigidities, while Section 4 ana-
lyzes the constrained eﬃcient allocation. Section 5 studies the robustness of
previous results when there are significant frictions in the price mechanism.
Section 6 concludes.


1         Model
The world economy consists of two countries, which are labelled H and F
or domestic and foreign, with population size n and 1 − n respectively and
0 < n < 1. The structure of the model is similar to most of the current open-
macro models.6 Each country is specialized in the production of a bundle of
goods of size n and 1 − n for country H and F , respectively. All goods are
traded without frictions and households within a country are identical and
have preferences of the form
                             X
                             ∞                 ∙                  Z                   ¸
                                        t−t0       Ct1−ρ gtρ 1        n
                                                                          lt (h)1+η
                     Ut0 =          β                       −                       dh    (1)
                             t=t0
                                                    1−ρ       n   0         1+η
    6
        See Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2001) among others.


                                                           4
for country H and
                        X
                        ∞                 ∙                              Z                       ¸
                                   t−t0       Ct∗1−ρ gt∗ρ    1                1 ∗
                                                                               lt (f )1+η
             Ut∗0   =          β                          −                                 df       (2)
                        t=t0
                                                1−ρ         1−n           n         1+η

for country F where β is the intertemporal discount factor with 0 < β < 1.
Households are blessed with perfect foresight. The momentary utility at a
generic time t depends on consumption indexes C and C ∗ , for households in
country H and F respectively, where ρ > 0 is the inverse of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption and g and g∗ are country-specific
shocks to the preferences toward consumption. The index C is defined as
                           ∙                  1
                                                     ¸ θ−1
                                                        θ
                              1   θ−1         θ  θ−1
                        C ≡ n θ CH θ + (1 − n) CF θ

where θ, with θ > 0, is the intratemporal elasticity of substitution between
the bundles of goods CH and CF . In particular CH includes the consumption
of all the goods produced in country H and is defined as
                               "µ ¶ 1 Z             # σ−1
                                                       σ
                                         n
                                 1  σ          σ−1
                          CH ≡             c(h) σ dh      ,
                                 n     o


where σ is the intratemporal elasticity of substitution across the goods pro-
duced within country H, with σ > 1, and c(h) indeed denotes consumption of
a variety h of these goods; CF includes instead the consumption of the goods
produced in country F with elasticity of substitution among them equal to
σ                                   "µ                                             # σ−1
                                                   ¶ σ1 Z   1
                                                                                      σ

                                           1                            σ−1
                        CF ≡                                    c(f )    σ    df
                                          1−n           n

where c(f ) is consumption of one of these goods. Consumption preferences
are similar across countries. It follows that n denotes at the same time
the population size of country H, the size of goods produced in country H
and the weight in the general consumption indexes C and C ∗ given to the
goods produced in country H. Another implication of the above structure
of consumption preferences is that there is no home bias in consumption —

                                                            5
preferences are similar across countries. Given prices p(h) and p∗ (h) for a
generic good h, in the currency of country H and F respectively, and given
prices p(f ) and p∗ (f ) for a generic good f , we assume that the law-of-one-
price holds for all goods, i.e. p(h) = Sp∗ (h) and p(f ) = Sp∗ (f ) where S is the
nominal exchange rate, i.e. the price of the currency of country F relative
to that of H.
       Given the above consumption indexes, it is possible to define in an appro-
priate way the consumption-based price indexes P , PH and PF in currency
of country H and P ∗ , PH∗ and PF∗ in currency of country F . Since the law-of-
one-price holds and the consumption bundles are identical across countries,
purchasing power parity holds at the level of all the consumption-based price
indexes. Moreover, the aggregate demands of generic goods h and f, pro-
duced respectively in country H and F , are given by
                              µ          ¶−σ µ         ¶−θ
                                  p(h)           PH
                    y(h) =                                   (nC + (1 − n)C ∗ ),      (3)
                                   PH            P

and                           µ           ¶−σ µ        ¶−θ
                    ∗             p(f )           PF
                   y (f ) =                                  (nC + (1 − n)C ∗ ),      (4)
                                   PF             P
where PH /P and PF /P obey the following restriction7
                           µ        ¶1−θ                    µ    ¶1−θ
                           PH                         PF
                         n                  + (1 − n)                   = 1.          (5)
                           P                          P

As it is shown in (1) and (2), the momentary utility of each household in-
cludes the disutility of supplying labor to the production of each of the goods
produced in its country. Disutility is separable across the varieties of la-
bor oﬀered. Technology to produce a generic domestic good is given by
y(h) = z · L(h) where L(h) is an average of labor of variety h supplied by the
households of country H and z is a country-specific shock to labor produc-
tivity. In particular, all households being alike, the equilibrium is symmetric
and L(h) = l(h). Similarly in country F , there is a production technology of
   7
       It is indiﬀerent whether we denominate prices in relative prices in the domestic or
foreign currency since the law-of-one-price holds.


                                                        6
the form y ∗ (f ) = z ∗ ·L∗ (f ) for a generic good f with L∗ (f ) = l∗ (f ) and z ∗ is a
country-specific shock to labor productivity in country F . After substituting
l(h) = y(h)/z and l∗ (f ) = y ∗ (f )/z ∗ in (1) and (2) and using the aggregate
demands (3) and (4), we can write
                               "                           #
                     X∞           1−ρ ρ          −(1+η)
                                          Yt1+η zt
                           t−t0 Ct   gt
               Ut0 =     β              −               ∆t                           (6)
                     t=t
                                 1−ρ         1+η
                                 0


and                                       "                                     #
                          X
                          ∞                                     ∗−(1+η)
                                              Ct∗1−ρ gt∗ρ Yt∗1+η zt
                 Ut∗0 =          β t−t0                  −                ∆∗t        (7)
                          t=t0
                                                1−ρ           1+η
where we have defined appropriate output aggregators of the form
                         µ ¶−θ
                           PH
                    Y ≡            (nC + (1 − n)C ∗ ),                               (8)
                           P
                         µ ¶−θ
                      ∗    PF
                    Y ≡            (nC + (1 − n)C ∗ ),                               (9)
                            P
and indexes of price dispersion
                                Z µ      ¶−σ
                             1 n p(h)
                        ∆=                    dh ≥ 1,                               (10)
                             n 0     PH
                                  Z 1µ       ¶−σ
                       ∗      1        p(f )
                     ∆ =                         df ≥ 1.                            (11)
                           1−n n        PF

1.1     Eﬃcient allocation
To answer the question of whether valuation eﬀects are desirable, we need to
specify an allocation of real quantities and relative prices. We choose it as
the solution of the following Pareto problem in which the objective

                                     Wt0 = nUt0 + (1 − n)Ut∗0                       (12)

is maximized by choosing the sequences {Ct , Ct∗ , Yt , Yt∗ , PH,t /Pt , PF,t /Pt ,
∆t , ∆∗t }∞
          t=t0 under the sequences of constraints (5), (8), (9), (10) and (11).
    There are two direct implications of the above maximization problem: (i)
there is no intertemporal dimension, (ii) it is eﬃcient not to create any price

                                                      7
dispersion in both countries, i.e. ∆t = ∆∗t = 1 for each t. The remaining set
of first-order conditions (which are necessary and suﬃcient) can be written
as
                                       Ct   gt
                                        ∗
                                          = ∗,                              (13)
                                       Ct  gt
                                     PH,t        −(1+η)
                           Ct−ρ gtρ       = Ytη zt      ,                   (14)
                                      Pt
                                     PF,t          ∗−(1+η)
                          Ct∗−ρ gt∗ρ      = Yt∗η zt        .                (15)
                                      Pt
Condition (13) shows that an increase in g at time t−other things being
equal— increases the ratio of consumption between country H and F in a
proportional way. Combining appropriately the above first-order conditions
we obtain that the terms of trade, labelled T , depend on the ratio of the
productivity shocks as
                                                   µ         ¶ (1+η)
                                PF,t                   zt      1+θη
                           Tt ≡      =                                  .   (16)
                                PH,t                   zt∗

      A similar observation applies to the ratio of output
                             µ         ¶       µ         ¶ (1+η)θ
                                 Yt                zt       1+θη
                                           =                        .       (17)
                                 Yt∗               zt∗

In particular a positive productivity shock in country H at time t increases
aggregate output in country H relative to country F, decreases the price of
goods produced in country H relative to that of country F worsening the
terms of trade of country H.


1.2     Implementation of the eﬃcient allocation in a fric-
        tionless economy
Up to this point, we have analyzed the eﬃcient allocation for real quantities
and relative prices. In our framework, the question of whether valuation
eﬀects —exchange rate movements— are beneficial is parallel to the issue of



                                                     8
determining which movements, if any, in prices and exchange rates are com-
patible with the eﬃcient allocation when markets for goods, labor and assets
are decentralized.
       Starting from the labor market, we assume that households supply labor
in a competitive market and at the margin they equate the marginal rate of
substitution between labor and consumption to the real wage for each of the
varieties h of labor oﬀered. This optimality condition reads as
                                    wt (h)   1 lt (h)η
                                           =                                         (18)
                                     Pt      n Ct−ρ gtρ

for households in country H and
                                 wt∗ (f )     1    lt∗ (f )η
                                          =                                          (19)
                                  Pt∗       1 − n Ct∗−ρ gt∗ρ

for those in country F where wt (h) and wt∗ (f ) are nominal wages for vari-
eties of labor h and f denominated in the currency of country H and F,
respectively.
       Firms act instead in a monopolistically-competitive market and maximize
their profits. Demand is aggregated across the two markets, as in (3) and
(4), and each firm can freely choose its price in its own currency. Profits of
a generic firm producing good h in country H are given by

                       π t (h) = (1 − τ )pt (h)yt (h) − nwt (h)lt (h)

where τ is a tax rate on firm’s revenue. Note that each firm is hires labor from
all home workers to produce one unit of output. We assume that firms are
monopolistically-competitive. This is notably one reason for why the eﬃcient
allocation cannot be decentralized. To avoid this problem, we assume that
τ is set as a subsidy in a way to oﬀset the monopolistic distortions.8 In this
case, optimality conditions on the side of the firms imply that
                                                nwt (h)
                                     pt (h) =                                        (20)
                                                  zt
   8
       The subsidy is financed through lump-sum taxes that adjust to balance the budget of
the government in any possible allocation.

                                                 9
for a generic firm h in country H and
                                       (1 − n)wt∗ (f )
                            p∗t (f ) =                                     (21)
                                            zt∗
for a generic firm f in country F . Combining (20) into (18) and (21) into
(19) we obtain
                                               yt (h)η
                              pt (h) = Pt                   ,              (22)
                                             Ct−ρ gtρ zt1+η
and
                                          yt∗ (f )η
                            p∗t (f ) = Pt∗              .               (23)
                                      Ct∗−ρ gt∗ρ zt∗1+η
In particular equations (22) and (23) imply a symmetric equilibrium in which
all firms within a country set the same price — i.e. pt (h) = PH,t and pt (f ) =
PF,t . Given the specified goods and labor markets, it follows that (22) and
(23) are consistent with (14) and (15), respectively.
   To complete the implementation of the eﬃcient allocation we need to
specify the structure of the asset markets. This is needed to enforce the first-
order condition (13) under decentralized markets. To illustrate the mech-
anism, we start from a simple form of financial markets in which the only
asset traded across countries is a real bond denominated in units of the com-
mon consumption index. Summing all the intertemporal budget constraints
among households living in a country together with the balance-budget con-
straint of the government we obtain the overall resource constraint of each
country. In particular for country H we obtain
                               X∞        ∙              ¸
                                           PH,τ
                        bt−1 =      Rt,τ        Yτ − Cτ                    (24)
                               τ =t
                                            Pτ
where bt−1 denotes the amount of real debt (in per-capita terms) contracted at
time t−1 in country H and maturing at date t. The above resource constraint
of country H requires that debt maturing at time t should be equal to the
present discounted value of real trade surplus where the discount factor Rt,τ
is given by the ratio of marginal utilities of consumption across periods and
corresponds to the compounded real interest rate between period t and τ
                                                      τY
                                                       −1
                                       C −ρ g ρ               1
                        Rt,τ =   β T −t τ−ρ τρ    =                ,       (25)
                                       Ct gt          s=t
                                                            1 + rs

                                                10
where rt is the one-period risk-free real rate. In the eﬃcient allocation the
RHS of (24) is a given number; moreover Bt−1 is also given by previous
decisions. When there is an unexpected shock, in general, (24) will not hold
when the RHS is evaluated along the eﬃcient equilibrium path. The eﬃcient
allocation is not implementable and the response to unexpected shocks would
be in line with that implied by the traditional intertemporal approach to the
current account. In this model there is no role for valuation eﬀects.
       To capture such eﬀects, we model an economy in which it is possible
to trade internationally two risk-free nominal bonds, one denominated in
country H’s currency and the other in country F’s currency. The purpose is
to investigate the role of exchange-rate valuation eﬀects that are due to the
diﬀerent currency compositions of the country portfolio. In this case (24)
becomes                                        ∙             ¸
                      Bt−1 St A∗t−1 X
                                      ∞
                                                 PH,τ
                          −        =      Rt,τ        Yτ − Cτ .                     (26)
                       Pt     Pt     τ =t
                                                  Pτ

where Bt−1 denotes country H’s per-capita holdings of nominal liabilities
denominated in currency of country H while A∗t−1 denotes country H’s per-
capita holdings of nominal assets denominated in the currency of country F .
We assume that B and A are positive.9 Standard Euler equation requires
that
                         Ct−ρ gtρ                Pt    Ct∗−ρ gt∗ρ
                         −ρ ρ     = β(1 + i t )      =  ∗−ρ ∗ρ                      (27)
                        Ct+1 gt+1               Pt+1   Ct+1 gt+1
for the bond denominated in domestic currency where it is the one-period
nominal interest rate on such bond and
                         Ct−ρ gtρ          ∗ Pt
                                                ∗
                                                   Ct∗−ρ gt∗ρ
                         −ρ ρ     = β(1 + it ) ∗ = ∗−ρ ∗ρ                           (28)
                        Ct+1 gt+1             Pt+1 Ct+1 gt+1

for the bond denominated in foreign currency where i∗t is the associated inter-
est rate. The role of valuation eﬀects is now evident by inspecting equation
(26). When there are unexpected shocks, prices and in particular exchange
   9
       This is going to capture the fact that the US economy is overall a net lender in
securities denominated in foreign currency and borrower in dollar-denominated securities.




                                              11
rate movements can succeed for the purpose of implementing the eﬃcient al-
location. It is even possible to find multiple paths of prices compatible with
that allocation. The mechanism of valuation eﬀects captured here empha-
sizes ex-post changes in portfolio returns due to unexpected movements in
the exchange rate that act as a vehicle of wealth distribution. In particular,
they are helpful to achieve the eﬃcient allocation of wealth across countries.
In a stochastic model, they are an instrument to achieve eﬃcient risk-sharing
when financial markets are incomplete.


2        Two textbook experiments
This section gets some further insights on the decentralization of the eﬃcient
allocation in the frictionless model with two assets described in the previous
section. To this purpose further restrictions are needed to determine uniquely
the allocation. The restrictions that we are imposing are not arbitrary but
indeed consistent with welfare maximization in the model with small price
frictions.10 In this limiting case, the eﬃcient allocation is approximated
closely while prices, exchange rate and asset positions are determined.
       We analyze two experiments. Let us assume that the equilibrium of
the economy is at a stationary solution in which zt = zt∗ = z̄, gt = ḡ and
gt = ḡ ∗ . Moreover in this stationary solution prices and exchange rate are
also constant.
       In particular (26) implies that

                            C̄ = p̄H Ȳ + (1 − β)ā∗ − (1 − β)b̄             (29)

and as a consequence of the equilibrium in goods and assets market that

                           C̄ ∗ = p̄F Ȳ ∗ − (1 − β)ā∗ + (1 − β)b̄,         (30)

where upper-bars denote steady-state values and we have defined p̄H ≡
P̄H /P̄ , p̄F ≡ P̄F /P̄ , ā∗ ≡ Ā∗ /P̄ ∗ and b̄ ≡ B̄/P̄ . Moreover we assume that
  10
       Later we discuss the model in details.


                                                 12
C̄, C̄ ∗ , Ȳ , Ȳ ∗ , p̄H , p̄F are consistent with the eﬃcient allocation, i.e. besides
satisfying (29) and (30) they also satisfy (13)—(15). In particular given a
value of ā∗ and b̄ we assume that steady-state values of ḡ and ḡ ∗ are such
that (13) is necessarily satisfied. In this economy, we analyze the eﬀect of
either a permanent increase in g or a permanent increase in z along the ef-
ficient allocation to study which movements in prices and exchange rate are
compatible with that allocation.


2.1        An increase in productivity of country H
2.1.1       A permanent shock

First we focus on a permanent productivity shock in country H. In this case,
looking at the system (13)—(15) we know that real quantities and relative
prices jump directly to the new equilibrium value and stay there forever.
In particular condition (13) implies that consumption in the two countries
should increase or decrease in the same proportion.11 Equation (16) shows
that the terms of trade of country H should worsen in a permanent way, i.e.
PF /PH should increase while equation (17) shows that output in country H
should increase relative to that of country F. Most important, a combination
of (16) and (17) determines relative real income across countries as
                                 PH,t Yt        µ         ¶ (1+η)(θ−1)
                                   Pt               zt         1+θη

                                 PF,t Yt∗
                                            =                            .            (31)
                                                    zt∗
                                   Pt

Following a positive productivity shock in the domestic economy, real income
in country H increases relative to that of country F provided θ, the intratem-
poral elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign traded goods,
is greater than the unitary value. Indeed in this case terms-of-trade move-
ments do not oﬀset output increases. In particular θ = 1 corresponds to the
case discussed in Cole and Obstfeld (1991) in which real income is perfectly
risk-shared across countries even when there are asymmetric shocks. On the
  11
       It can be shown that following a positive productivity shock in one country consump-
tion should increase in both countries under the eﬃcient allocation.

                                                          13
opposite θ < 1 corresponds to a case of ‘immiserizing growth’ in which a
country is poorer when its productivity increases. In what follows we assume
that θ is larger than the unitary value so that following a permanent pro-
ductivity shock in country H there is a permanent increase in real income of
country H relative to country F .
       In the standard theory of the intertemporal approach to the current ac-
count a permanent increase in real income of a country corresponds to a
parallel increase in its consumption without any accumulation of assets or
liabilities since there is no need of smoothing wealth across time.12 Here
instead the eﬃcient allocation would require that consumption increases in
both countries and in a proportional way. How can this take place? This can
happen if country H, at the time the shock hits, experiences also a negative
shock to its financial wealth in a way that is forced to accumulate liabilities
in future periods whose financial payments balance the permanent increase
in relative real income. In this way wealth is transferred to the other country.
In particular, the nominal exchange rate should appreciate.
       We show that this is indeed a possible equilibrium. A log-linear ap-
proximation to the flow budget constraint associated with the intertemporal
budget constraint of country H, equation (26), implies that

                                          b̄              ā∗                           x
 β ·(â∗t − b̂t ) = (â∗t−1 − b̂t−1 )−       (βı̂t −π t )+ (βı̂∗t −π ∗t )+ p̂H,t + Ŷt − Ĉt (32)
                                         Ȳ               Ȳ                            n
where a hat variable denotes log deviation of the respective variable in ref-
erence to the original steady state with the exception of b̂t ≡ (bt − b̄)/Ȳ ,
â∗t ≡ (a∗t − ā∗ )/Ȳ , π t ≡ ln Pt /Pt−1 and π ∗t ≡ ln Pt∗ /Pt−1
                                                                ∗
                                                                   . Moreover x =
n[1 + (1 − β)(ā∗ /Ȳ − b̄/Ȳ )]. Let us assume that the shock hits the economy
at time t0 . Since we are analyzing a permanent shock, consumption jumps
immediately to its new permanent level. According to (32), this is given by
                         nh                     ∗
                                                      i
                    Ĉ =   p̂H + Ŷ + (1 − β)(â − b̂)
                         x
  12
       With standard theory we mean a model in which only one real bond is traded across
countries.



                                                     14
in the domestic economy and
                               1−nh                              i
                      Ĉ ∗ =       p̂F + Ŷ ∗ − (1 − β)(â∗ − b̂) ,
                               1−x
in the foreign economy where we have eliminated the time-subscript to denote
permanent deviations with respect to the original steady state. Taking the
diﬀerence between the above two equations we obtain that
                                                 x                n−x ∗
  2(1 − β)(â∗ − b̂) = (p̂F + Ŷ ∗ − p̂H − Ŷ ) + (Ĉ − Ĉ ∗ ) −          Ĉ . (33)
                                                 n               n(1 − n)
Since the first-term on the right-hand side is negative because of (31), the
second term is zero because of (13) and the third term is likely to be small in
magnitude for reasonable calibration, it follows that â∗ − b̂ should be negative
meaning that the domestic economy is permanently worsening its net foreign
asset position. To restrict the degrees of indeterminacy, we assume that
prices and exchange rate jump to the new equilibrium value at the time of
the shock and remain stable afterward.13 In this case equations (27) and
(28) imply that the interest rates are not going to move away from the initial
steady state, so that even ı̂t0 and ı̂∗t0 are zero. We can then write (32) at time
t0 as
                                      b̄       ā∗                x
                     β(â∗ − b̂) =       π t0 − π ∗t0 + p̂H + Ŷ − Ĉ
                                     Ȳ        Ȳ                 n
and in a specular way

                                  b̄   ā∗                   1−x
                 −β(â∗ − b̂) = − πt0 + π ∗t0 + p̂F + Ŷ ∗ −     Ĉ
                                 Ȳ    Ȳ                    1−n
whose diﬀerence imply

                 b̄    ā∗                              x               n−x ∗
2β(â∗ − b̂) = 2 πt0 −2 π ∗t0 −(p̂F + Ŷ ∗ − p̂H − Ŷ )− (Ĉ − Ĉ ∗ )+          Ĉ .
                Ȳ     Ȳ                               n              n(1 − n)
                                                                              (34)
A comparison between equations (33) and (34) shows that

                                b̄       ā∗
                                   π t0 − π ∗t0 = (â∗ − b̂) < 0.
                               Ȳ        Ȳ
  13
       This assumption is compatible with the way we have constructed the new permanent
levels of consumption.

                                                 15
In particular in this equilibrium it is still not possible to determine π t0 or
π ∗t0 . Since P and P ∗ are both functions of PH , PF∗ and S, the above condition
imposes only one restriction on the triplet PH , PF∗ and S. Another restriction
is given by the determination of T from equation (16), but this is not enough
to determine all prices.14 However, we can infer that at least one of the
following inequalities should be true: i) π ∗t0 > 0 ; ii) π t0 < 0. In general
country H should experience a negative financial shock either through an
increase in the real value of liabilities or a decrease in the real value of assets.
Since ∆st0 = ln St0 −ln St0 −1 = π t0 −π ∗t0 an exchange rate appreciation would
help in this direction.

2.1.2       A temporary shock

We move to the analysis of the adjustment following a temporary productiv-
ity shock. The standard theory of the intertemporal approach to the current
account would say that the country that experiences the favorable tempo-
rary increase in real income should increase assets to smooth wealth and
consumption across future periods. In our context, to accord with the ef-
ficient allocation, consumption should instead move up and proportionally
in both countries in the period of the shock and return back to the original
steady state thereafter. This is compatible with a path that requires net
foreign assets to return back to the initial level in the period subsequent to
the shock. To restrict the degrees of indeterminacy, we assume that PH and
PF∗ jump at the time of the shock and remain stable afterward. Since in the
eﬃcient allocation the terms of trade should worsen on impact and return
back to the initial value in the following periods, the assumption that PH and
PF∗ just move on impact and remain stable afterward implies that the second
movement in the terms of trade is entirely brought about by an appreciation
of the nominal exchange rate. We have then pinned down the exchange rate
movement from period t0 to period t0 + 1. Considering the flow resource
  14
       Our limiting flexible-price economy is going instead to determine all prices.




                                                  16
constraint of country H at time t0 + 1 we can write

                                                b̄                        ā∗
 β · (â∗t0 +1 − b̂t0 +1 ) = (â∗t0 − b̂t0 ) −     (βı̂t0 +1 − π t0 +1 ) + (βı̂∗t0 +1 − π∗t0 +1 )
                                               Ȳ                         Ȳ
                                                         x
                               +p̂H,t0 +1 + Ŷt0 +1 − Ĉt0 +1
                                                         n
in which we know that in the eﬃcient allocation p̂H,t0 +1 = Ŷt0 +1 = 0. We
further guess that â∗t0 +1 = b̂t0 +1 = ı̂t0 +1 = ı̂∗t0 +1 = 0 and π t0 +1 = (1−n)∆st0 +1 ,
π ∗t0 +1 = −n∆st0 +1 to obtain
                                              µ                ¶
                                                       b̄  ā∗
                  (â∗t0   − b̂t0 ) = −∆st0 +1 (1 − n) + n       > 0.                       (35)
                                                      Ȳ   Ȳ

In equation (35), having inferred the movements of the exchange rate from
period t0 to period t0 + 1, we can infer that the overall net foreign asset
position at the time of the shock should improve in country H. This is in
contrast with the permanent-shock case. The reason for why country H
should improve its foreign asset position at time t0 is because the terms of
trade should improve at time t0 + 1 and the exchange rate appreciate. This
acts as a negative financial shock reducing the overall portfolio real return.
It follows that to compensate for this shock the domestic country should
accumulate foreign assets above liabilities in the period of the shock in order
to maintain the initial level of consumption in period t0 + 1 and afterward.
    We show in the appendix that in the period in which the shock hits
                                                         µ           ¶
   b̄     ā∗ ∗              ∗                              b̄   ā∗
 2 πt0 −2 π t0 = (p̂F,t0 +Ŷt0 −p̂H,t0 −Ŷt0 )−(1−β+2ρβ)       −       Ĉt0 . (36)
  Ȳ      Ȳ                                               Ȳ    Ȳ
    Since the first-term on the RHS of (36) is negative because of (31) and
assuming that country H starts with a negative net foreign asset position
over output, it follows that the LHS should be also negative. As in the
previous case, we cannot determine π t0 and π ∗t0 , but we can infer that at
least one of the following inequalities should be true: i) π ∗t0 > 0 ; ii) π t0 < 0.
In general country H should experience a negative financial shock at the
time the favorable temporary productivity shock hits. An appreciation of
the nominal exchange rate can help for this purpose.

                                                   17
   The story is the following. When a temporary productivity shock hits
country H, a wealth transfer should immediately occur to sustain consump-
tion in the other economy. This happens through a financial shock that
distributes wealth across country. Part of the increase in relative real income
in country H is then absorbed by a fall in financial wealth. The remaining
parts are consumed in the eﬃcient proportion and used to improve the net
foreign asset position. This improvement is needed to cushion against the
negative future financial shock driven by the appreciation of the nominal
exchange rate that works to improve the terms of trade. Even though price
and exchange rate implications are similar whether the shock is temporary or
permanent, the dynamic of the net foreign asset position is diﬀerent. With
a temporary shock country H should accumulate foreign assets in the short
run that should return back to the initial steady state thereafter. With a
permanent shock, country H should accumulate foreign liabilities and worsen
its net foreign asset position forever.


2.2    An increase in the preference shock of country H
First we focus on a permanent shock. As an important diﬀerence with re-
spect to the previous case, neither the terms of trade nor relative output
nor relative real income across countries should change in the eﬃcient allo-
cation. However, equation (13) shows that the ratio of consumption between
countries should move proportionally to match the increase in g. In the stan-
dard intertemporal approach to the current account, there is no increase in
relative real income. However consumption in the domestic economy rises
through a permanent worsening of the terms of trade without any accumu-
lation of assets. Here, it is instead possible to achieve the eﬃcient allocation
without any movement in the terms of trade provided country H receives a
positive shock to financial wealth suﬃcient to increase the current level of
consumption and to increase net foreign asset holdings in a way to sustain
consumption at higher level even in the future. Indeed since (33) still holds
under this experiment, we observe that now the RHS of (33) is likely to be

                                          18
positive so that
                                  (â∗ − b̂) > 0
and country H should indeed improve its net foreign asset position. Following
previous steps we obtain
                          b̄       ā∗
                             π t0 − π ∗t0 = (â∗ − b̂) > 0,
                         Ȳ        Ȳ
from which it follows that at the time of the shock country H should be af-
fected by a favorable financial shock that either inflates the value of liabilities
or appreciates the asset holdings. An exchange rate depreciation can help
for this purpose.
   The case of a temporary shock is even simpler. Since in the eﬃcient
allocation there should not be any movement in the terms of trade there
is no need to increase or decrease the net foreign asset position to cushion
against financial shocks in future periods. The net foreign asset position of
each country remains stable at the initial steady state. However, at the time
the shock hits, consumption in country H can increase because appropriate
movements in prices and exchange rate temporarily improve its financial
wealth.


2.3    Some numerical computations
As a rough idea on the magnitude of the movements in prices and exchange
rates needed to achieve the eﬃcient allocation we perform some computations
in a ‘limiting’ flexible price economy. The model considered is similar to
the one presented in the previous section, but with some frictions in the
price-setting mechanisms. Details are in the following section. The limit
is taken with respect to those frictions making them very small in a way
to approximate the flexible-price allocation and still determine the path of
prices and exchange rate under welfare maximization. Moreover, the results
are in line with the discussion of sections 2.1 and 2.2.
   In this section, we introduce the calibration of the parameters of the
model. First, we assume that the countries are of equal size, n = 0.5. We

                                           19
consider a quarterly model with a steady-state real interest rate equal to
1% on a quarterly basis, implying a value of β equal to 0.99. We assume
σ = 7.66 implying a potential mark-up of 15% and set θ = 2 as in Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ (2006). Micro-data suggests Frisch elasticity to be in the range
of 0.05 — 0.3. We set η = 5 which corresponds to a Frisch elasticity of 0.20.
For the risk-aversion coeﬃcient we choose ρ = 2, consistent with the work of
Eichenbaum et al. (1988) that found a range of 0.5 — 3.
   Studies as Gourinchas and Rey (2006), Higgins et al. (2006), Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2004, 2006), Tille (2003, 2005) have documented that the
composition of foreign assets and liabilities of the US economy is quite diver-
sified ranging from bonds, equities to FDI. Moreover an important charac-
teristic of the current composition is that the assets are mostly denominated
in foreign currency while liabilities are mostly denominated in US dollars.
In particular, as discussed in Tille (2005), the US economy is an overall net
lender in securities denominated in foreign currency and borrower in dollar-
denominated securities. In our exercise, we assume that all these positions
are made by bonds and in particular that the assets coincide with holdings
of bonds denominated in foreign currency while the liabilities coincide with
issuing bonds denominated in domestic currency. To calibrate the steady
state of the model, we refer to Tille (2005) for the US portfolio positions in
the year 2004. In particular, the US net foreign asset position in that year
is negative and equal to −22% of the GDP. In particular the net leverage
position in foreign currency corresponds to assets equal to the amount of 50%
of GDP while net dollar liabilities are 72% of GDP. In our simple two-bond
economy, this maps in assuming that ā∗ /Ȳ is equal to 0.50 ∗ 4/n (since assets
are in per-capita terms and output is on a quarterly basis), while b̄/Ȳ is equal
to 0.72 ∗ 4/n.
   Following a 1% permanent increase in country H productivity, we find
that the nominal exchange rate should appreciate by 5.54%, the GDP price
level in country H, PH , should decrease by 3.6%, while that of country F ,
PF∗ , should increase by 2.5%. The CPI price level in country H, P , should


                                          20
fall by 3.32% and the foreign CPI price level, P ∗ , should increase in the
amount of 2.22%. An important role in the adjustment is taken up by the
accumulation of liabilities towards the rest of the world. Indeed the overall
net asset position goes from −22% to −25.25% in percentage of GDP.
       Following a 1% permanent increase in the shock to the consumption pref-
erences in country H, the nominal exchange rate should depreciate by the
amount of 9.86%, PH should increase by 5.82%, while PF∗ should decrease
by 4.04%, P should increase by 5.82% and P ∗ should fall in the amount of
4.04%. However, part of the adjustment is taken up by the accumulation of
foreign assets in country H with respect to the rest of the world, the overall
net foreign asset position goes from −22% to −15.76%.
       In general following permanent shocks, even of small dimension, there are
large movements of prices and assets which are compatible with the eﬃcient
allocation.15
       There is no long-run asset accumulation when shocks are temporary. Fol-
lowing a 1% temporary increase in productivity in the domestic economy, the
net foreign asset position moves to −21.45% in the period of the shock and
reverts back to the initial value in the following period. No change occurs
when the economies are perturbed by a temporary shock to the preference.
The adjustment is mostly done by exchange rates and prices. Following again
a 1% temporary increase in productivity of country H, the nominal exchange
rate should appreciate by 0.3% in the period of the shock and by 0.5% in the
following period, the GDP price level in country H should decrease by 0.5%,
while in country F should increase by 0.3% in the period of the shock and re-
main stable afterwards. Following a temporary 1% increase in the preference
shock of country H, the nominal exchange rate should depreciate by 0.34%
in the period of the shock, the GDP price level in country H should increase
by 0.20%, while in country F should decrease by 0.13% in the period of the
shock and remain stable afterward.
  15
       Corsetti and Konstantinou (2005) find that permanent shocks explain a large fraction
of the variance of the current account, especially at long-horizon.



                                                21
3        Adding price rigidities
The result that in a frictionless economy prices and exchange rates adjust
in accordance with the current account to sustain the eﬃcient allocation is
reminiscent of the role of prices in optimal taxation problem that relieve taxes
from the role of maintaining the intertemporal resource of the government in
balance.16
       In this section we study how a concern for a low volatility of prices,
in line with the recent literature on inflation targeting (see among others
Woodford, 2003), aﬀects this result. We explore the role of price rigidities
modelled following Calvo (1983) and Yun (1996). In particular, a generic
firm producing good h in country H faces each period a constant probability
of adjusting its price. In this event the price chosen at a generic time t might
last until period T with probability αT −t where 0 ≤ α < 1 and 1−α is indeed
the probability that a generic firm changes its price in a certain period. This
is the only source of randomness in the model.17 The problem of a generic
firm producing good h in country H that is chosen to set its price in period
t is that of maximizing the following expected stream of profits
              X∞          ∙                                       ¸
                    T −t                            wT (h)
                   α Qt,T (1 − τ )pt (h)ỹT (h) − n        ỹT (h)
              T =t
                                                     zT

where Qt,T = Rt,T Pt /PT and
                             µ            ¶−σ µ          ¶−θ
                                 pt (h)           PH,T
                 ỹT (h) =                                     (nCT + (1 − n)CT∗ ).
                                 PH,T              PT

As in Benigno and Woodford (2005), the first-order condition of this problem
can be combined with the expression for wT (h) given by (18) to yield an
  16
       Recent works in the area are Benigno and Woodford (2006), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2005) and Sims (2002).
  17
     We could have obtained the same results using the Rotemberg model of price rigidities,
see Nisticó (2007). However, at the end to obtain an empirical measure of price rigidity
we should have mapped the parameters of the Rotemberg model into that of the Calvo
model.



                                                         22
aggregate supply equation of the form
                                                 µ         ¶ 1+ση
                                                              σ−1
                                 1 − αΠσ−1
                                       H,t            Ft
                                           =                                                       (37)
                                   1−α                Kt

having used the law of motion of the general price index PH implied by the
Calvo model. In particular, we have defined
                        X∞                       µ      ¶σ(1+η)
                                 T −t −(1+η) 1+η   PH,T
                   Kt ≡      (αβ) zT        YT                  ,                                  (38)
                        T =t
                                                   PH,t

                      X∞                 µ      ¶µ      ¶σ−1
                               T −t −ρ ρ   PH,T    PH,T
                 Ft ≡      (αβ) CT gT YT                     ,                                     (39)
                      T =t
                                            PT     PH,t

and ΠH,t ≡ PH,t /PH,t−1 . In a similar way we obtain an aggregate supply
equation for country F
                                                      µ         ¶ 1+ση
                                                                   σ−1
                              1 − α∗ (Π∗F,t )σ−1          Ft∗
                                                 =                       ,                         (40)
                                  1 − α∗                  Kt∗

where we have defined Π∗F,t ≡ PF,t
                               ∗     ∗
                                   /PF,t−1 ,
                                                                  Ã          !σ(1+η)
                     X
                     ∞                                                 ∗
                                                                      PF,T
                 ∗
                Kt ≡   (α∗ β)T −t (zT∗ )−(1+η) (YT∗ )1+η                ∗
                                                                                          ,        (41)
                       T =t
                                                                      PF,t

                                               µ      ¶                      Ã          !σ−1
                  X∞
                                                 PF,T                             ∗
                                                                                 PF,T
                                 ∗ −1 ∗−ρ ∗ρ ∗
          Ft∗   ≡        ∗  T −t
                       (α β) (μT ) CT gT YT                                        ∗
                                                                                               ,   (42)
                  T =t
                                                  PT                             PF,t
where 1 − α∗ with 0 ≤ α∗ < 1 denotes the probability that a firm of country
F is chosen to adjust its price in a certain period. Moreover, the price-setting
mechanism assumed implies that the indexes of price dispersions (10) and
(11) follow the laws of motion
                                                      Ã                      !− σ(1+η)
                                 σ(1+η)                   1 − αΠσ−1
                                                                H,t
                                                                                 1−σ

                ∆t = α∆t−1 ΠH,t           + (1 − α)                                       ,        (43)
                                                            1−α

                                                  µ                                ¶− σ(1+η)
                                               1 − α∗ (Π∗F,t )σ−1                      1−σ

     ∆∗t = α∗ ∆∗t−1 (Π∗F,t )σ(1+η) + (1 − α∗ )                                                 .   (44)
                                                   1 − α∗

                                                 23
An important implication of the assumption of price rigidities is that it is
no longer possible, in general, to implement the eﬃcient allocation when
markets are incomplete. This can be seen by noting that indeed setting
ΠH,t = Π∗F,t = 1 in each period t assures that Ft = Kt and Ft∗ = Kt∗ so that
conditions (14) and (15) are necessarily satisfied. Eﬃciency requires certain
                                              ∗
movements in relative prices PH,t /Pt and St PF,t /Pt . But the requirement that
ΠH,t = Π∗F,t = 1 restricts necessarily the paths of Pt and St in a way that (26)
is not satisfied in general when its RHS is evaluated at the eﬃcient allocation
for unexpected perturbations.


4     Constrained-eﬃcient allocation
Since the eﬃcient allocation is not feasible, we investigate which allocation is
optimal in this second-best environment. To do this, we analyze the solution
using approximation methods. First, we require that the constrained eﬃcient
policy and the eﬃcient policy coincides in a steady-state in which zt = zt∗ = z̄
and gt = ḡ and gt = ḡ ∗ . We know that if ΠH,t = Π∗F,t = 1 conditions (14)
and (15) are necessarily satisfied and so they will be in a stationary solution
with zero producer inflation at all times. However in the steady-state, (26)
implies that
                       C̄ = (1 − β)ā∗ − (1 − β)b̄ + p̄H Ȳ

                     C̄ ∗ = −(1 − β)ā∗ + (1 − β)b̄ + p̄F Ȳ ∗ .

As in the previous section, for given initial conditions b̄ and ā∗ , we choose ḡ
and ḡ∗ in a way that (13) is also satisfied. This implies that in the stationary
solution the initial allocation under producer-price stability is eﬃcient.
    Our objective is to characterize the departure of the constrained-eﬃcient
allocation from the eﬃcient allocation when there are small movements of
the stochastic disturbances from the above-defined stationary solution. In
particular, we are interested in characterizing a log-linear approximation to
the constrained-eﬃcient allocation. This can be obtained as a solution of
a linear-quadratic (LQ) problem. Since the steady-state in the constrained

                                            24
problem is eﬃcient, the quadratic objective function can be obtained by
just taking a second-order expansion of the objective function of the Pareto
problem (12), using the method of Rotemberg and Woodford (1998).
       As shown in Benigno (2001), the objective function can be written as18
                                              W
                                       UC C       X
                                                  ∞
                               Wt0 = −                   β t−t0 Lt ,                  (45)
                                         2        t=t0

with

Lt = (ρ + η) · [ĈtW − C̃tW ]2 + x(1 − x)ρ[ĈtR − C̃tR ]2 + n(1 − n)(1 + ηθ)θ · [T̂t − T̃t ]2
        σ                      σ
     +n (π H,t )2 + (1 − n) ∗ (π∗F,t )2 + t.i.p. + O(kξk3 ),
        k                      k

where, for a generic variable X, we denote with X̂ the log-deviation of the
variable X from the steady state under sticky prices, with X̃ the log-deviation
of the variable X from the steady state under the eﬃcient allocation; X W
denotes the weighted average with weights s and 1 − s of the variables X and
X ∗ for country H and F respectively, X R is the relative diﬀerence between
X and X ∗ ; πH,t = ln PH,t /PH,t−1 and π ∗F,t = ln PF,t
                                                    ∗     ∗
                                                        /PF,t−1 . In particular k ≡
(1−α)(1−αβ)(ρ+η)/[α(1+ση)] and k∗ ≡ (1−α∗ )(1−α∗ β)(ρ+η)/[α∗ (1+ση)];
t.i.p. denotes terms independent of policy while O(kξk3 ) denotes terms of
order higher than the third. C̃tW , C̃tR and T̃t can be obtained from a log-
linear approximation of constraints (13), (14) and (15). They are all linear
combinations of the shocks of the model as detailed in the appendix.
       This loss function indeed shows that it would be optimal to achieve the
eﬃcient allocation for both quantities and relative prices. Indeed consump-
tion and terms of trade movements are penalized for fluctuating around the
eﬃcient allocation. At the same time it is optimal to set producer (or GDP)
inflation rate in each country to zero since, when prices are staggered as
in the Calvo model, inflation creates ineﬃcient variation among prices of
  18
       To compute the constrained-eﬃcient policy there is no need to use a linear-quadratic
solution, this is convenient to obtain an objective function. See also Pescatori (2005) for
an alternative derivation in a closed-economy heterogenous-agent model.



                                                  25
goods which are produced according to the same technology. We have al-
ready discussed that the eﬃcient allocation cannot be in general achieved
when markets are sticky. There are three conflicting objectives: (i) the ob-
jective of eﬃcient risk sharing; (ii) the desire for producer price stability;
(iii) the desire for an eﬃcient adjustment in international relative prices.
The constrained-eﬃcient policy should then balance the losses in the above
criterion taking into account the structural constraints. In particular, a log-
linear approximation to the constraints (8), (9), (26) to (28), (37) to (44)
suﬃces for analyzing the constrained problem. The solution is detailed in
the appendix.


5     Are valuation eﬀects desirable when prices
      are sticky?
We have seen that in the frictionless model, prices and exchange rate adjust
substantially in accordance with the eﬃcient allocation of quantities and
relative prices. In this section, we study the desirability of these movements
when there are instead frictions in the price mechanism. We assume that the
degrees of price rigidity are equal across countries, i.e. α = α∗ , and let α
vary from small numbers close to zero —which approximate the flexible-price
allocation discussed in section 2.2— to higher numbers indicating a substantial
amount of price rigidities.
    The focus is on unexpected permanent or transitory shocks. Figure 1
shows the percentage changes in the log deviations with respect to the steady
state of producer prices, domestic and foreign, and exchange rate at the time
the shock hits following a permanent increase of 1% in the productivity of
country H. In particular we study how these movements vary when α moves
from zero to higher numbers. The result is striking. A small amount of
price rigidities is suﬃcient to substantially dampen the response of prices
and exchange rates. A value of α close to 0.1 meaning a price duration of 3
month and a half would already be suﬃcient. In particular when α is equal

                                         26
                                         lnP
                                               H
        0

       -1
   %




       -2

       -3

       -4
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3         ∗   0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                         lnP
                                               F
        3


        2
    %




        1


        0
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3             0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                         lnS
        2

        0
   %




       -2

       -4

       -6
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3             0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                          α



Figure 1: Short-run percentage changes of prices (ln PH and ln PF∗ ) and ex-
change rate (ln S) with respect to the initial steady state for diﬀerent degrees
of nominal rigidities (α) following a 1% permanent increase in productivity
in country H.




                                           27
to 0.2— implying a price duration of approximately 4 months— domestic and
foreign GDP price levels should be stabilized. In particular the reaction of
the exchange rate is substantially reduced compared to the flexible-price case
minimizing the desirability of valuation eﬀects.

                  -21.5




                   -22




                  -22.5




                   -23
       % of GDP




                  -23.5




                   -24




                  -24.5




                   -25
                          0   0.1   0.2    0.3        0.4      0.5       0.6       0.7
                                                 α



Figure 2: Ratio between the long-run value of the net foreign assets and
GDP in country H for diﬀerent degrees of nominal rigidities (α) following a
1% permanent increase in productivity in country H. (Initial steady state is
−22% of GDP)

       Figure 2 analyzes the ratio between the long-run net foreign asset position
of country H and the long-run value of output to study what is the long-run
impact of the shock on the financial position of the countries. The initial
value for this ratio is the calibrated one −22%.19 In a similar way to Figure
  19
       Conditional on a shock and for given α and net foreign asset position, it is always
possible to find a portfolio composition such that the eﬃcient allocation is implementable
with stable prices.


                                                 28
1, a small amount of price rigidities is suﬃcient to dampen the response of
assets. When there are suﬃcient frictions in the price adjustment, the net
foreign asset position of country H is close to the initial value in contrast to
the large worsening when prices are flexible.

                                         lnP
                                               H
        6


        4
    %




        2


        0
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3         ∗   0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                         lnP
                                               F
        0

       -1
   %




       -2

       -3

       -4
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3             0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                         lnS
       10
   %




        5




        0
            0   0.1       0.2      0.3             0.4   0.5    0.6       0.7
                                          α



Figure 3: Short-run percentage changes of prices (ln PH and ln PF∗ ) and ex-
change rate (ln S) with respect to the initial steady state for diﬀerent degrees
of nominal rigidities (α) following a 1% permanent increase in the preference
shock in country H.

   Figures 3 and 4 repeat the experiment when the economies are subject to
a permanent shock to consumption preferences in country H. The conclusion
does not change. It is suﬃcient a small amount of price rigidity to dampen
the overall response of prices, exchange rate and assets.
   To substantiate the parallel with the optimal taxation literature, even
there a small concern for price stability is suﬃcient to move the trade-oﬀ be-

                                           29
              -16.5


               -17


              -17.5


               -18


              -18.5
   % of GDP




               -19


              -19.5


               -20


              -20.5


               -21


              -21.5
                      0   0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4   0.5   0.6     0.7
                                            α



Figure 4: Ratio between the long-run value of the net foreign assets and
GDP in country H for diﬀerent degrees of nominal rigidities (α) following a
1% permanent increase in the preference shock in country H. (Initial steady
state is −22% of GDP)




                                            30
tween using distorting taxes or prices to balance the intertemporal constraint
of the government towards the use of taxes .20
      We now investigate the features of the constrained-eﬃcient allocation
when prices are sticky. We do this under the calibration of section 2.3 but here
we assume that prices are sticky for three quarters in country H (α = 0.66)
and for four quarters in country F (α∗ = 0.75). We investigate the responses
of the main variables of interest to permanent shocks as in previous analyses.
Since there is no interesting dynamic in the response of the variables except
for what can be learnt from the first and final periods, we just focus on the
short-run and long-run responses. With short-run response, we mean the
impulse response at the time the shock occurs; with long-run response we
mean the impulse response in a suﬃciently distant period of time. Table 1
presents the results for both shocks with 1% magnitude. In particular we have
defined tbt as the ratio of the log deviations of the trade balance with respect
to the original steady state over initial steady-state output. The variable
nf at denotes the changes in the net foreign asset position with respect to the
initial value as a percentage of GDP.
      Producer prices do not vary much both in the short and long run. In-
deed, the concern for price stability built into the loss function (45) is strong
enough to keep these prices stable. If producer prices do not move much,
most of the stabilizing role remains in the nominal exchange rate. Focusing
first on the permanent productivity shock, a striking feature of the results
reported in Table 1 (second and third columns) is that short and long-run
behaviors are quite diﬀerent. In particular, the exchange rate does not react
much in the short run and depreciates in the long run. To understand this,
let us move back to the frictionless world where consumption in both coun-
tries should rise, but in the same magnitude, and the terms of trade should
worsen to make goods which are produced more eﬃciently cheaper. There
are two objectives: risk sharing and the terms of trade adjustment. Our
results would point to say that the terms of trade objective is dominating in
 20
      See Benigno and Woodford (2006) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2005).



                                             31
                 Productivity Shock               Preference Shock
               Short Run     Long Run         Short Run      Long Run
     Ĉ          0.43           0.66             0.63             0.27
  Ĉ − C̃        0.00           0.23             -0.01            -0.37
    Ĉ ∗         -0.02          0.20             0.39             0.02
 Ĉ ∗ − C̃ ∗     -0.45         -0.22             0.74             0.37
     T̂          0.05           0.46             0.79             0.13
  T̂ − T̃        —0.48         -0.08             0.79             0.13
  ln PH          -0.01          0.00             0.02             0.00
   ln PF∗        0.00           0.00             0.00             0.00
   ln S          0.04           0.46             0.81             0.13
     Ŷ          0.25           0.89             1.30             0.28
    Ŷ ∗         0.14          -0.03             -0.27            0.01
    tbt          -0.14          0.45             1.06             0.08
   nf at         -0.34          0.11             1.44             0.75

Table 1: Short and long-run responses following a 1% permanent increase in
either productivity or preference shock. Benchmark calibration.




                                       32
the long run and indeed the exchange rate permanently depreciate to meet
this objective. In the long run the domestic country enjoys higher relative
real income and output together with a worsening of the terms of trade that
pushes up consumption. Instead, in the short run the exchange rate works
for the risk-sharing objective. In particular the exchange rate does not react
much, terms of trade improve, production in country H does not increase
as it should and consumption in country H does not rise much. The overall
combination of these eﬀects produce a negative financial shock so that lia-
bilities are accumulated in the short run while they are replenished in the
long-run.
   Similar balance between the two objectives can be observed when the
economies are hit by a permanent shock to the consumption preferences in
country H. Indeed the risk-sharing objective would require that consumption
in country H increases relative to that of country F while the terms of trade
should not move. Even in this case, the behavior of the exchange rate is
diﬀerent comparing the short and long run. In the short run, the exchange
rate substantially depreciates while in the long run it goes close to the initial
value. As in the previous case, the terms of trade objective dominates in
the long run while in the short run the exchange rate works in favour of the
risk-sharing objective. Indeed the initial depreciation of the exchange rate
acts as a positive financial shock for country H and increases the return of
holding foreign assets improving its net-foreign assets position. This is the
channel through which it is possible to sustain a higher level of consumption
in the long-run relative to the foreign country.
   We study the robustness of previous results by investigating how a dif-
ferent composition of the net foreign asset position aﬀects the outcome. We
assume three alternative scenarios. In all cases, the overall net foreign asset
position is calibrated to −22% of GDP. However, in the first scenario there
are no assets denominated in foreign currency, all the net foreign asset posi-
tion is made by liabilities denominated in domestic currency amounting to a
total of 22% of GDP. In the second scenario, assets are 50% of GDP while lia-


                                          33
                       ā∗               ā∗               ā∗
                       Ȳ
                             = 0%        Ȳ
                                               = 50%       Ȳ
                                                                 = 100%
                    SR          LR     SR         LR      SR         LR
       Ĉ           0.43       0.66    0.43       0.66    0.44       0.64
  Ĉ − C̃           0.00       0.24    -0.01      0.23    0.01       0.21
       Ĉ ∗         -0.04      0.20    -0.03      0.20    0.02       0.22
   ∗            ∗
 Ĉ − C̃            -0.47      -0.23   -0.46      -0.23   -0.41     -0.20
       T̂           0.41       0.46    0.06       0.46    -0.22      0.47
  T̂ − T̃           -0.13      -0.08   -0.49      -0.08   -0.77     -0.07
  ln PH             -0.01      0.00    -0.01      0.00    -0.02      0.00
  ln PF∗            -0.00      0.00    0.00       -0.00   0.00       0.00
   ln S             0.41       0.47    0.05       0.47    -0.24      0.47
       Ŷ           0.60       0.89    0.26       0.89    0.06       0.90
            ∗
       Ŷ           -0.13      -0.03   0.14       -0.03   0.45      -0.04
       tbt          0.38       0.45    -0.15      0.46    -0.55      0.49
   nf at            0.05       0.14    -0.33      0.10    -1.25     -0.19

Table 2: Short (SR) and long-run (LR) responses (%) following a 1% perma-
nent increase in productivity in country H. Alternative assumptions on the
composition of net foreign assets.




                                          34
bilities 72%, in the third case assets are 100% of GDP while liabilities amount
to 122%. Table 2 presents the results for the case in which the economies
are aﬀected by a permanent productivity shock in country H, while Table 3
analyzes the case of a permanent shock to consumption preferences.




                  ā∗                   ā∗                  ā∗
                  Ȳ
                        = 0%            Ȳ
                                              = 50%          Ȳ
                                                                   = 100%
                SR         LR         SR         LR         SR         LR
     Ĉ        0.65       0.24       0.64        0.27       0.63       0.33
  Ĉ − C̃      0.00       -0.41      -0.01       -0.38     -0.02      -0.32
          ∗
    Ĉ         0.47       0.05       0.44        0.02       0.27      -0.04
 Ĉ ∗ − C̃ ∗   0.82       0.40       0.39        0.37       0.62       0.31
     T̂        0.23       0.15       0.74        0.14       1.16       0.12
  T̂ − T̃      0.23       0.15       0.79        0.14       1.16       0.12
   ln PH       0.01       -0.01      0.02        0.00       0.03       0.00
   ln PF∗      0.01       0.01       0.00        0.01      -0.01       0.00
   ln S        0.23       0.13       0.81        0.13       1.20       0.11
     Ŷ        0.79       0.29       1.30        0.28       1.61       0.26
    Ŷ ∗       0.33       -0.01      -0.28       0.01      -0.72       0.03
    tbt        0.25       0.13       1.06        0.08       1.56      -0.01
   nf at       0.41       0.27       1.43        0.75       3.12       1.56

Table 3: Short (SR) and long-run (LR) responses (%) following 1% perma-
nent increase in the preference shock of country H. Alternative assumptions
on the composition of net foreign assets.

   Under a productivity shock, when all liabilities are in the amount of 22%
of GDP, the exchange rate depreciates even in the short run. Moreover
the domestic country experiences a short and long-run improvement in the
trade balance. The terms of trade objective is dominating even in the short
run. Instead with a more diversified composition of the net foreign assets,
the exchange rate works to improve risk sharing, but in a muted way with

                                         35
respect to the flexible-price allocation. This is seen by inspecting the table
and observing that the consumption gaps get smaller as the financial position
becomes more diversified.
    However, the gains are really of small order. This points more towards
substantiating the overall argument that the concern for price stability in-
trinsic in models with price rigidity is suﬃcient to dampen the desirability
of valuation eﬀects.


6     Extensions and conclusion
In this paper we have analyzed to what extent the exchange-rate valuation
channel is desirable. We have indeed focused on the constrained-eﬃcient or,
whether applicable, eﬃcient allocation from the point of view of a global
planner and asked which movements in prices and exchange rate are com-
patible with those allocations. In a pure frictionless world, large movements
in prices, exchange rates and assets are needed to distribute financial wealth
in an eﬃcient way across countries. However, as soon as small frictions in the
price mechanism are added, a strong argument for price stability emerges and
valuation eﬀects are muted. We have also discussed how the standard theory
of the “intertemporal approach to the current account” should be modified
to account for prices and exchange rate movements when permanent or tran-
sitory shocks perturb the economy.
    We have chosen a very stylized model that presents several limitations.
Here, we discuss to what extent our results are robust to relaxing some of
the assumptions made. We have analyzed only bond economies, although
with bonds denominated in diﬀerent currencies. An important extension
should consider also trade in equities. There are two potential roles for
valuation eﬀects when equities are considered: i) changes in equity prices are
an important source of movements in the market value of wealth; ii) if equities
are denominated in diﬀerent currencies then exchange-rate movements can
be an important source of valuation eﬀects. Concerning the first channel, this


                                         36
is less relevant from an empirical perspective. Among others, Tille (2005)
has documented that for the US external position valuation eﬀects due to
changes in the price of equities overall cancel out when both sides of assets
and liabilities are considered together. The second channel is instead already
taken into account in our analysis. What matters for the exchange-rate
valuation channel in a log-linear approximation is the steady-state portion of
wealth denominated in foreign currency and not its composition. Our results
will not change if part of that share is made up by equities.
      By increasing the number of financial instruments traded there can be
more scope for risk sharing. This is actually going to reinforce our results.
Indeed, when markets are complete the exchange rate is completely relieved
from the role of distributing wealth across countries. In the second-best world
with price frictions, price stability can be implemented and the exchange rate
moves the terms of trade in the desired way.
      There is one dimension along which the results might change. This is
when large shocks are considered. In the optimal taxation literature, Siu
(2001) has shown that optimal inflation variability is low when shocks are
small but becomes more desirable when shocks are of large magnitude. It
might be the case that with large shocks the objective of risk-sharing dom-
inates that of price stability requiring then large unexpected movements in
the exchange rate. A complete analysis of this issue goes beyond the scope
of the approximation methods used in this work.
      Another interesting extension to explore is the case in which prices of
traded goods are set in local currency. The literature on optimal policy in
open economies finds that in this case it is optimal to stabilize the exchange
rate.21 This result is going to reinforce our conclusions. Similarly when the
economy is hit by news on future disturbances.22
      An important limitation of the analysis is that we have focused on a
perfect foresight equilibrium in which asset positions are indeterminate and
 21
      See Devereux and Engel (2003).
 22
      See Devereux and Engel (2006).




                                         37
can be chosen arbitrarily. In a stochastic model, as shown in Devereux and
Sutherland (2006), steady-state asset positions will be endogenously depen-
dent on the variance of the shocks and on the optimal monetary policy cho-
sen. In the case of unexpected shocks, the analysis of this paper would go
through. More complex and interesting would be the analysis of optimal
exchange rate volatility which would require more general tools than the
standard LQ method used here. This is an open area of research to explore.
   One advantage of choosing a perfect foresight model and arbitrarily steady
state positions is that in reality there are components of the portfolio posi-
tions which are not optimally chosen on the basis of asset pricing consider-
ations, e.g. FDI. In our model we can choose the steady state positions to
match those of the data. Another limitation of our analysis is that we have
assumed that the economy starts from a stationary solution while in reality
asset positions currently observed can be moving as a part of the dynamic
adjustment toward a steady state. This is hard to factor out in the data and
moreover cannot be properly analyzed with the local methods used in this
paper.
   Finally, we have focused on the welfare-maximizing allocation from the
point of view of a central planner. There are other possible allocations in our
economy that can be supported by alternative paths of prices and exchange
rate. In particular, each country has an incentive to use monetary policy to
redirect valuation eﬀects in its favor. Issues of cooperation might arise and
countries might have incentive to maximize their own welfare. It is however
likely that even in this case a small concern for price stability can reduce these
incentives or at the least dampen the extent to which valuation eﬀects can
be really used to increase in a strategic manner the welfare of each country.



References
 [1] Benigno, Pierpaolo (2001), “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial
     Integration,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2854.

                                          38
 [2] Benigno, Pierpaolo and Michael Woodford (2005), “Inflation Stabiliza-
    tion and Welfare: the Case of a Distorted Steady State,” Journal of the
    European Economic Association 3, 1-52.

 [3] Benigno, Pierpaolo and Michael Woodford (2006), “Optimal Inflation
    Targeting Under Alternative Fiscal Regimes,” NBER Working Paper
    No. 12158.

 [4] Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi and Filipa Sa (2005), “The U.S.
    Current Account and the Dollar,” Brookings Papers on Economic Ac-
    tivity, 2005:2.

 [5] Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing
    Framework,” Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 383-398.

 [6] Cavallo, Michele and Cedric Tille (2006), “Could Capital Gains Smooth
    a Current Account Rebalancing? ” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
    Staﬀ Report 237.

 [7] Clarida, Richard (2006), G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
    and Adjustment, The University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

 [8] Cole, Harold and Maurice Obstfeld (1991), “Commodity Trade and
    International Risksharing: How Much do Financial Markets Matter?”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 28, pp. 3-24.

 [9] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Panagiotis Konstantinou (2005), “Current Ac-
    count Theory and the Dynamics of US Net Foreign Liabilities,” unpub-
    lished manuscript.

[10] Devereux, Michael and Charles Engel (2003), “Monetary Policy in the
    Open Economy Revisited: The Case for Exchange-Rate Flexibility Re-
    stored,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(4): 765-783.

[11] Devereux, Michael and Charles Engel (2006), “Expectations and Ex-
    change Rate Policy,” unpublished manuscript.

                                       39
[12] Devereux, Michael and Makoto Saito (2005), “A Portfolio Theory of
    International Capital Flows”, unpublished manuscript, University of
    British Columbia.

[13] Devereux, Michael and Alan Sutherland (2006), “Country Portfolios in
    Open Economy Macro Models”, unpublished manuscript, University of
    British Columbia.

[14] Eichenbaum, Martin, Lars P. Hansen and Kenneth Singleton (1988),
    “A Time Series Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consump-
    tion and Leisure Choice Under Uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 103, 51-78.

[15] Engel, Charles and Akito Matsumoto (2005), “Portfolio Choice in a
    Monetary Open-Economy DSGE Model,” unpublished manuscript, Uni-
    versity of Wisconsin.

[16] Ghironi, Fabio, Jaewoo Lee and Alessandro Rebucci, (2005), “The
    Valuation Channel of External Adjustment,” unpublished manuscript,
    Boston College.

[17] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey (2005), “International Fi-
    nancial Adjustment,” unpublished manuscript, Princeton University

[18] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey (2006), “From World Banker
    to World Venture Capitalist: The US External Adjustment and The
    Exorbitant Privilege,” forthcoming in Richard Clarida (ed.) G7 Current
    Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The University of
    Chicago Press: Chicago.

[19] Higgins, Matthew, Thomas Klitgaard and Cedric Tille (2005), “The
    Income Implications of Rising U.S. International Liabilities,” Federal
    Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance,
    vol. 11, number 12.



                                      40
[20] Kollman, Robert (2003), “Monetary Policy Rules in an Interdependent
    World,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4012.

[21] Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2004), “Financial Global-
    ization and Exchange Rates,” CEP Discussion Paper 662.

[22] Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2005), “A Global Perspec-
    tive on External Positions,” forthcoming in Richard Clarida (ed.) G7
    Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, The Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press: Chicago.

[23] Ljungqvist Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (2004), Recursive Macroeco-
    nomic Theory, 2nd edition, The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.

[24] Nisticó, Salvatore (2007), “The Welfare Loss from Unstable Inflation,”
    Economics Letters, forthcoming.

[25] Obstfeld, Maurice (2004), “External Adjustment,” Review of World
    Economics, no.4.

[26] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2000), “New directions for sto-
    chastic open economy models,” Journal of International Economics 50,
    117—153.

[27] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2005), “Global Current Account
    Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
    nomic Activity 1.

[28] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (2006), “The Unsustainable US
    Current Account Position Revisited,” forthcoming in Richard Clarida
    (ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment,
    The University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

[29] Pescatori, Andrea (2005), “Incomplete Markets, Idiosyncratic Income
    Shocks and Optimal Monetary Policy,” unpublished manuscript.



                                         41
[30] Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1998), “An Optimization-
    Based Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,”
    in B.S. Bernanke and Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeconomic Annual
    1997, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 297-346.

[31] Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martín Uribe (2004), “Optimal Fiscal
    and Monetary Policy under Sticky Prices,” Journal of Economic Theory
    114, 198-230.

[32] Siu, Henry (2004), “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Sticky
    Prices,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(3) pp. 575-607.

[33] Sims, Christopher A., (2002) “Fiscal Consequences for Mexico of Adopt-
    ing the Dollar,” unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

[34] Tille, Cedric (2003), “The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S.
    Foreign Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in
    Economics and Finance, vol. 9, number 1.

[35] Tille, Cedric (2005), “Financial Integration and the Wealth Eﬀect of
    Exchange Rate Fluctuations,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ
    Report 226, October 2005.

[36] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory
    of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press.

[37] Yun, Tack (1996), “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity,
    and Business Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics 37: 345-370.




                                       42
A        Appendix

Derivation of equation (36)

    A log-linear approximation of the Euler equations (??), (??), (27) and
(28) at time t0 implies that

                                  ı̂t0 = π t0 +1 + ρ(Ĉt0 +1 − Ĉt0 ),

                                  ı̂∗t0 = π ∗t0 +1 + ρ(Ĉt∗0 +1 − Ĉt∗0 ).

Since Ĉt0 +1 = Ĉt∗0 +1 = 0 in the eﬃcient allocation and we have furthermore
guessed that π t0 +1 = n∆st0 +1 and π ∗t0 +1 = −(1 − n)∆st0 +1 we obtain

                                        ı̂t0 = n∆st0 +1 − ρĈt0                                (A.1)

                                  ı̂∗t0 = −(1 − n)∆st0 +1 − ρĈt∗0 .                           (A.2)

In particular, the resource constraint at time t0 requires that
                                               b̄               ā∗                              x
β ·(â∗t0 − b̂t0 ) = (â∗t0 −1 − b̂t0 −1 )−       (βı̂t0 −πt0 )+ (βı̂∗t0 −π∗t0 )+ p̂H,t0 + Ŷt0 − Ĉt0
                                              Ȳ                Ȳ                               n
in which we can substitute (35), (A.1) and (A.2) to obtain
           b̄           b̄       ā∗     ā∗                     x
              π t0 + ρβ Ĉt0 − ρβ Ĉt∗0 − π ∗t0 + p̂H,t0 + Ŷt0 − Ĉt0 = 0.
          Ȳ           Ȳ        Ȳ      Ȳ                      n
In a similar way we obtain for country F that
       b̄        b̄       ā∗     ā∗                       (1 − x) ∗
     − π t0 − ρβ Ĉt0 + ρβ Ĉt∗0 + π ∗t0 + p̂F,t0 + Ŷt∗0 −        Ĉ = 0.
      Ȳ        Ȳ        Ȳ      Ȳ                        (1 − n) t0
Taking the diﬀerence between the above two equations, we obtain
  b̄        b̄       ā∗      ā∗                                  x       (1 − x) ∗
2 π t0 +2ρβ Ĉt0 −2ρβ Ĉt∗0 −2 π ∗t0 +p̂H,t0 +Ŷt0 −p̂F,t0 −Ŷt∗0 − Ĉt0 +        Ĉ = 0.
 Ȳ        Ȳ        Ȳ       Ȳ                                   n       (1 − n) t0

We use the fact that equation (13) in a log-linear form implies Ĉt0 = Ĉt∗0 and
substitute it in the above equation to get equation (36) in the main text
                                                                  µ           ¶
   b̄      ā∗ ∗              ∗                                      b̄   ā∗
2 πt0 − 2 π t0 = (p̂F,t0 + Ŷt0 − p̂H,t0 − Ŷt0 ) − (1 − β + 2ρβ)       −       Ĉt0
  Ȳ       Ȳ                                                       Ȳ    Ȳ

                                                         43
where we have also used the definition of s.


   Constrained-eﬃcient allocation

   In this section we show how to obtain a log-linear approximation to the
constrained-eﬃcient policy. First, we note that in a first-order approxima-
tion to the first-order conditions (13), (14) and (15) we obtain the log-linear
approximation to the eﬃcient allocation for the following variables
                       η                             ρ
            C̃tW =        [nẑt + (1 − n)ẑt∗ ] +           [sĝt + (1 − s)ĝt∗ ],
                      η+ρ                          η+ρ
                                        η
                                T̃t =         (ẑt − ẑt∗ ),
                                      1 + ηθ
                                       C̃tR = ĝt − ĝt∗ ,
where
                                C̃tW = xC̃t + (1 − x)C̃t∗ ,
and
                                      C̃tR = C̃t − C̃t∗ .
The constrained eﬃcient allocation is obtained by minimizing
        X
        ∞
                β t−t0 {(ρ + η) · [ĈtW − C̃tW ]2 + x(1 − x)ρ[ĈtR − C̃tR ]2
         t=t0
                                              σ                   σ
        +n(1 − n)(1 + ηθ)θ · [T̂t − T̃t ]2 + n (π H,t )2 + (1 − n) ∗ (π∗F,t )2 }
                                              k                   k
under the following sequence of constraints. A first-order approximation to
(27) and (28) implies

                      ρ(Ĉt − ĝt ) = ρ(Ĉt+1 − ĝt+1 ) − (ı̂t − π t+1 );            (A.3)

           ρ(Ĉt∗ − ĝt∗ ) = ρEt (Ĉt+1
                                    ∗       ∗
                                        − ĝt+1 ) − (ı̂∗t − (πt+1 − ∆st+1 ));        (A.4)
                                     ı̂t = ı̂∗t + ∆st+1 ;                            (A.5)
a first-order approximation to (37), (38) and (39) that together with (8)
imply

 πH,t = k[η ĈtW + (1 + ηθ)(1 − n)T̂t + ρĈt − (1 + η)ẑt − ρgt ] + βπ H,t+1 ; (A.6)

                                                  44
a first-order approximation to (40), (41) and (42) that together with (9)
imply

   π ∗F,t = k∗ [η ĈtW − n(1 + ηθ)T̂t + ρĈt∗ − (1 + η)ẑt∗ − ρgt∗ ] + βπ ∗F,t+1 ;    (A.7)

                                                                    ∗
a first-order approximation to the terms of trade identity Tt = St PF,t /PH,t

                           T̂t = T̂t−1 + ∆st + π ∗F,t − π H,t ;                       (A.8)

the relation between CPI inflation and GDP inflation rates given in a log-
linear form by
                         π t = nπ H,t + (1 − n)(π ∗F,t + ∆st );                       (A.9)

the definition
                               ĈtW = xĈt + (1 − x)Ĉt∗ ;                           (A.10)

and the law of motion of the net-foreign asset position of country H given in
a log-linear form by

                                   b̄           ā∗                                  x
β·(â∗t −b̂t ) = (â∗t−1 −b̂t−1 )− (βı̂t −π t )+ (βı̂∗t −π ∗t )+(θ−1)(1−n)T̂t +ĈtW − Ĉt .
                                  Ȳ            Ȳ                                   n
                                                                                  (A.11)
The minimization problem is solved by forming the Lagrangian in which
multipliers φ1,t to φ9,t are attached to the constraints (A.3) to (A.11), re-
spectively. The first-order conditions of this minimization problem together
with the constraints (A.3)-(A.11) and the process of the stochastic distur-
bances form a system of stochastic diﬀerence equations which is solved using
standard rational-expectation solution algorithms.




                                               45
