                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SENSATION SEEKING, OVERCONFIDENCE, AND TRADING ACTIVITY

                                             Mark Grinblatt
                                             Matti Keloharju

                                          Working Paper 12223
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12223


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




We would like to thank the Finnish Vehicle Administration, the Finnish Armed Forces, the Finnish Central
Securities Depository, and the Finnish Tax Administration for providing access to the data, as well as the
Office of the Data Protection Ombudsman for recognizing the value of this project to the research
community. Our appreciation also extends to Antti Lehtinen and Juan Prajogo, who provided superb research
assistance, and to Ivo Welch, Samuli Knüpfer, Juhani Linnainmaa, Tyler Shumway, and seminar participants
at the University of Illinois, the University of Michigan, the University of Texas, and the University of
Mannheim, who generated many insights that benefited this paper. We also thank Seppo Ikäheimo for his
help in obtaining the data and Markku Kaustia, Samuli Knüpfer, Lauri Pietarinen, and Elias Rantapuska for
participating in the analysis of the Finnish Central Securities Depository data. Financial support from the
Academy of Finland, the Foundation for Economic Education, and the Paulo Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Sensation Seeking, Overconfidence, and Trading Activity
Mark Grinblatt and Matti Keloharju
NBER Working Paper No. 12223
May 2006
JEL No. G10, G11

                                           ABSTRACT

This study analyzes the role that two psychological attributes—sensation seeking and
overconfidence—play in the tendency of investors to trade stocks. Equity trading data are combined
with data from an investor’s tax filings, driving record, and psychological profile. We use the data
to construct measures of overconfidence and sensation seeking tendencies. Controlling for a host of
variables, including wealth, income, age, number of stocks owned, marital status, and occupation,
we find that overconfident investors and those investors most prone to sensation seeking trade more
frequently.

Mark Grinblatt
UCLA
Anderson School of Management
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu

Matti Keloharju
Helsinki School of Economics
Department of Accounting and Finance
Runeberginkatu 22-24
FIN-00100 Helsinki
FINLAND
matti.kaloharju@hse.fi
1. Introduction

       The extraordinarily high volume of equity trading that takes place on stock exchanges

represents one of the greatest puzzles in finance.1 The classic asset pricing models suggest

that investors should optimally buy a single risky portfolio and hold it in perpetuity.

Rebalancing motivations generate only negligible trading for most plausible return generating

processes, even when the motive is a proper asset allocation between cash and risky assets.

       Researchers have offered a variety of explanations for why trading volume is so large,

but these are not fully satisfactory. The obvious candidate, heterogeneous information, does

not immediately generate rational trading. Milgrom and Stokey (1982) argued that in the

presence of common knowledge, there is no rational trade, even with heterogeneous

information signals. Models with disagreement require noise trading to generate trading

volume.2 Without a satisfactory explanation of what drives the noise trading and a calibration

that accounts for observed trading, trading volume remains a puzzle.

       As a consequence of the failure of traditional models to explain trading, empiricists

have begun to study and document how behavioral factors might explain trade. Odean

(1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), and Grinblatt and Han (2005) argue that trading can

arise as a consequence of a disposition effect.                    Odean (1998, 1999) suggests that

overconfidence may drive excessive trading. Barber and Odean (2001) find that gender is

related to trading—the portfolios of males exhibit greater turnover—and that this is due to

their greater overconfidence. Gervais and Odean (2001) develop a model in which successful

chance experiences can generate overconfidence and lead to excessive trading. Graham,

Harvey, and Huang (2005) contend that competence drives trading.



       1
           See, for example, Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000, 2002).
       2
           See Weiss (1979), Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), and Pfleiderer (1984).
                                                       1
         This paper employs data on the psychological traits of each investor to show that

trading may be driven by two emotional considerations: The first is sensation seeking, which

is the search for novel, intense, and varied experiences generally associated with real or

imagined physical, social, and financial risks; the second is overconfidence, which is the

tendency to place an irrationally excessive degree of confidence in one’s abilities and beliefs.

Using a comprehensive dataset from Finland, which offers a remarkable number of control

variables, we show that investors who are most prone to sensation seeking and those who are

most overconfident trade the most.              To our best knowledge, this is the first study to

specifically focus on sensation seeking as a motivation for trade and the first that employs

comprehensive data to directly measure overconfidence and study its relationship to trading.

         A potential link between sensation seeking and trading activity should be apparent to

anyone who has spent time in a casino. Gambling, which the psychology literature has tied to

sensation seeking,3 is a worldwide industry, generating over $2 trillion in revenues each year.4

There also is widespread unreported and often illegal gambling activity that most everyone is

acquainted with and which frequently is reported on in the popular press.                            Given the

consumptive utility enjoyed in all sorts of activities where an element of risk and thrill is

involved, it would truly be surprising if some consumers did not enjoy the thrill from trading

in the stock market. A recent paper by Kumar (2005) concludes that investor-types with

characteristics associated with an attraction to gambling prefer lottery-like stocks.

         A link between overconfidence and trading activity is also plausible, as recent

literature has noted.5 When one’s private valuation of a stock differs from that of the market,



         3
            For a review of the literature, see Raylu and Oei (2002).
         4
            Source: BBC News World Edition August 22, 2005 reporting on “Place Your Bets, Part 3.”
          5
            Barber and Odean (2001) test whether overconfidence drives trading using gender as a proxy for
overconfidence. Glaser and Weber (2004), using data on 215 online investors who responded to a survey, find
that the better than average effect is related to trading frequency. Using experimental data, Deaves et al. (2003)
                                                        2
the overconfident investor places more validity on his private valuation and less on the

market’s valuation. This can occur for two related reasons. The first is hubris or what is

sometimes referred to as the “better than average effect.” The other is “miscalibration.” This

arises when the confidence interval around the investor’s private signal is tighter than it is in

reality. Both forms of overconfidence lead the overconfident investor to form posteriors with

excessive weight on private signals. This generates larger trades than would be observed in a

less confident investor.

         We measure sensation seeking as the number of automobile speeding convictions

earned by an investor over a multi-year period. Zuckerman (1994), one of the pioneers of the

concept, as well as Jonah (1997), suggest that driving behavior may be one of the best

observed behaviors for assessing sensation seeking. Data on speeding tickets from Finland is

particularly pertinent with respect to the financial risks associated with this trait. In Finland,

the fine for substantive automobile violations is a function of income. Thus, those who risk

breaking the law do so under severe financial penalty as well as enduring possible physical

risks.

         We derive the overconfidence measure from a standard psychological test. This test is

given to all Finnish males at approximately the age of 19 or 20 (generally, many years prior to

observation of an investor’s trading activity). One of the scales from the test measures self-

confidence. As this confidence measure is a combination of talent and overconfidence, we

use regression analysis to control for talent and obtain overconfidence as the residual effect.

Because of the mandatory and comprehensive nature of the psychological examination, the

responses lack the bias typically associated with the decision of whether to answer a survey.




observe that overconfidence is positively related to trading activity, while Biais et al (2005) find that
overconfidence reduces trading performance.
                                                   3
        The correlation between our sensation seeking and overconfidence measures is very

low, so both behavioral attributes have relatively independent influence on trading. Sensation

seeking is far less related to the decision of whether to trade at all. However, sensation

seeking appears to be more important than overconfidence as a predictor of an investor’s

turnover ratio. Indeed, the relationship between overconfidence and turnover is marginally

insignificant despite the strong relationship between overconfidence and other measures of

trading frequency. In light of the Barber and Odean (2001) conclusion that turnover is related

to overconfidence, this finding points to the importance of direct measurement of behavioral

attributes.

        The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 offers motivation for the paper and

describes the data. Section 3 presents the results on sensation seeking, overconfidence, and

trading activity. Section 4 concludes the paper.



2. Motivation and Data

        The literature in finance is ripe with stylized facts about investor behavior. One of the

most prominent is that trading propensity is related to gender.6 Figure 1 Panel A plots the

average number of trades per year as a function of age and gender. Consistent with earlier

findings, men trade more than women within all age groups. Panel B effectively offers the

same plot but takes out the effect of income, wealth, and the number of stocks in the portfolio.

It reports coefficients on dummies for birth year and the sum of those coefficients and those

on the product of a male gender dummy and the same birth year dummies, controlling for

income decile dummies and wealth decile dummies. The pattern is a bit different. Now,

except for those who are under age 23 at the start of our stock trading sample period, the gap


        6
            See, for example, Barber and Odean (2001) and Agnew et al (2003).
                                                       4
between the trading inclinations of men and women seems to diminish with age. Still, males

trade more than females, irrespective of age.

        What lies behind the greater tendency of males to trade? One possibility is that males

enjoy the thrill of trading to a greater extent than females. Barber and Odean (2001) argued

that one factor that might explain gender-related differences in trading activity is that the

entertainment value of trading has a consumptive appeal that is similar to the thrill obtained

from gambling. In the psychology literature, the gambler’s thrill derives from an attribute

known as “sensation seeking.” This literature has shown that this attribute varies across

investors by age and gender. Ultimately, Barber and Odean (2001) dismissed entertainment

as an explanation for their results in favor of gender-based differences in overconfidence.

This is because trading volume, as measured by turnover, was largely invariant to the fraction

of an investor’s net worth invested in common stock.7 We think this dismissal is premature.

Panel C plots the number of speeding tickets, a proxy for an investor’s degree of susceptibility

to sensation seeking, as a function of age and birth year. Except for those under 23 at the start

of the trading sample period, there is a marked similarity between the two graphs in Panels B

and C.8 Irrespective of whether sensation seeking ultimately accounts for the trading pattern

in Panel B’s graph, we find it difficult to wholly dismiss it as a motivation for trading activity

when the evidence supporting this dismissal is so indirect. It would clearly be interesting to

run a horse race between sensation seeking and overconfidence if one had direct measures of

these attributes for each investor. We are fortunate to be able to analyze such data.




        7
           This argument hinges on the assumption that some fixed fraction of one’s wealth must be invested
prudently, even if entertainment from the act of trading drives much of observed trading activity.
         8
           One has to be cautious about drawing conclusions from this similarity. As Ameriks and Zeldes (2004)
and others point out, however, it is very difficult to disentangle cohort, age, and time effects from each other.
                                                       5
2.1 Sensation seeking

          The classic characterization of sensation seeking is found in Zuckerman (1994, p. 27).

He labels sensation seeking as “… a trait defined by the seeking of varied, novel, complex,

and intense sensations and experiences, and the willingness to take physical, social, legal, and

financial risks for the sake of such experience.“

          With respect to trading activity, sensation seeking is distinct from the magnitude or

sign of the risk aversion parameter. For example, the willingness to take on an undiversified

trading strategy may be encouraged by the consumptive value associated with sensation

seeking, yet deterred by a high degree of risk aversion. The mix of these two competing

forces may determine the degree of diversification. However, as Barber and Odean (2001)

observe, an investor’s risk aversion parameter has little bearing on desired trading frequency.

To the extent that markets are efficient, trading frequency has costly financial consequences,

but these are not tied to the risk aversion parameter. The mere act of trading and the

monitoring of a constant flow of “fresh stocks” in one’s portfolio may create a more varied

and novel experience than a buy and hold strategy, but it does not increase volatility per se.

          There is reason to believe that males are more prone to sensation seeking behavior.9

As Zuckerman (1994) points out, males are more prone to risky sporting activities. While

some of this may be explained by physical traits, there also is a greater tendency among males

towards violence, alcohol, drugs, gambling, and most forms of illicit activity that is not as

easily explained.           Even relatively safe sensation seeking behaviors, like high speed

amusement park rides, are more popular among males.10 A review article by Jonah (1997)

documents that sensation seeking is significantly related to risky driving.


          9
               See, for example, Zuckerman, Eysenck, and Eysenck (1978) and Ball, Farnhill, and Wangeman
(1984).
          10
               See Begg and Langley (2001).
                                                      6
       Men also differ from women with respect to the type of gambling they do. Potenza et

al (2001) find that men prefer action-oriented forms of gambling, like blackjack, craps, or

sports betting, as opposed to passive escape-oriented gambling (e.g., slot machines, lotteries).

Biaszcynski et al (1997) as well as Vitaro et al (1997) suggest that action-oriented gambling

reflects a higher level of sensation seeking among males.        Comings (1998) shows that

pathological gambling behavior may be transmitted genetically. Pavalko (2001, p. 34) likens

trading (as opposed to investing) to action-oriented gambling.



2.2 Overconfidence

       The second explanation we investigate for the greater trading of males is

overconfidence. The literature offers differing views on whether males actually are more

overconfident than women. Lundeberg, Puncochar, and Fox (1994) argue that men are more

overconfident than women, particularly for tasks that are perceived to be in the masculine

domain.    Pulford and Colman (1996) find that men are slightly more overconfident.

However, Deaux and Farris (1977), Beyer (1997), and Beyer and Bowden (1998) find that

men have higher self perceptions than women but also tend to be better—not less—calibrated.

Lichtenstein and Fishhoff (1981), Lundeberg et al (2000), Deaves et al (2003), and Biais et al

(2005) find no difference in overconfidence between men and women.

       To assess whether overconfidence explains trading, it would be useful to directly

observe a measure of overconfidence, rather than a measure that is tied to a gender-based

instrument.   We have overconfidence measures on a large sample of subjects from an

extensive psychological profile of those subjects. Our data also offer the possibility of a

much cleaner test of whether overconfidence causes excessive trading. Ideally, in a controlled

experiment of whether overconfidence affects trading activity, all other attributes of the

                                               7
subjects would be identical and only overconfidence would vary.           In a social science

experiment, this ideal is not attainable. However, in our study, all of the subjects for whom

we have a direct measure of overconfidence happen to be male. Moreover, the age at which

we measure overconfidence is approximately the same across subjects (about 20).              To

demonstrate a link between such a measure of overconfidence and trading activity would

indeed be remarkable, as it may imply that overconfidence is a stable characteristic that

influences economic behavior throughout one’s lifetime.        We also have data on a large

number of control variables that allow us to use traditional regression analysis to assess

overconfidence, with fewer concerns about omitted variables than one typically has in studies

of economic behavior.



2.3 Data Sources

       Our paper’s analysis requires us to combine information from a number of datasets:

   •   FCSD data. This dataset records the portfolios and trading records from January 1,

       1995 through November 29, 2002 of all household investors domiciled in Finland. The

       daily electronic records we use are exact duplicates of the official certificates of

       ownership and trades, and hence are very reliable. Details on this data set, which

       includes trades, holdings, and execution prices, are reported in Grinblatt and Keloharju

       (2000, 2001). We study trading data from July 1, 1997 on for those individuals who

       held stocks at some point between January 1, 1995 and June 30, 1997.          The latter

       requirement allows us to focus on the determinants of trading activity rather than on

       whether an investor participates in the stock market in the first place. (The results are

       qualitatively similar if we use all individuals in lieu of individuals who have invested




                                               8
        in the market before.) In addition to trading data, we use this dataset to measure

        financial wealth and number of stocks held.

    •   HEX stock data. Closing transaction prices are obtained from a dataset provided by

        the Helsinki Exchanges (HEX). In combination with the FCSD data, this dataset is

        used to measure financial wealth.

    •   FVA driver data. Data from the Finnish Vehicle Administration (FVA) were used to

        obtain a set of subjects who have a normal vehicle driving license (as opposed to a

        motorcycle or professional driving license) as of July 1, 1997. The FVA data contain

        all driving-related final judgments on each motorist in the provinces of Uusimaa and

        East Uusimaa between July 1, 1997 and December 31, 2001.                          (These provinces

        contain Greater Helsinki and represent the most densely populated areas in Finland.)

        The judgments contain paragraphs about the nature of the violation that we coded

        either as “speeding related” or “not speeding related.” Thus, we have comprehensive

        records of tickets for speeding that were finalized over a four and a half year period. 11

        We use this data to measure differences in the sensation seeking attribute across

        investors.

    •   FAF psychological profile. This dataset, from the Finnish Armed Forces, helps us to

        measure cross-sectional variation in overconfidence among investors. Around the

        time of induction into mandatory military duty in the Finnish armed forces, typically

        at ages 19 or 20, males in Finland take a battery of psychological tests. It includes a

        leadership inventory test for which we have comprehensive data beginning January 1,

        1982 and ending December 31, 2001. The leadership inventory exam, which includes

        11
           Non speeding offenses are fewer in number, varied across many categories, and difficult to interpret.
For example, tickets do get issued for driving too slowly on a freeway. For these reasons, we focus only on
speeding offenses in the sample. When we pool speeding with all other driving offenses as our measure of
sensation seeking, we obtain highly similar results.
                                                       9
       218 “agree” or “do not agree” questions, provides eight scales for leadership. One of

       these scales is self-confidence, which is reported as a number from 1 to 9 (and is

       designed to approximate a stanine in the overall sample of test takers). We convert

       this measure to an overconfidence measure using regression techniques described later

       in the paper for all shareholders who have driver’s licenses prior to the start of July 1,

       1997. The psychological profile also contains an intellectual ability score. The test

       measures intellectual ability in three areas: mathematical ability, verbal ability, and

       logical reasoning. FAF forms a composite ability score from the results in these three

       areas. We use the composite ability score in our analysis.

   •   FTA dataset. This dataset, from the Finnish Tax Administration, contains annual data

       from the 1998 and 1999 tax returns of Finnish investors in the provinces of Uusimaa

       and East Uusimaa, as well as data from a population registry. Variables constructed

       from this source include income, age, gender, marital status, occupation, and

       homeownership status. These variables are used as controls in regressions that explain

       trading activity and regressions used to construct a measure of overconfidence for an

       individual. We use 1998 data for all of the variables except for employment status,

       which is first reported in 1999.



2.3 Variable Description and Summary Statistics

       Our analysis largely consists of cross-sectional regressions, with some measure of

trading activity as a left hand side variable. The variables and the data sources for them are

described in Table 1 Panel A. The remainder of the table provides summary statistics on the

data. Panel B describes means, medians, standard deviations, and interquartile ranges for




                                              10
most of the variables. Panel C provides detailed summary statistics on the self-confidence

measure. Panel D presents the correlation matrix for relevant variables.

        As can be seen from Table 1, Panel B, stock trades and speeding tickets are rare.

Panel C’s distribution of the self-confidence measure indicates that the highest and lowest

measures of self-confidence (1 and 9) also are relatively rare. Our sample of male drivers is a

bit more self-confident than the universe of males taking the exam. Some of this may have to

do with the fact that we limit our sample to individuals who own stocks between January

1995 and June 1997. Thus, our sample is wealthier than the population at large. Panel D

indicates that the number of speeding convictions, self-confidence, and gender all have a

relatively large correlation with various measures of a subject’s trading activity, but self-

confidence, described later, is close to being uncorrelated with the number of tickets earned.12

Consistent with Figure 1 Panel A, age (without controls for income) does not display an

obvious relationship with trading activity. Panel D also indicates that gender per se (with a

dummy value of one being male) is more correlated with all measures of trading activity than

are measures of sensation seeking and self-confidence. However, gender also is highly

correlated with the sensation seeking attribute, as we hypothesized earlier.



3. Results

        Our analysis has two parts to it. The first part studies sensation seeking and the role it

plays in trading activity. This analysis makes use of both males and females. The second part

jointly focuses on sensation seeking and overconfidence as explanations for trading activity.

Because our overconfidence score can only be computed for young and middle-aged males, it

contains fewer observations.

        12
           The correlations of the variables in the table with overconfidence, which is derived from self-
confidence with a procedure described later, are similar to their correlations with self-confidence.
                                                   11
3.1 Sensation Seeking Results

        Earlier, we mentioned that our proxy for sensation seeking is the number of final

convictions for speeding. Admittedly, speeding convictions are not a perfect instrument for

speeding because not all violators are caught. However, in Finland, where many fines are tied

to income, there is less reason to believe that the motivation for traffic violations is a rational

calculation based on the cost of one’s time.                 For example, Jussi Salonoja, a wealthy

businessman, received a 170,000 euro fine for driving 80km/hour in a 40km/hour zone, while

Anssi Vanjoki, a Nokia executive, received an 80,000 euro ticket for driving 75km/hr in a

50km/hr zone.13 Moreover, because of the extreme cost of being caught, compliance with

traffic laws is likely to be greater in Finland than in the United States and most parts of

Europe. Speeding convictions are not a signal that one is simply the unlucky driver who is

almost randomly “fished out” from a sea of violators.

        Table 2 reports regressions that explain three different measures of trading as a

function of this measure of sensation seeking and a host of control variables. The first

column, which uses probit estimation to study the decision of whether to trade or not, employs

all investors in the sample.        The second column employs investors who trade at least once

and uses the natural logarithm of the number of trades over the sample period as the

dependent variable.14 Because this sample is censored to exclude those who do not trade, we

use Heckman’s two stage procedure to estimate the coefficients. The first stage obtains a

Mill’s ratio from the probit regression in the first column. The second stage, estimated with

ordinary least squares, adds Mill’s ratio as an additional regressor to obtain consistent

estimates on the remaining variables. The third column uses the Barber and Odean (2000,
        13
             Source: Finn’s speed fine is a bit rich, BBC News, February 10 2004. Mr. Vanjoki’s fine was later
reduced by 95% due to a drop in his executive stock option income.
          14
             We also used Poisson estimation to obtain coefficients for a regression with the number of trades
(rather than the log of trades) as the dependent variable. The t-statistic on the speeding conviction coefficient
was 5.48.
                                                      12
2001) measure of turnover as the dependent variable.15 The coefficients in this column are

estimated with ordinary least squares. The middle three columns report the corresponding

standardized coefficients and the rightmost three columns report the corresponding t-statistics

for the coefficients. (All t-statistics and standard errors in the paper are robust, in that they are

computed using White’s heteroskedasticity-consistent standard error estimation procedure.)

         The regressors for Table 2 include the number of ticket convictions as a predictor of

trading activity. As can be seen from the bottom row, this measure of sensation seeking has

coefficients that are highly significant for all of the measures of trading activity. The first

column indicates that the probability of trading increases by 4.7% for each additional

speeding ticket. The second column indicates that the number of trades increases by 9.8% for

each additional speeding ticket. Annualizing the coefficient in the third column (multiplying

by 12) implies that each additional speeding ticket tends to increase turnover by about 3.6%

per year. Starting from the annualized average turnover rate of about 40% per year among

those who traded stocks (Table 1’s monthly average of .019 times twelve, divided by the 56%

who traded stocks), each additional ticket increases turnover by a factor of 1.09. These effects

control for age dummies and dummies for the number of stocks held in addition to the

controls reported in Table 2.16


         15
             This is the average of buy turnover plus sell turnover. Buy turnover for a given month is the
investor’s portfolio weighted average of the ratio of shares bought of a stock to shares owned in the stock at the
end of the month (or one if the ratio exceeds one). Sell turnover is the investor’s portfolio weighted average of
the ratio of shares sold of a stock to shares owned in the stock at the beginning of the month (or one if the ratio
exceeds one). We average monthly buy turnover and sell turnover over all months to obtain an investor’s overall
buy turnover and sell turnover ratios. Months for which there is no end of month holding (for buy turnover) or
beginning of month holding (for sell turnover) are excluded from the average. The number of observations for
this measure of trading activity is slightly smaller than the sample for number of trades because of the absence of
computable portfolio holdings.
          Although not reported formally, adjusting our turnover measure in each month by subtracting the
average turnover across all investors for that month, before averaging across months, yields approximately the
same results as we report here. This robustness applies, irrespective of whether the subtracted average for the
month equally weights all investors or weights them in proportion to their portfolio value.
          16
             The coefficients for a turnover regression specification that employs dummies for one speeding
ticket, two speeding tickets, and three or more speeding tickets are .003, .007, and .010, respectively. Because so
                                                       13
         The sensation seeking coefficients for the second and third columns in Table 2 are

highly similar when we run the regressions separately for males and for females. For males,

the coefficients on sensation seeking for the number of trades and turnover regressions are

.084, and .003, while for females, they are .092, and .002, respectively. The probit regression

in the first column has a coefficient on the tickets variable of .033 for males and .067 for

females. All of these coefficients are highly significant.

         We obtain similar coefficients on the speeding tickets variable when we run the

regressions in the first two columns separately for buys and sells. For example, the probit

regression in the first column generates a coefficient of .045 (t = 5.75) when the buy dummy

is the dependent variable and .053 (t = 6.78) when the sell dummy is the dependent variable.

The fact that these are similar and that the regression with the buy dummy as the dependent

variable is highly significant dispels the notion that Table 2’s results are driven by asset sales

to finance high fines for speeding.

         Another indication that cash needs do not drive the link between speeding tickets and

trading activity comes from regressions based on the type of speeding ticket. In Finland, there

are two types of speeding tickets.             Mild violations receive a flat fine and more severe

violations receive a fine related to income. When the Table 2 regressions employ the number

of flat fine tickets as the proxy for sensation seeking, the coefficient is highly similar to the

corresponding regressions in which the number of income-related speeding violations is the

proxy for sensation seeking. For example, each additional income-related fine increases the

number of trades by 10.1% while each additional flat fine increases the number of trades by

9.7%.


few subjects have four or more tickets, these coefficients are consistent with the reported regression in Table 2,
which has a .003 coefficient on number of speeding tickets. For the other two regressions as well, we obtain
similar results to those reported in Table 2 when we employ dummies for tickets in lieu of number of speeding
tickets.
                                                       14
       Greater degrees of sensation seeking should not only be associated with greater

numbers of both mild and severe speeding violations, they should also be associated with

some of the more severe violations being even more severe. Fines for the more severe

violations in Finland, known as “day fines,” are assessed (approximately) as a number of half

days of foregone income. The number of half days assessed, referred to as “days fined,” is

based on the severity of the infraction. The mean days fined, calculated only for those with

day fines, and averaged only across day fine penalties earned by that driver, has a

significantly positive coefficient when it replaces number of speeding tickets in the Table 2

specifications. Mean days fined also is a more significant predictor of the decision to trade

and the log of the number of trades when added as an additional regressor to Table 2’s

specifications. It is an insignificant predictor of turnover in the third regression, but the t-

statistic of 1.53 is non-trivial given that restricting the sample to subjects with at least one day

fined reduces the number of observations by a factor of ten.

       The reported coefficients on the control variables are interesting in their own right and

sensible.   Financial wealth, income, and whether one is employed in a finance-related

profession are positively related to trading activity even after controlling for the number of

stocks in the investor’s portfolio. Also, being unemployed is positively related to trading

activity. This may be a retiree effect; it may be that independently wealthy individuals trade

for their own account rather than work; finally, it may simply reflect that those who lose their

jobs have to liquidate their financial wealth to consume.

       The gender effect in Table 2’s regression—men trade more—is extremely strong, even

more so for single or widowed men. Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 2, the relationship

between age, gender, and trading remains about the same as in Figure 1, Panel B, even after

controlling for all of the remaining non-gender related regressors in Table 2, including our

                                                15
sensation seeking proxy. This is to be expected even if the sensation seeking trait fully

explains the relationship between age, gender, and trading activity. Speeding tickets represent

an imperfect proxy for sensation seeking.        As a consequence, other sensation seeking

correlates, such as age and gender, would have marginal explanatory power for trading

activity (or any other behavior that true sensation seeking generates).



3.2 Overconfidence, Sensation Seeking, and Trading Activity

       Barber and Odean (2001) have argued that the relationship between gender and

trading activity is due to the greater overconfidence of men.             We investigate this by

controlling for gender (focusing only on males) and looking at how variation in a direct

measure of overconfidence influences their trading activity. Our analysis also controls for

number of speeding tickets, a sensation seeking proxy, to assess whether overconfidence has

any marginal explanatory power for trading activity.

       Overconfidence is derived from the FAF self-confidence scale, which is interpreted by

the FAF as follows:

       “A person with a high score believes in himself. He views himself at least
       as intelligent as others and believes he will manage in life, if necessary,
       even without the help from others. He does not feel nervous or anxious in
       social situations; he does not expect others’ approval and is not afraid of
       others’ possible critique.    A person with a low score is uncertain of
       himself and he may hate himself and his outlook. He gives up easily when
       facing difficulties and can even blame others for his failures: ‘he has been
       given too difficult tasks.’ As a result of lack of self-confidence he feels
       himself unsure and anxious in social situations, and can therefore avoid
       particular individuals who are self-confident and view him critically.”




                                               16
The self-confidence measure for an individual is transformed into an overconfidence measure,

which is a residual from a regression that uses controls for talent from the FAF, FTA, and

FCSD datasets. Table 3 Panel A reports the coefficients and test statistics for this regression.

The controls include the regressors from Table 2 (except for number of speeding tickets and

the finance professional dummy) as well as the composite intellectual ability score from the

FAF exam, which measures verbal, mathematical, and logical ability.                            (Our results are

virtually identical if we enter these dimensions of ability as separate scores in lieu of the

composite score.) Table 3 Panel A indicates that individuals’ self-confidence scores are

somewhat prescient about their future life success. Those who have greater FAF ability

scores, who later in life achieve greater income, marry, and hold down jobs tend to be the

most self confident.

       There also is an age pattern to the exam. As age dummies represent an age range of

the subject in 1998, higher age dummies generally correspond to those who took the exam in

the more distant past (and to a small extent, those who entered military service at a later

age).17 Those who took the exam most recently exhibit the greatest self-confidence. One can

only speculate about the reasons for this. On the one hand, it may reflect generational

differences and economic changes in Finland. The successful economic growth of Finland

and the waning influence of the Soviet Union (and later Russia) may have produced ever

growing confidence among army recruits. On the other hand, our sample is filtered for those

who own at least one stock during the 2 ½ years that precede our sample period. This may

select more confident subjects among the very young.

       The residual from Panel A’s regression is our measure of overconfidence. The idea

behind this is that self-confidence, as measured by a scale from the Finnish Armed Forces


       17
            Entrance to military service generally is from ages 18-20, but is never later than age 28.
                                                         17
leadership assessment, is a combination of talent and overconfidence. Panel A’s regression

controls for talent and the residual represents overconfidence.

         The last two rows of Table 3 Panel B provide direct evidence on the joint impact of

sensation seeking and overconfidence on trading activity.          Sensation seeking is highly

significant except when measuring whether someone trades or not. The number of trades and

turnover are significantly related to sensation seeking, even after controlling for

overconfidence and the other regressors listed in the table, as well as unreported dummies for

birth year and number of stocks in the portfolio.

         Overconfidence also is significantly related to trading (at the 5% level), except when

turnover is the dependent variable. Here, the insignificance is marginal, but rather intriguing.

It is plausible that the noisy measurement of overconfidence from the FAF exam explains the

marginal insignificance.     However, it also is possible that sensation seeking is a more

plausible explanation for why men have higher turnover rates than women. Barber and Odean

(2001) found that the turnover of males exceeded that of females and attributed that to the

greater overconfidence of males. However, within the male sample that took the FAF exam,

the sensation seeking proxy appears to be better at explaining turnover than overconfidence.

Since we know that males are more prone to sensation seeking than females, it is equally

plausible that the Barber and Odean (2001) gender difference is driven more by the gender

difference in the sensation seeking trait than by the gender difference in the overconfidence

trait.

         Why is it that sensation seeking has little effect on the decision of whether to trade or

not, but overconfidence has such a large effect? One possibility is that sensation seekers

achieve stimulation with each trade; a single trade offers very little stimulus. However, this is

more likely a sample-specific finding: Restricting the sample so that it excludes older citizens

                                                18
as well as women significantly weakens the predictive power of sensation seeking on the

decision to trade. This occurs even without the addition of the overconfidence variable. It

appears that women and older male investors who receive few speeding tickets do not trade.

The same cannot be said for the relatively younger and exclusively male group who are in the

FAF data sample. Even though their turnover ratios and number of trades are low, these

young males still trade on rare occasions.



4. Summary and Conclusion

       This paper has shown that, for some investors, trading is driven by behavioral

attributes. Those who are sensation seekers (as measured by the number of speeding tickets

received) and those who exhibit more overconfidence (as measured by a psychological

assessment of each male entering the armed forces) trade more. The overconfidence proxy is

more related to whether an investor trades at all. The sensation seeking proxy is slightly more

related to the turnover ratio. These findings are derived from a dataset that has several

advantages over those used to study related issues in behavioral finance in the past.

       In addition to its comprehensive nature and lack of response bias, the dataset allows us

to control for a number of other variables that might explain trade. As a consequence, we do

not believe that our results on the relation between sensation seeking and trading activity are

driven by investor differences in risk aversion. First, our trading activity regressions control

for the degree of diversification in the investor’s portfolio by employing dummy variables for

the number of stocks held and additionally control for both income and wealth. Second, a

proxy for an investor’s risk aversion—the ratio of his equity wealth to his total wealth—

appears to be unrelated to that investor’s sensation seeking attribute. As a consequence,

employing this risk aversion proxy (in unreported regression) as an additional control variable

                                               19
in our trading activity regressions has little impact on the coefficients or test statistics for the

sensation seeking variable. Finally, regressions (containing the usual set of controls) of

trading activity on an alternative measure of sensation seeking—a dummy variable for

whether one owns a sports car—indicate that alternative sensation seeking proxies are

significantly related to trading activity, albeit to a lesser degree than the number of speeding

tickets.

           We have also demonstrated that gender-based differences in trading activity may have

root causes that deserve further investigation. There is a clear relationship between the age

and sex of the investor and trading activity, controlling for income and wealth alone. This

relationship may be driven by a correlation between the two emotional factors studied here

and both age and gender. However, our data on sensation seeking and overconfidence does

not convincingly demonstrate this. With respect to overconfidence, we have no data on how

overconfidence varies with gender or age. With respect to sensation seeking, we do not have

longitudinal data sampled at a frequency that allows us to assess how the sensation seeking

attribute varies as one ages. In addition, our measures of these attributes are imperfect.

Hence, even if these two factors were wholly responsible for the age and gender difference in

trading, it would be hard to prove it from the measures we employ. Further investigation,

with alternative measures of these emotional characteristics, seems warranted given the

strength of our findings.




                                                20
                                         REFERENCES

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sundén, 2003, Portfolio choice and trading in a
large 401(k) plan, American Economic Review 93, 193-215.

Ameriks, John, and Stephen Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolios vary with age?
Columbia University working paper.

Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.

Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and
common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 261-292.

Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean, 2002, Online investors: Do the slow die first? Review of
Financial Studies 15, 455-487.

Ball, S., D. Farnhill, and J. Wangeman, 1984, Sex and age differences in sensation seeking:
some national comparisons, British Journal of Psychology 75, 257-265.

Begg, Dorothy and John Langley, 2001, Changes in risky driving behavior among young
adults, Journal of Safety Research 32, 491-499

Beyer, Sylvia, 1998, Gender differences in self-perception and negative recall biases, Sex
Roles 38, 103-132.

Beyer, Sylvia and Edward Bowden, 1998, Gender differences in self-perceptions: convergent
evidence from three measures of accuracy and bias, Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin 23, 157-172.

Biaszcynski, A., Z. Steel, N. McCongaghy, 1997, Impulsivity in pathological gambling: the
antisocial impulsivist, Addiction 92, 75-87.

Biais, Bruno, Denis Hilton, Karine Mazurier, and Sébastian Pouget, 2005, Judgmental
overconfidence, self-monitoring and trading performance in an experimental financial market,
Review of Economic Studies 72, 287-312.

Comings, David, 1998, The molecular genetics of pathological gambling, CNS Spectrums 3,
20-37.

Deaves, Richard, Erik Lüders, and GuoYing Luo, 2003, An experimental test of
overconfidence and gender on trading activity, Working paper, McMaster University.

Deaux, Kay and Elizabeth Farris, 1977, Attributing causes for one’s own performance: The
effects of sex, norms, and outcome, Journal of Research in Personality 11, 59-72.

Gervais, Simon and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of Financial
Studies 14, 1-27.
                                            21
Glaser, Markus and Martin Weber, 2004, Overconfidence and trading volume, Working
paper, Mannheim University.

Graham, John, Harvey, Campbell, and Hai Huang, 2005, Investor competence, trading
frequency, and home bias, Working paper, Duke University.

Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.

Grinblatt, Mark and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect theory, mental accounting, and momentum,
Journal of Financial Economics 78, 311-339.

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of
various investor-types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, 2000, Journal of Financial
Economics 55, 43-67.

Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade? Journal of Finance
56, 589-616.

Jonah, Brian, 1997, Sensation seeking and risky driving: A review and synthesis of the
literature, Accident Analysis and Prevention 29, 651-665.

Kumar, Alok, 2005, Who gambles in the stock market? Working paper, University of Notre
Dame.

Lichtenstein, Sarah and Baruch Fischhoff, 1981, The effects of gender and instructions on
calibration, Decision Research Report 81-5, Decision Research (Eugene, OR).

Lundeberg, Mary, Paul Fox, and Judith Punćochaŕ, 1994, Highly confident but wrong: gender
differences and similarities in confidence judgments, Journal of Educational Psychology 86,
114–121.

Lundeberg, Mary, Paul Fox, Amy Brown, and Salman Elbedour, 2000, Cultural influences on
confidence: Country and gender, Journal of Educational Psychology 92, 152-159.

Milgrom, Paul and Nancy Stokey, 1982, Information, trade and common knowledge, Journal
of Economic Theory 26, 17-26.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above
average, Journal of Finance 53, 1887-1934.

Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89, 1279-
1298.

Pavalko, Ronald, 2001, Problem Gambling and its Treatment, Springfield, IL, Charles, C.
Thomas Publisher, Ltd.



                                            22
Pfleiderer, Paul, 1984, The volume of trade and the variability of prices: a framework for
analysis in noisy rational expectations equilibria, Working paper, Stanford University.

Potenza, Marc, M.A. Steinberg, S.D. McLaughlin, et al, 2001, Gender-related differences in
the characteristics of problem gamblers using a gambling helpline, American Journal of
Psychiatry 158, 1500-1505.

Pulford, Briony and Andrew Colman, 1997, Overconfidence: feedback and item difficulty
effects, Personality and Individual Differences 23, 125-133.

Raylu, Namrata and Tian Oei, 2002, Pathological gambling: a comprehensive review, Clinical
Psychology Review 22, 1009-1066.

Vitaro, F., I. Arnseneault, and R.E. Tremblay, 1997, Dispositional predictors of problem
gambling in male adolescents, American Journal of Psychiatry 154, 1769-1770.

Weiss, 1979, Information aggregation and policy, Cowles Foundation discussion paper #528,
Yale University.

Zuckerman, Marvin, 1994, Behavioral expression and biosocial bases of sensation seeking,
Cambridge University Press.

Zuckerman, M., Eysenck, S., and Eysenck, H., 1978, Sensation seeking in England and
America: Cross-cultural, age, and sex comparisons, Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 46, 139-149.




                                           23
Table 1
Variable descriptions and descriptive statistics
Table 1 describes the variables used in this study and provides summary statistics on them. Panel A provides detailed descriptions of the variables used, date or
interval of measurement, and the source for the data used to construct the variable. Panel B reports means, medians, standard deviations, and interquartile ranges
for the variables used in the study. Panel C contains the histogram for the scores reported on the self-confidence measure. Panel D is the correlation matrix for
key variables used in the study. The sample is restricted to drivers in the province of Uusimaa or East Uusimaa who got their AB or B license before July 1,
1997, who owned stocks between January 1, 1995 and June 30, 1997, and for whom there is tax data from 1998.

Panel A. Variable description
Variable                           Data source                  Measuring time                  More details
Age                                FTA + FCSD                   Measured at 1997                Determined based on social security code
Male                               FTA + FCSD                   Does not change                 Determined based on social security code
Married                            FTA / Pop. Register          End 1998
Cohabitor                          FTA / Pop. Register          End 1998
Unemployed                         FTA                          Year 1999                       Drew unemployment benefits for at least one day in 1999
Homeowner                          FTA                          End 1998                        Declared either real estate or apartment wealth at end 1998
Finance professional               FTA                          End 1998                        Empoyment in finance-related profession in 19981
Total income                       FTA                          Year 1998                       Declared total ordinary income + total capital income from 1998
Value of stock portfolio           FCSD                         6/30/1997                       Market value of stock portfolio
# stocks in portfolio              FCSD                         6/30/1997                       Number of different stock exchange listed stocks
# stock trades                     FCSD                         7/1/1997-11/29/2002             Number of open market trades of stocks
Portfolio turnover                 FCSD                         7/1/1997-11/29/2002             Computed as in Barber and Odean (2001) for stocks
# of speeding tickets              FVA                          7/1/1997–12/31/2001             Total number of speeding tickets
Self confidence                    FAF                          When test taken                 Psychological test self-confidence scores. The test scores
                                                                                                are (approximately) stanine scores and vary between
                                                                                                1 (lowest) and 9 (highest). 0 denotes an unreliable score.
Ability score                      FAF                          When test taken                 Psychological test ability scores. Each test score combines
                                                                                                results from three separate tests that measure mathematical
                                                                                                ability, verbal ability, and logical reasoning. The test scores are
                                                                                                (approximately) stanine scores.

Explanations of abbreviations:
FTA = Finnish Tax Administration
FCSD = Finnish Central Securities Depositary
FTA / Pop. Register = Tax authorities have obtained the information from the Finnish Population Register
FVA = Finnish Vehicle Administration
FAF = Finnish Armed Forces
1
  Represents one of the following professions (# in the sample): Portfolio manager or professional investor (117), dealer (FX and money market, 47), bank
manager (mostly commercial banking, manager of branch, 297), stockbroker (61), stockbroker or portfolio manager assistant (29), investment advisor (generally
low level, in bank branches, 20), miscellaneous investment baking or other higher level finance professional (68), financial manager (corporation, 45), equity
analyst (33), miscellaneous low level investment banking related job (33), loan officer (commercial banking, 138), retired bank manager (23), CFO (227), analyst
(may be other than equity analyst, 104). The tax authorities do not update the profession information often, as there was very little change in the profession data
between 1998 and 2000.
Panel B. Means, medians, standard deviations, and interquartile ranges of variables
                                        Mean Std. Deviation                  Percentiles                          N
                                                                        25           50          75
Total income, EUR                      35,559          73,337       14,888       25,474      40,425           95,804
Portfolio value, EUR                   24,620         289,019          221        1,571       7,844           95,804
# stocks                                2.050           2.546            1             1          2           95,804
# stock trades                          14.67          119.40            0             1          6           95,804
Monthly portfolio turnover              0.019           0.056            0        0.002       0.014           90,467
Age                                     44.40           14.39           32           46          54           95,804
# speeding tickets                      0.200           0.586            0             0          0           95,804
Ability score                           6.425           1.749            5             6          8           12,466

Fraction of sample individuals
Traded stocks                           0.557           0.497           0             1            1          95,804
Male                                    0.471           0.499           0             0            1          95,804
Married                                 0.584           0.493           0             1            1          95,804
Cohabitor                               0.024           0.152           0             0            0          95,804
Unemployed                              0.060           0.237           0             0            0          95,515
Homeowner                               0.759           0.427           1             1            1          95,804
Finance professional                    0.014           0.116           0             0            0          91,129



Panel C. Distributions of the self-confidence measure (males only)

                                      This sample                      Full sample
Stanine score            # observations      % of reliable scores   % of reliable scores    Stanine distribution
No reliable result              207
1 (low self confidence)         135                  1%                       3%                    4%
2                               203                  2%                       5%                    7%
3                               432                  3%                       9%                   12%
4                               844                  6%                      14%                   17%
5                              1,941                15%                      20%                   20%
6                              1,903                14%                      14%                   17%
7                              2,961                23%                      16%                   12%
8                              3,620                28%                      15%                    7%
9 (high self confidence)       1,114                 8%                       4%                    4%
Totals                        13,360                100%                     100%                  100%

Average                                              6.54                    5.48                      5.00

Panel D. Correlations between key variables

                  Trade dummy     ln(#trades)   Turnover        Male           Age    # tickets   Self confidence
Trade dummy              1.000           N.A.      0.278        0.146         0.026      0.047              0.100
ln(#trades)                             1.000      0.252        0.243        -0.007      0.095              0.058
Turnover                                           1.000        0.113        -0.076      0.068              0.040
Male                                                            1.000         0.005      0.206               N.A.
Age                                                                           1.000     -0.108             -0.020
# tickets                                                                                1.000              0.012
Self confidence                                                                                             1.000
Table 2
Regressions of trading activity on sensation seeking and control variables

Table 2 reports coefficients, standardized coefficients, and robust test statistics for a probit
regression (column 1), a Heckman two-stage regression (column 2, which also reports the
correlation coefficient between the residuals in the two stages), and an OLS regression (column
3). These regressions explain three measures of trading activity as a function of the number of
speeding tickets and a host of control variables. Income and other socioeconomic data are from
1998. Unreported are coefficients on a set of dummies for the number of stocks in the investor's
portfolio and birth year dummies. The sample is restricted to drivers in the province of Uusimaa
or East Uusimaa who got their AB or B license before July 1, 1997, who owned stocks between
January 1, 1995 and June 30, 1997, and for whom there is tax data from 1998.
                                   Coefficient               Standardized coefficient             t -value
                                Dependent variable             Dependent variable            Dependent variable
                            Trade                           Trade                        Trade
Independent variables      dummy ln (#trades) Turnover     dummy ln(#trades) Turnover   dummy ln (#trades) Turnover
(Constant)                  -0.325      0.603      0.057                                  -5.32         4.53    27.11
Total income dummies
Lowest                      -0.133      -0.105   -0.004    -0.038     -0.027   -0.001    -6.21        -3.58     -4.04
2                           -0.039      -0.047   -0.001    -0.011     -0.013    0.000    -1.90        -1.79     -1.24
3                           -0.030      -0.077   -0.001    -0.009     -0.021    0.000    -1.52        -3.05     -0.79
4                           -0.031      -0.021   -0.001    -0.009     -0.006    0.000    -1.58        -0.83     -0.67
6                            0.072       0.128    0.000     0.022      0.038    0.000     3.74         5.14      0.43
7                            0.093       0.201    0.000     0.028      0.062    0.000     4.74         7.80      0.23
8                            0.127       0.301    0.001     0.039      0.096    0.000     6.40        11.23      1.22
9                            0.200       0.454    0.001     0.061      0.150    0.000     9.75        15.72      0.83
Highest                      0.394       0.863    0.007     0.120      0.305    0.002    17.60        25.68      7.18
Financial wealth dummies
Lowest                      -0.994      -0.740   -0.020    -0.398     -0.242   -0.007    -48.96       -8.54   -31.95
2                           -0.788      -0.735   -0.017    -0.232     -0.169   -0.005    -42.38      -10.73   -26.07
3                           -0.504      -0.645   -0.011    -0.155     -0.177   -0.003    -28.91      -14.41   -15.87
4                           -0.335      -0.526   -0.005    -0.100     -0.151   -0.002    -19.27      -15.91    -6.79
6                           -0.037      -0.168   -0.001    -0.011     -0.054    0.000     -2.16       -8.32    -1.19
7                            0.064       0.041    0.002     0.019      0.014    0.001      3.67        2.07     2.84
8                            0.193       0.240   -0.002     0.043      0.067    0.000      4.84        7.37    -2.09
Highest                      0.361       0.406    0.004     0.108      0.149    0.001     12.85       12.71     4.39
Other dummies
Male                         0.347       0.762    0.013     0.173      0.380    0.007    23.08        25.48    20.37
Married                      0.029       0.062    0.003     0.014      0.031    0.001     2.19         3.94     6.11
Cohabitor                   -0.070      -0.034   -0.001    -0.011     -0.005    0.000    -1.79        -0.66    -0.64
Male * married              -0.107      -0.351   -0.006    -0.049     -0.167   -0.003    -5.55       -13.78    -6.60
Male * cohabits              0.022      -0.082   -0.001     0.002     -0.009    0.000     0.37        -1.04    -0.54
Unemployed                   0.083       0.166    0.007     0.020      0.038    0.002     4.28         6.18     6.61
Homeowner                    0.111       0.094   -0.003     0.047      0.037   -0.001     8.84         5.05    -4.39
Finance professional         0.539       0.426    0.017     0.063      0.059    0.002    12.11         8.17     7.75
# speeding tickets           0.047       0.098    0.003     0.028     0.061    0.002       5.75        8.45     6.84
Inverse Mill's ratio                     0.476                         0.157                           3.86
ρ                                        0.358
Pseudo R2                    0.153
Adjusted R2                             0.236     0.078
Number of observations      90,868     50,713    85,796
Table 3
Regressions of trading activity on both sensation seeking and overconfidence
Table 3 reports coefficients and robust test statistics for regressions. Panel A’s cross-sectional regression
uses ordered probit to estimate talent as the predicted value from a regression of self-confidence (from the
FAF leadership assessment) on control variables that measure success in later life. Overconfidence is the
residual from the regression. Panel B’s probit, 2-stage Heckman (which also reports the correlation
between the residuals of the two stages), and OLS regressions explain three measures of trading activity
as a function of overconfidence, the number of speeding convictions, and a host of control variables.
Income and other socioeconomic data are from 1998. Unreported in Panel B are coefficients on a set of
dummies for the number of stocks in the investor's portfolio and birth year dummies. The sample is
restricted to male drivers in the province of Uusimaa or East Uusimaa who got their AB or B license
before July 1, 1997, who owned stocks between January 1, 1995 and June 30, 1997, and for whom there
is tax data from 1998.

Panel A. Parsing out talent from self-confidence to derive overconfidence

Independent variables                       Coefficient       Standardized coefficient        t -value
Total income dummies
Lowest                                        -0.031                  -0.012                   -0.75
2                                              0.027                   0.010                   0.63
3                                             -0.061                  -0.018                   -1.35
4                                             -0.128                  -0.034                   -2.74
6                                              0.013                   0.004                   0.29
7                                              0.102                   0.030                   2.30
8                                              0.181                   0.052                   4.08
9                                              0.268                   0.074                   5.70
Highest                                        0.367                   0.087                   6.75
Portfolio value dummies
Lowest                                        -0.032                  -0.014                   -1.10
2                                             -0.080                  -0.026                   -2.25
3                                             -0.020                  -0.007                   -0.56
4                                              0.002                   0.001                   0.05
6                                              0.014                   0.004                   0.36
7                                              0.033                   0.009                   0.85
8                                             -0.004                  -0.001                   -0.05
Highest                                       -0.020                  -0.004                   -0.32
Other dummies
Married                                        0.156                   0.072                   6.37
Cohabitor                                     -0.117                  -0.021                   -2.17
Unemployed                                    -0.238                  -0.048                   -4.85
Homeowner                                      0.009                   0.005                   0.43
Ability score                                 0.119                    0.209                   20.82
Age dummies
23-29                                          0.420                   0.197                   5.59
30-34                                          0.358                   0.165                   4.97
35-39                                          0.129                   0.058                   1.82
40-44                                         -0.012                  -0.003                   -0.16
Pseudo R2                                     0.021
Number of observations                        12,379
Panel B. Sensation seeking, overconfidence, and trading activity

                                    Coefficient               Standardized coefficient             t -value
                                 Dependent variable             Dependent variable            Dependent variable
                            Trade                            Trade                        Trade
Independent variables      dummy ln (#trades) Turnover      dummy ln(#trades) Turnover   dummy ln (#trades) Turnover
(Constant)                   -0.639      1.502      0.084                                  -1.67         2.14    6.57
Total income dummies
Lowest                      -0.023      -0.203    -0.006     -0.008    -0.070   -0.002    -0.40       -2.51     -1.78
2                            0.075       0.051    -0.004      0.026     0.017   -0.001     1.30        0.61     -1.12
3                            0.135      -0.015    -0.002      0.039    -0.004   -0.001     2.25       -0.17     -0.58
4                            0.029      -0.122    -0.001      0.008    -0.031    0.000     0.48       -1.36     -0.22
6                            0.267       0.303     0.006      0.077     0.088    0.002     4.47        3.11      1.59
7                            0.307       0.386     0.005      0.094     0.121    0.002     5.22        3.93      1.45
8                            0.493       0.679     0.010      0.147     0.215    0.003     7.96        6.05      2.63
9                            0.564       0.777     0.008      0.160     0.239    0.002     8.63        6.48      2.22
Highest                      0.868       1.293     0.023      0.210     0.360    0.006    10.36        9.04      4.95
Financial wealth dummies
Lowest                      -1.142      -1.010    -0.022     -0.517    -0.405   -0.009    -21.39      -4.44     -9.15
2                           -0.892      -0.923    -0.023     -0.292    -0.259   -0.008    -16.91      -5.32     -9.78
3                           -0.522      -0.812    -0.016     -0.167    -0.252   -0.005     -9.88      -7.50     -6.59
4                           -0.321      -0.588    -0.008     -0.096    -0.181   -0.002     -5.87      -7.19     -2.88
6                            0.023      -0.067     0.003      0.007    -0.021    0.001      0.39      -1.09      1.04
7                            0.206       0.157     0.006      0.055     0.048    0.002      3.20       2.31      1.97
8                            0.275       0.317    -0.019      0.042     0.059   -0.003      1.40       2.65     -3.41
Highest                      0.362       0.346    -0.008      0.079     0.090   -0.002      2.95       3.51     -1.72
Other dummies
Married                     -0.092      -0.324    -0.001     -0.043    -0.153    0.000     -2.74      -7.02     -0.24
Cohabitor                   -0.134      -0.183    -0.004     -0.025    -0.033   -0.001     -1.80      -1.84     -0.89
Unemployed                  -0.072       0.050     0.014     -0.014     0.009    0.003     -1.12       0.46      2.66
Homeowner                    0.144       0.134    -0.001      0.072     0.067    0.000      4.77       2.93     -0.44
Finance professional         0.692       0.577     0.025      0.110     0.107    0.004      6.47       4.85      4.55
# speeding tickets          -0.001       0.070     0.003     -0.001     0.061    0.003     -0.05       3.54      3.37
Overconfidence               0.037       0.037     0.001      0.062     0.059    0.001      4.81       2.96      1.91
Inverse Mill's ratio                     0.816                          0.244                          2.50
ρ                                        0.532
Pseudo R2                    0.156
Adjusted R2                              0.154     0.122
Number of observations      11,521       7,359    10,693
Figure 1
The joint effect of age and gender on trading activity and sensation seeking

Figure 1 plots trades and speeding tickets as a function of age and gender. Panel A plots
number of trades from 7/1/1997-11/29/2002. Panel B effectively plots number of trades over
the same period, controlling for income, wealth, and number of stocks in the portfolio. It
reports coefficients from a regression of number of trades on birth year dummies (Females
line) as well as the sum of the former coefficients and the product of birth year dummies and a
male gender dummy (Males line). Regressors for income deciles, wealth deciles, and number
of stocks are also controlled for. Panel C plots the number of speeding tickets from 7/1/1997-
12/31/2001. The sample is restricted to drivers in the province of Uusimaa or East Uusimaa
who got their AB or B license before July 1, 1997, who owned stocks between January 1, 1995
and June 30, 1997, and for whom there is tax data from 1998.

Panel A. Average number of trades as a function of gender and birth year

                         100
   Average # of trades




                         10




                          1
                           1920   1930   1940        1950        1960   1970
                                                  Birth year

                                                Females        Males
Panel B. Marginal effects of gender and birth year on average number of trades with effects of
control variables taken out


                              1.5


                                   1
     Coefficient




                              0.5


                                   0
                                    1920   1930   1940        1950        1960   1970
                             -0.5
                                                           Birth year

                                                         Females        Males




Panel C. Speeding convictions as a function of gender and birth year
   Mean # speeding tickets




                             0.7
                             0.6
                             0.5
                             0.4
                             0.3
                             0.2
                             0.1
                              0
                               1920        1930   1940        1950        1960   1970
                                                           Birth year

                                                         Females        Males




                                                                   3
Figure 2
The joint effect of age and gender on trading activity controlling for sensation seeking

Figure 2 effectively plots the number of trades from 1997-2002 for males and females,
averaged for each birth-year cohort controlling for the non-gender regressors in Table 2. It
reports the coefficients on birth year dummies (Females line) and on the sum of the former
coefficients and the product of age and a male gender dummy (Males line) are given in the
graph. The trades are from 7/1/1997-11/29/2002 on the vertical axis. The sample is restricted
to drivers in the province of Uusimaa or East Uusimaa who got their AB or B license before
July 1, 1997, who owned stocks between January 1, 1995 and June 30, 1997, and for whom
there is tax data from 1998.


                   2

                 1.5
   Coefficient




                   1

                 0.5

                    0
                     1920   1930   1940      1950       1960   1970
                 -0.5
                                          Birth year

                                      Females          Males
