                    NBER IO.RKING PAPER SERIES




               ECONOMIC AND STATISTICAL ANALfSIS OF
                     DISCRIMINATION IN HIRING


                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg

                         Robert S. Smith



                      Working Paper No. 1222




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1983




Professor of Economics and Labor Economics, Cornell University, and
Research Associate, National Bureau of' Economic Research, and
Professor of Labor Economics, Cornell University, respectively.
We are grateful to our Cornell colleagues, Michael Gold, George
Milkovich and Stewart Schwab, for their comments on earlier drafts
and for providing us with background readings. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NEER Working Paper #1222
                                                        October 1983




                 Economic and Statistical Analysis of

                       Discrimination in Hiring



                               ABSTRACT

     Legal and administrative determinations of employers' compliance with

"equal employment opportunity" (EEO) requirements often hinge on the Issue

of the availability of protected class members to employers. That is,

courts and affirmative action review agencies compare the hire rates of

protected class members (the ratio of the number of protected class members

hired to the number who applied or who were potentially available) to the

comparable ratio for other applicants, in assessing whether an employer's

hiring policies meet the standards required of them by equal opportunity

regulations. The purpose of this paper is to review what economic theory

suggests affects availability and to analyze the extent to which these

factors are considered in administrative or judicial decisions concerning

hiring policies. In our analyses, we point out areas where there seem to

be inconsistencies or unresolved issues.



                                            Ronald C. Ehrenberg
                                            Robert S. Smith
                                            Department of Labor Economics
                                            Cornell University
                                            Ithaca, NY 14853
                                            (607) 256—3026
11.   Introduction

       Legal and administrative determinations of employers' compliance with

"equal employment opportunity" (EEO) requirements often hinge on the issue

of the availability of protected class members to employers. That is, courts

and affirmative action review agencies compare the hire rates of )rotected

class members (the ratio of the number of protected class members hired to

the number who applied or who were potentially available) to the comparable

ratio for other applicants, in assessing whether an employer's hiring policies

meet the standards required of them by equal opportunity regulations. The

purpose of this paper is to review what economic theory suggests nifects

availability and to analyze the extent to which these factors nrc con-

sidered in administrative or judicial decisions concerning hiring policies.

In our analyses, we will point out areas where there seem to he inconsistencies

or unresolved issues.



II. An Economic Model of Availability

       As a rough approximation, once individuals have decided to seek work

for pay, the characteristics of the ultimate employee—job "match" will be

influenced by both employee behavior and employer policies. Below, we

discuss these influences as they pertain to the issue of availability.

       A. Human Capital Decisions

        Searching and/or training for a job often entail an investment by the

employee associated with schooling, with on—the—job training that initially

is paid for by lower wages, with a geographical move, or with the costs of

quitting one job and looking for another. These Investment costs represent

barriers to occupational and geographical mobility, but not insurmountable

ones in most cases. Workers will change occupations, domiciles and employers
                                                                       2



if   the expected long—term gains are large enough to outweigh the initial

transactions costs.

       Human capital theory has two major implications for the calculation of

"availability." First, not all of the protected class workers who    consider
themselves   in a given occupation are equally available to an employer

seeking employees to fill that job. The pecuniary and pSyChic costs of

making geographic changes appear to rise with distance, so that in

"national"   or "regional" labor markets not all potential applicants are
equally likely to be interested. Persons with working spouses also face
higher costs of mobility,   other things equal. Likewise, those currently

without   employment tend to have lower opportunity costs of accepting a
given offer than those with a job, and even among the latter group transactions

costs will vary with the wage and compensation characteristics of the current

job. Finally, the long—term gains from a human capital investment fall

with age, so that older workers tend to be less mobile ("available") than

younger workers. Because the age distribution of the labor force varies by

race and sex, the proportions of the labor force actually "available" in a

labor markeL probably differ by race and sex.

      Second, those not currently "in" the labor market from which a firm

is hiring may be induced to join if the net returns are high enough.

Employers normally hiring only those workers in the local area can induce

workers to move in from other areas if their compensation offers are

sufficiently high. Similarly, workers will change occupations when the

long—run net benefits are large enough. Thus, the concept of a particular

occupational/geographic "labor market" containing a fixed number of workers

is a simplification that ignores mobility among workers.
                                                                          3




        B. Employer Policies

        Participation and human capital decisions are usually modelled in

terms of general, market incentives ——      incentives   that are normally beyond

the control of one employer. However, an individual employer'E policies

clearly    do affect the number and quality of its   applicants, and It is to

a   brief review of the effects of these policies to which w' now turn.
        1) Size of Recruiting Area. Firms offering relativeLy generous        compensa-

tion packages will attract larger numbers of applicants. The       gellorous compensa—

Lion will offset high commuting costs for many workers who live far away from
the   plant and tend to enlarge the geographic size of the firm's recruiting
area.
        Psychic   and pecuniary costs of commuting, however, vary with sex, income

level, and distance. Therefore, the geographic radius from which a given

plant can draw applicants may differ by race and sex, and the interest of

workers in the recruiting area will decline with distance from the plant.

The willingness of a firm to pay higher wages depends on Its ability to

enlarge the number of Its applicants and the payoff from doing so. Thus,

unskilled   jobs where worker selection need not be very careful may have smaller

recruiting areas than more skilled jobs in the same plant where stringent

screening is required.

         2) Applicant Quality. Compensation policies of a firm can also affect

the quality of its applicants. At lower compensation levels, only those

whose current wages are very low will tend to be "available" to a firm. At

higher levels, those available will include workers currently receiving

higher wages. Because high wages can be presumed to reflect high productivity,

higher wage offers by a firm will tend to attract more applicants of higher
                                                                               4




average productivity. The quality—increasing effects of higher wages, however,

could be offset by dilution associated with the increased probabilities of

attracting more distant applicants. Thus, while the number of            high—productivity
applicantswill rise as wages increase (causing the average qua] i ty of
successful applicants to rise), It is not possible to assert a priori whether
high—quality applicants will form a larger proportfon of total applicants.
      Another factor affecting the quality of those hired is the          recruiting

strategy    of the firm.   Some firms will, as above, offer   high wages and

select the best from a large number of applicants. Others will offer low

starting wages and train previously unqualified new hires for their jobs.

Training offered may be general In nature, in which case it         is   paid for by

the   employee in the form of low   initial wage rates. If traintiig Is employer—
specific,    both employer and employee will tend to share in us costs and

agree to a post—training compensation policy that discourages the other from

unilaterally     severing the employment relationship. Thus "high—training"
strategies can substitute for "high wage" policies, with       predictable effects

on   hiring standards, the quality of applicants, wage rates and         later mobility.

        3) Sex   and Race Composition of   Applicants. Other aspects of a plant's

employment package can affect the sex and race composition of applicants.

A reputation for discrimination is one ,      but beyond that are

such things as career ladders, fringe benefit packages, and plant location.

Some plants maintain an "internal labor market," where new entrants are

initially placed in low—responsibility, low—paying jobs but offered a

succession of internal promotions later on. Employers look for qualities

beyond the entry—level job, and the employees who find these jobs attractive

are those who have a relatively long planning horizon and/or low discount rates.

There are likely to be cultural and/or wealth differences by race or sex           that
                                                                     5




affect planning horizons and/or discount rates——and these factors will in turn

influence the proportion of protected class workers who both apply for such

jobs and are ultimately hired.

     Fringe benefits form an increasing proportion of most compensation

packages, and they can subtly affect the race/sex mix of applicants. The

fundamental characteristic of fringe benefits is that they are not paid in

currently spendable cash; they are in—kind or deferred payments whose primary

advantage to an employee is their income tax treatment. Because tax breaks

are more valuable for high—income people, fringe benefits are of least

value to the poor. Low wage and low—wealth workers will tend to prefer cash;

thus, compensation packages that offer high fringe benefits and lower wages

will attract fewer minority applicants. Married women, who are perhaps

already covered by medical insurance (say), may also be less attracted by

compensation packages heavily weighted toward particular fringe benefits.

     Finally, the locational decisions of a firm will affect the race and

sex composition of its applicants. Locating near pleasant suburban resi-

dential areas will tend to attract more women than locating near rioriresi—

dential areas. Similarly, locating near minority "ghettoes" wil.i attract

more minorities than locating near distant suburbs. Land values, access to

transportation and access to customers, as well as the availability of labor,

all affect locational decisions.



III. Operationalizing the Conceptual Framework

      Given the above framework, it is interesting to ask how the criteria

and evidence used in discrimination in hiring cases relate to it. To do so,

we trace how the courts have treated a number of issues including the

geographic dimensions of a firm's labor market, the pool of potential

applicants, and the determination of which applicants or potential applicants
                                                                     6




are qualified for particular jobs. The discussion that follows is non-

technical in nature; citations to specific legal cases to support our

impressions are found in the footnotes (available from us on request). To

anticipate, we find that while the courts have moved increasingly towards

using criteria and evidence that are consistent with economic and statistical

analyses, in some cases they have not moved quite far enough.

     A. The Geographic Dimension of a Firm's Labor Market

     Early cases arbitrarily specified the extent of a firm's labor market

by geographic boundaries, such as a state, SMSA, or county.'    However, such

a broad specification ignores a firm's location within an area; since an

Individual's willingness to work for a firm depends upon commuting time and

costs, where a firm is located will affect its potential labor supply.

Moreover, the higher the compensation a firm offers, the greater the distance

potential applicants will be willing to commute. Hence, the relevant

geographic labor market is a firm—specific concept and depends both on the

firm's location and its compensation policy.

     Subsequent cases have adopted such a view arid defined a firm's labor

market by reference to actual commuting patterns of its workforce or

applicant pool and/or by reasonable expected commuting patterns.2 For

example, with respect to the former criterion, the numbers of qualified (to

be defined below) protected and nonprotected class individuals in each area

is sometimes weighted by the fraction of a firm's employees (or applicants)

who reside in the area to compute an overall availability rate.3 With

respect to the latter, the weights assigned to each residential area are

sometimes assumed to decline monotonically with the distance between the area

and the firm.4
                                                                    7



    To date, the courts appear to have overlooked the fact that willingness

to commute differs by race and sex. There is much evidence that females

tend to live closer to their jobs than males and some evidence that non-

whites commute shorter distances than whites.5 To the extent that these dif-

ferences reflect voluntary labor supply decisions, this suggests that in

computing availability ratios the weights assigned to each residential area

might be reasonably expected to differ by gender or race. For example, a

function relating the fraction of male applicants from a given residential

area to the distance of that area from a firm might start (at 0 distance)

lower but extend farther out than the comparable female function.

     Other things equal, as we move to more highly skilledand compensated workers,

commuting costs become relatively less important and the size of the local

labor market expands; a tendency the courts have recognized.6   However, the

courts have been less consistent with economic theory in their treatment of

availability in national labor markets, markets for highly skilled profes-

sionals where the job search by both employers and potential employees is

truly national in scope. To say that a market is national is not to say

that a given firm's chances of attracting employees from all areas of the

country are equal. For example, professionals raised and trained in the

"sunbelt" may have strong nonpecuniary preferences for remaining there

rather than moving to a snowbelt state. Moreover, we know that interstate

migration rates decline with distance, even for highly skilled professionals.

Finally, firms located In Isolated small towns may face problems in attracting

professionals with career—oriented spouses because the chances of the spouse's

finding an acceptable job offer In such a town may be ouite low. Court

cases that use national availability data for professional employees appear

to ignore these considerations.7
                                                                   8


     B. The Pool of Potential Applicants

     While the earliest court decisions permitted the use of population

representation as an appropriate standard for availability,8 it was soon

realized that population figures included individuals who were not available

for work (e.g., the aged, young children, individuals in institutions).

Later cases moved to the use of civilian labor force data9 and, in cases

where occupational qualifications could be established, to the use of the

qualified civilian labor forceJ0

     Although this is clearly movement in the right direction, a number of

thorny conceptual issues remain; these all relate to the fact that the

stock of qualified individuals in an area is not equal to the flow of

potential applicants to a firm. First, the civilian labor force consists

both of employed and unemployed workers and, as noted above, the response

of each group to job offers is likely to be different. Some work by

economists has considered the possibility of using a "reservation wage

approach" to compute the number of potential applicants, but it is unclear

how the courts will react to this methodology.11 It is clear, however, that

employed and unemployed workers should not be given equal weight in comput-

ing availability numbers; since unemployment rates differ by race and sex,

to do so would bias availability comparisons.

     Next, In computing applicant pools, the focus in court cases is often

on the total stock of "qualified" individuals In the labor market. As Is

well—documented, however, the probability of voluntary turnover declines

with age. The focus should more appropriately be on relatively young

employed workers in a labor market, with older more experienced workers

receiving less weight in the computation of availability. Put another way,

the flow of new hires should be contrasted to the flow of potential appli-

cants, not to the stock of existing employees in the labor market. If the
                                                                       9




protected class proportion of new entrants exceeds their proportion of

all employees (due to increased minority population and female labor force

participation rates), the former proportion will lead to higher standards

being set for protected class hiring. While it is now routine for uni-

versities hiring at the assistant professor level to focus on the share of

protected class members in the new Ph.D. pool, it is our impression that

in most other cases, older individuals are assumed to be equally "avaitable"

to a firm as younger oners.

     Finally, a firm's compensation policy may affect the   fraction   of

minorities or females in its potential applicant pooi for at least two

reasons. On the one hand, if reservation wage functions differ for

minorities or females in the applicant pool will vary systematically with

a firm's wage policy.12 On the other hand, holding total compensation

fixed, firms that offer high wages but lower fringe benefits may generate——

for reasons noted above——more female and minority applicants than those

that offer low—wage/high—fringe packages. To date, the courts do not seem

to have realized that a nondiscriminating firm's compensation policy may

affect the race/sex composition of its potential applicant pool.

     C. Which Potential Applicants Are Qualified?

     In a number of cases dealing with skilled and semi—skilled workers, the

courts have ruled that occupational representation is an appropriate availa-

bility standard.13 In some cases, for example those dealing with teachers,

determining who is qualified to be hired is straightforward (employed teachers

and other individuals who meet state or local teacher certification require-

ments). In other cases, however, qualifications are much more nebulous.

While some jobs require very specific skills and prior occupational exper-

ience, others may require only general age/education/labor market experience
                                                                     10




credentials. It is clear that no general guidelines will emerge here.

      What about the question of training? While a 1977 General Services

Administration document defined availability to include those ". . .who are

capable of acquiring those skills within a reasonable period of time,"14

we find no evidence that the courts have adopted this position. We believe

this to be wise, for one knows from human capital theory that the costs of

all general training, and some share of the costs of specific training,

must be "borne" by workers if firms are permitted to maximize profits.

Hence, If already trained workers were available, firms would hire untrained

workers only If the latter were willing to accept lower wages and/or forgo

training opportunities. If the protected class workers were disproportionately

concentrated among the untrained (rather than the trained), and the courts

counted such workers among the available set, then one of three outcomes

woulc necessarily occur even In nondiscriminating firms:    (1) New hires from

the protected class would receive lower rates, on average, than other new

hires; (2) the protected class new hires would be more likely than these

others to be shunted into dead—end jobs that provide no training opportunities;

or (3) firms would be constrained from maximizing profits. Since the first

two outcomes might erroneously lead to allegations of discrimination and the

third might reduce the number of nondiscriminating employers, none of the

three outcomes seems socially desirable.

       Finally, given a qualified applicant pool, the courts have agreed that

employers have the right to choose the subset of applicants that they con-

sider to be the most qualified)5 However, It is not sufficient to argue

that explicit or Implicit hiring standards (e.g., test scores or education

levels) are believed to be correlated with subsequent productivity. Rather

it   must be documented that they are valid predictors for the particular
                                                                     11




employer. Put another way, although a variety of economic theories

(human capital, screening, neo—Marxian) all suggest that increased education

is associated with increased productivity, in the absence of explicit

evidence that such an association exists at a particular firm, the courts

appear to be unwilling to accept evidence on differences in mean education

levels between protected group and other applicants as a justification for

differential hire rates between the two groups.16



IV. Policy Issues

     Hiring employees can be conceived of as a two—step procedure. Appli-

cants are first generated, and then employees are selected from among the

applicants. We examine each step below (in reverse order) within the con-

text of legal policy issues.

     A. Selection Criteria

     The Supreme Court17 has enunciated the general rule that a plaintiff

has made a prima facie case of discrimination by showing that a selection

device has a significant disparate impact on race or sex (i.e., the ratio of

those passing to those taking the test differs significantly by race or sex).

Once a prima facie case of discrimination has been established by the

plaintiff, the burden shifts to the defendant to show that the business

practice giving rise to the disparate impact grows out of a business neces-

sity. The Supreme Court has also emphasized the validity of inferring dis-

crimination if the overall selection ratios of the firm (those hired divided

by those applying) are significantly different by race or sex.18 The import-

ance of showing disparate outcomes has been a key factor in stimulating

the use of statistical methods and economic theory in discrimination cases

involving the hiring process.
                                                                   12




     A statistical issue raised by the disparate impact standard is how

to measure the "significance" of any differences in hiring ratios. The

courts have considered criteria of statistical significance in some areas,

focusing on hire rates being different at the .05 level of significance or

being at least two to three standard deviations apart.19 In other cases,

they have considered (but not always accepted) a standard of whether pro-

tected class applicant hire rates are at least eighty percent of the hire
                            20
rate of other applicants.

     There are well—known deficiencies with both of these approaches. The

focus on statistical significance makes it difficult to prove evidence of

disparate impacts in situations where there are a small number of observa-

tions, either because an employer has done proportionately little hiring

or its workforce is small in size. The "eighty percent" rule is arbitrary

and is not grounded in any analytic framework. Nonetheless, it seems clear

that the criteria ultimately chosen should involve issues of both statistical

and quantitative significance. One senses, for example, that hire rates

for a large employer of .49 for minorities and .50 for nonminorities which

are statistically significantly different should not be taken as strong

evidence of disparate impact.

     Given that statistical significance is difficult to infer when samples

are small, that arbitrary standards can be disputed, and that a finding of

"disparate impact" leads to a finding of discrimination only in cases where

selection standards cannot be shown to be job—related, it seems that courts

will inevitably be drawn into the issue of judging firms' hiring criteria.

It would thus appear difficult for courts to sidestep the evaluation of

hiring procedures by looking just at hiring outcomes.
                                                                   13




     B. Actual vs. Potential Applicant Pools

     A firm that appears to apply nondiscriminatory hiring criteria to its

applicants may in fact employ methods of recruiting applicants that are

discriminatory in intent or effect. For this reason, the courts have

sometimes been reluctant to accept a firm's actual applicant flow as the

basis for judging the fairness of selection procedures; estimates of the

potential applicant flow it faces thus enters the picture.

     If data on the actual applicant flow to a firm are available, the

courts appear to have concluded that it is preferable to use such data

rather than estimates of potential applicant flows, provided that the repre-

sentation of protected group members in the former is equal to or exceeds

their representation in the latter.2' However, if actual applicant flow

data are distorted by application procedures, recruitment practices, or

other actions that discourage protected group members from applying,

potential applicant flow data may be preferred.22 This seems to almost

reduce to the rule "use the type of applicant flow data that yields the

highest representation of protected group members." There are two major

flaws with this rule.

     First, were "potential availability" accurately estimatable, a standard

of actual or potential availability, which ever is higher, would create a

goal that cannot be attained in the aggregate. The reason is simple: to

the extent that actual availability exceeded expected availability in any

firm, the aggregate goal would exceed the number potentially available.

    More importantly, however, it seems clear from our review of both

theory and evidence that factors affecting the availability of potential

applicants to a particular firm can be highly specific. Thus, while esti-

mates of expected availability can be obtained from a careful count and
                                                                   14




weighting of various workers in the labor market, a specific firm will

usually be able to point to aspects of its training or recruiting policies,

compensation packages, or skill needs that make it atypical. It appears to

us that comparing actual to potential applicant flows for lurloses of

finding "disparate impact" will often involve quite legitimate disputes.

A logical extension of the judicial standard applying to hiring criteria

would seem to involve the following: If a firm's actual applicant flows

from protected classes are below those expected, the firm is permitted an

attempt to demonstrate that the totality of its recruitment procedures

(including its location and its compensation package) serve the purpose of

business necessity. Once again, it appears to us impossible for the courts

to circumvent the need to judge a firm's policies or procedures by looking

only at outcomes.

     Unfortunately, court judgments on whether a firm's policies are non-

discriminatory presents an issue of profound importance. Suppose two plants

are located side—by—side in a suburban location, but one pays a high wage

that attracts black applicants from the central city and the other does not.

Should a court be permitted to order the lower—wage firm to raise its wage?

Should a high—wage firm that attracts white suburban applicants despite

being located in the central city be told to reduce its wage to increase

the proportion of black applicants? Should courts make similar judgments

about a firm's fringe benefit package or its reasons for relocating a plant?

Courts are now allowed to make judgments about the business necessity of a

firm's hiring criteria, so perhaps a logical extension of this power is

judicial intrusion into matters of compensation levels, fringe benefit

packages and location policy. It is a step, however, fraught with serious

implications for a market system.
                                                                    15



                                References

Donald Atwater, Richard Niehaus, and James Sheridan, "Labor Pool for Antibias
     Program Varies by Occupation and Job Market," Monthly Labor Review 104,
     September 1981, 43—45.

Donald Atwater and James Sheridan, "Assessing the Availability of Non—workers
     for Jobs," Human Resource Planning, December 1980, 211-218.

David Baldus and James Cole, Statistical Proof of Discrimination (Colorado
     Springs, Col.: Shepard's Inc., 1979).

Michael Borus, "Willingness of Youth to Work," Journal of Human Resources 17,
     Fall 1982.

Ronald Ehrenberg and Robert Smith, Modern Labor Economics: TheoTTy and Poliy
     (Scott Foresman and Co., 1982).

David Eliwood, "The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: Are There Teenage Jobs Missing
     in the Ghetto?" (paper presented at the NBER Conference on Minority Youth
     Unemployment, Cambridge, Mass., August 1983).

Robert Flanagan, et al., Perspectives on Availability (Equal Employment Advisory
     Council, Washington, D.C., 1977).

Joseph Gastwirth and Sheldon Haber, "Defining the Labor Market for Equal
     Employment Standards," Monthly Labor Review 99, March 1976, 32—36.

            "Specifying the Labor Market for Individual Firms," Monthly Labor
            ,

     Review 101, August 1978, 26—29.
General   Services Administration, Contract Compliance Manual (Washington, D.C.,
     1977).

Sheldon Haber, "The Mobility of Professional Workers and Fair hiring,"
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34, January 1981, 257—264.

Harry Holzer, "Black Youth Nonemployment: Duration and Job Search" (paper
     presented at the NBEF, Conference on Minority Youth Unemployment, Cambridge,
     Mass., August 1983).

Frank Krzystofiak and Jerry Newman, "Evaluating Employment Outcomes: Availability
     Models and Measures," Industrial Relations 21 (Fall 1982, 277—292.

Richard Lester, Reasoning About Discrimination (Princeton University Press,
     1977).

Frank Morris, Current Trends in the Use and Misuse of Statistics in Employment
     Discrimination Litigation, 2nd ed. (Equal Employment Advisory Council,
     Washington, D.C., 1978).

Albert Rees and George Schultz, Workers and Wages in an Urban Labor Market
     (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970).

Barbara Schlei and Paul Grossman, Employment Discrimination, 2nd ed. (Bureau
     of National Affairs, Washington, D.C., 1983).
                                                                     16




                                 Footnotes

     1. See Griggs v. Duke Power Company, 401 U.S. 424 (1971) or Taylor v.
Safeway Stores, 524 F.2d 263 (bc., 1975).

     2. On the use of actual commuting patterns, see Detroit Police Officers
Assoc. v. Young, 452 U.S. 938 (1981), and Drayton v. City of St. Petersburg,
477 F.Supp. 846 (M.D. Florida 1979). On the use of reasonable expected com-
muting patterns, see ABROV v. Black and Decker Mfg. Co., 439 F.Supp. 1095
(D. Maryland 1977), and EEOC v. North Hills Passauant Hospital, 466 F.Supp.
783 (W.D. Pa. 1979).

     3. See EEOC v. duPont Co., 445 F.Supp. 223 (D. Delaware 1978), Smith v.
Union Oil of California,              (D. California 1977), Louisville Black
Police Officers v. City, 511 F.Supp. 825 (D. Kentucky 1979), fyv. Waiters
Union, Local 30, 489 F.Supp. 282 (N.D. Cal. 1980), and Mark Fenneco        Oil
Co., 635    F.2d 497 (5th Cir. 1981).

     4.    See, for example, Timkin Co. v. Vaughan, 413 F.Supp. 1183 (N.D. Ohio
1976).

     5. For evidence on commuting time differentials by race and sex, see
David Eliwood (1983), and the citations included there, and Albert Rees and
George Schultz (1970).

     6. Barbara Schlei and Paul Grossman (1983), p. 1362.

     7. See, for example, Quigley v. Braniff Airways, Inc., 85 F.R.D. 74
(N.D. Tex. 1979). Haber (1981) suggests a methodology that takes spacial
mobility patterns into account when computing availability data for national
markets, but to our knowledge it has not been adopted for use in actual cases.

     8. For example, Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324 (1977).

     9. See, for example, EEOC v. duPont Co., Smith v. Union Oi1, Detroit
Police Officers Assoc. v. Young, supra, and Reynolds v. Sheet Metal Workers
Local 102, 498 F.Supp. 952 (D.D.C. 1980).

     10.  See, for example, Hazelwood School District v. U.S., 433 U.S. 299
(1977), Croker v. Boeing Co., 437 F.Supp. 1138 (1977), EEOC v. Radiator
Specialty Co., 610 F.2d 178 (4th Cir. 1979), and EEOC v. United Virginia Bank,
615 F.2d 147 (4th Cir. 1980).

     11. See Donald Atwater and James Sheridan (1980) and Atwater, Richard
Niehaus and Sheridan (1981).

     12. For evidence on white/nonwhite reservation wage differences for
teenagers, see Harr Hoizer (1983) and Michael Borus (1982).

     13. See the citations in footnote 10.

     14. General Services Administration (1977), p. 9.
                                                                   17




     15. See Griggs v. Duke Power Co., supra.

     16. See Green and Danley v. U.S. Steel Corp. Decision by Judge J. Newcomer
in the Eastern District of Pennsylvania District Court, July 18, 1983.

     17. Griggs v. Duke Power Co., supra, enunciated the standard of "disparate
impact".

     18. See, for example, Hazelwood School District v. United States, supra,
and Teamsters v. United States, supra.

     19. See, for example, Contraras v. City of Los Angeles, )56 I'. 2d 1267
(9th Cir. 1981), Davis v. City of Dallas, 483 F.Supp. 54 (H.!). Texas 1979),
Hazeiwood School District v. United States, supra, and Rivera_v. City of Wichita
Falls, 665 F.2d 531 (5th Cir. 1982).

     20. See, for example, Eubanks v. Pickens—Bond Construction Co., 635 F.2d
1341 (8th Cir. 1980) where the court rejected the 80% rule because of a small
sample size, and Moore v. Southwestern Bell Tel. Co., 593 F.2d 607 (5th Cir.
1979) where the rule was adopted.

     21. See, for example, United Statesv. County of Fairfax, Va., 629 F.2d
1374 (5th Cir. 1974) or New York City Transit Authority v. Beazer, 440 U.S. 568
(1979).

     22. See Dothard v. Rawllnson, 433 U.S. 321 (1977).
