                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              DO FOREIGNERS INVEST LESS IN POORLY GOVERNED FIRMS?

                                              Christian Leuz
                                               Karl V. Lins
                                            Francis E. Warnock

                                          Working Paper 12222
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12222


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2006




Email addresses: leuz@wharton.upenn.edu, finkvl@business.utah.edu, and WarnockF@darden.virginia.edu.
We thank Jillian Faucette, Sara Holland, Ivalina Kalcheva, and Alex Rothenberg for valuable research
assistance. We are grateful for helpful comments from Anup Agrawal, Robert Bushman, Alexander Dyck,
Robert Heinkel, Dale Henderson, Helena Isidro, Andrew Karolyi, Leora Klapper, Mike Lemmon, Darius
Miller, René Stulz, Rohan Williamson, Luigi Zingales, and participants at the 2004 NYSE Conference on
Global Equity Markets, the Tenth Annual Assurant/Georgia Tech International Finance Conference, the 2005
Shanghai Conference on Corporate Governance in Asia and China, the 2005 Maryland Finance Symposium,
the 2005 Bank of Canada Workshop at UBC, the 2006 Darden/World Bank Emerging Markets Conference,
the 2006 Corporate Governance and Capital Markets Conference sponsored by CEMAF and ISCTE in
Lisbon, and seminars at Indiana University, Ohio State University, the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, and the University of Oklahoma. The statistical analysis of security-level data on U.S. investors’
holdings reported in this study was conducted at the International Finance Division of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality
requirements. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be
interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other
person associated with the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Christian Leuz, Karl V. Lins and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Do Foreigners Invest Less in Poorly Governed Firms?
Christian Leuz, Karl V. Lins and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 12222
May 2006
JEL No. G3, F3

                                            ABSTRACT

As domestic sources of outside finance are limited in many countries around the world, it is
important to understand the factors that influence whether foreign outside investors provide capital
to a country’s firms. This study examines whether and why investor concern about corporate
governance results in fewer foreign holdings. We use a comprehensive set of foreign holdings by
U.S. investors as a proxy for foreign investment and analyze a sample of 4,411 firms from 29
emerging market and developed economies. We find that foreigners invest significantly less in firms
that are poorly governed, i.e., firms that have ownership structures that are more conducive to outside
investor expropriation. Interestingly, this finding is not simply a matter of a country’s economic
development but appears to be directly related to a country’s information rules and legal institutions.
We therefore argue that information problems faced by foreign investors play an important role in
this result. Supporting this explanation, we show that foreign investment is lower in firms that appear
to engage in more earnings management.

Christian Leuz
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2315 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367

Karl V. Lins
David Eccles School of Business
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303

Francis E. Warnock
Darden Business School
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
and NBER
warnockf@darden.virginia.edu
      “The fundamental issue for everyone involved in financial markets today, regardless of company
      or country, must be to maintain high standards – legal, regulatory, and ethical – that breed trust
      and confidence. ….. Capital will flee environments that are unstable or unpredictable – whether
      that'
          s a function of lax corporate governance, ineffective accounting standards, a lack of
      transparency, or a weak enforcement regime. Investors must see for themselves that companies
      are living up to their obligations and embracing the spirit underpinning all securities laws.”
      [William Donaldson, Chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005].


1. Introduction

        Domestic sources of outside finance are limited in many countries around the world

[Giannetti and Koskinen (2004)]. In response, many capital markets have been liberalized, and

foreign capital has become an increasingly important source of finance, particularly for firms

from emerging markets [Karolyi (1998)]. For instance, in the mid-1990s Asian firms raised $1

in foreign equity markets for every $3 they raised domestically [Bekaert, Harvey and Lumsdaine

(2002)]. Given the growing significance of foreign financing, and the fact that access to foreign

capital may well be uneven across firms and countries, it is important to understand more fully

the factors that can cause investors to shy away from providing capital to foreign firms.

        Poor firm-level corporate governance is one factor that draws considerable attention from

outside investors and regulators, but has rarely been investigated in large-scale academic studies.

Institutional investors frequently claim that they avoid foreign firms that are poorly governed,

particularly when it comes to investments in emerging markets.1 Similarly, as the quote above

makes clear, government officials and securities regulators often express concerns that poor

governance hinders foreign investment and may thus impede financial development. However,

outside investors that fear governance problems and expropriation by insiders are likely to


1
  A 2002 McKinsey and Company global investor survey shows that corporate governance considerations dominate
decisions about which firms in Latin American and East Asia receive investment whereas for North American firms
financial statement considerations dominate. The survey also reports that “more than 60% of investors state that
governance considerations might lead them to avoid individual companies with poor governance.” Similarly, when
discussing investment criteria, the long-time manager of the $1.2 billion Templeton Developing Markets Trust,
Mark Mobius, states that “corporate governance is not improving, so why fight it?” [Karmin (2000)].
reduce the price they are willing to pay for a firm’s shares. As a result of price protection, even

poorly governed firms should offer an adequate return, raising the questions of whether and why

governance concerns could manifest themselves in fewer foreign holdings.

       Our study is an attempt to shed some light on these questions examining a sample of

4,411 firms from 29 countries in which U.S investors are the “foreign” investors. We show that

U.S. investors, which comprise about half of all foreign investment worldwide, do in fact hold

fewer shares in non-U.S. firms with ownership structures that are more conducive to governance

problems and expropriation by controlling insiders. We also provide evidence that information

problems faced by U.S. investors play a central role in this result.

       It is commonly argued that foreign investors are at an informational disadvantage relative

to local investors [Brennan and Cao (1997), Kang and Stulz (1997), and Choe, Kho, and Stulz

(2005)].   In this paper, we argue that information asymmetries between foreign and local

investors are particularly pronounced with respect to the evaluation of a firm’s governance

structures. In many countries – constituting both emerging and developed markets – business

transactions, financing arrangements, and, ultimately, corporate governance are shaped not by

arm’s length dealings, but by relationships among a tightly knit group of controlling families and

managers. Understanding these insider relationships (and their implications for outside investor

expropriation) requires an intricate social knowledge of political connections, banking

connections, private gatherings of the business elite, and so forth, which foreigners are less likely

to have. Additionally, it seems plausible that foreign investors are more likely to shy away from

particular firms with expected insider expropriation problems when a country’s governance and

information regulations are relatively weak, because poor country-level institutions make the

evaluation of firms’ governance structures more important and costly.




                                                                                                   2
        These information asymmetries can influence the investment decisions of foreign

investors in two ways. First, they give rise to an adverse selection problem when investors

transact in foreign markets [Akerlof (1970) and Milgrom (1981)].2                       As a result, investors

underinvest in foreign stocks because they do not expect to receive a fair return based on the

prices at which locals would transact. Consistent with this reasoning, Choe, Kho, and Stulz

(2005) find that for Korean stocks prices move more against foreign investors than domestic

investors before trades. Second, once an investment is made, firms with suspect governance

structures require more monitoring than well-governed firms and, based on our preceding

arguments, this is likely to be more costly for foreign investors. In addition, poorly governed

firms often actively hide the extent of their governance problems and expropriation activities, for

instance, by providing opaque financial statements and managing earnings [e.g., Fan and Wong

(2002) and Leuz, Nanda and Wysocki (2003)].                    Again, local investors are probably better

equipped to unravel these activities, resulting in lower monitoring costs.

        Stulz (1981) shows in an equilibrium model that out-of-pocket costs incurred in holding

foreign assets can induce investors to underweight foreign securities. While Stulz (1981) models

these costs as a tax that equally affects all foreign holdings of domestic investors, his basic

insight can be extended to the situation we describe above, in which information costs related to

governance differ across investors, firms, and markets [see Cooper and Kaplanis (1986, 2000)

for such model extensions]. These papers form the theoretical basis of our argument that, in

capital market equilibrium, governance structures that are particularly taxing with respect to their

information and monitoring costs can manifest themselves in lower foreign holdings.




2
 The fundamental problem is very similar to the one that motivates bid ask spreads and price impact of trades in the
market microstructure literature. See, e.g., Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985).


                                                                                                                  3
        As there can be a host of reasons why foreign investors avoid or seek stocks from a

particular country, such as the degree of market integration, benefits from diversification,

transaction costs, restrictions on capital flows, proximity to the home country, and language, we

control for country-fixed effects in our tests That is, we analyze which stocks U.S. investors

choose within a given country, focusing on ownership structures that are more conducive to

governance problems and expropriation of outside investors.

        We obtain U.S. holdings by merging comprehensive security-level data on all U.S.

investors’ positions in non-U.S. equities from the 1997 U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve Board

benchmark survey. We identify poor firm-level governance by constructing both nominal and

relative proxies indicating that managers and their families are, in effect, in control of their firms.

As managers and families generally obtain control by owning far less than 100% of a firm’s cash

flow rights, controlling insiders have not only the ability but also the incentive to expropriate

outside investors [Jensen and Meckling (1976) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer

(hereafter LLS) (1999)].3 We obtain our ownership and control data from Claessens, Djankov,

and Lang (2000) (Japan), Faccio and Lang (2002) (Western Europe), and Lins (2003) (emerging

markets) and combine these datasets in a consistent fashion.

        Across all countries, we find that firm-level proxies for governance problems and private

control benefits have a negative relation to U.S. investment, but the result is relatively weak in

terms of both economic and statistical significance.                 We next analyze the effect of poor

governance on U.S. holdings within emerging market economies because it is often argued that

access to foreign capital is particularly important for these firms and for these economies overall

[Henry (2000), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001, 2005)]. We find that firm-level proxies

3
 Supporting this hypothesis, Claessens, Djankov, Fan, and Lang (2002), Lemmon and Lins (2003), and Lins (2003)
show that in emerging markets high levels of managerial and family control are costly to non-controlling or outside
shareholders.


                                                                                                                  4
for governance and expropriation problems are unrelated to U.S. holdings in this context. While

seemingly surprising, the classification of countries as “emerging markets” based on per-capita

GDP does not account for the substantial variation in countries’ institutional structures. There

are developed market countries, such as Italy, for which Zingales (1994) provides evidence that

opaque reallocations of assets to favor connected insiders at the expense of minority shareholders

are easily tolerated within the country’s institutional and political framework. In contrast, there

are emerging markets such as Hong Kong that have relatively comprehensive and well-enforced

disclosure requirements, such as those on related party transactions as documented by Cheung,

Rau, and Stouraitis (2005). Similarly, a country’s domestic supply of arm’s-length finance is not

simply a function of its economic development. In Germany, one of the largest economies in the

world, finance has traditionally been more relational than arm’s length.

       We expect the governance effect on holdings to be more pronounced in countries whose

institutional structures exacerbate the information problems faced by foreign investors. To

examine this hypothesis, we conduct tests that estimate the governance effect on foreign holdings

separately for countries with low and high scores for measures from LLS (2004) that capture a

country’s disclosure regulation and outside investor protection. Our results indicate that weak

country-level disclosure and governance, rather than a country’s GDP-per-capita, makes firm-

level governance an important determinant of foreign investment. U.S. investors significantly

underweight firms with high levels of managerial and family control when they are domiciled in

countries with weaker disclosure requirements, securities regulations, and outside shareholder

rights, or domiciled in countries with a non-English legal origin, which is often argued to be a

summary measure for a number of institutional features. In contrast, within extensive-disclosure




                                                                                                 5
and strong-governance countries, firms with high levels of managerial and family control do not

experience less foreign investment.

       These results are consistent with an interpretation that information problems faced by

foreign investors for firms with poor firm-level governance play an important role in investment

choices.   Stringent disclosure requirements make it less costly to become informed about

potential governance problems and they also level the playing field among investors so it is less

likely that locals have an information advantage.       Strongly enforced minority shareholder

protection reduces the consumption of private benefits of control and thus decreases the

importance of information regarding these private benefits.          In contrast, low disclosure

requirements and weak investor protection exacerbate information problems.

       An alternative and potentially more direct way to test whether information problems are

at the core of our holdings results is to use proxies for poor information flows instead of our

governance variables. Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki (2003) and Haw, Hu, Hwang, and Wu (2004)

show that earnings management is more pervasive in countries with weak investor protection,

and in firms where insiders are more likely to consume private control benefits. These findings

support the notion that information flows to outside investors are particularly poor for firms with

weak governance. Thus, we replace our firm-level governance variables with firm-level earnings

management proxies and re-estimate our models to see whether these proxies yield similar

results. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that foreign holdings of U.S. investors are

negatively related to the presence of firm-level earnings management in countries with weak

disclosure requirements, securities regulation and outside shareholder protection. This finding

sheds some light on the mechanism behind our earlier results and lends further credence to the

notion that information problems associated with poor governance deter foreign investment.




                                                                                                 6
        Our paper has two main contributions. First, we are the first to provide compelling

evidence for a large sample across many countries that foreigners do indeed invest less in poorly

governed firms. As discussed in more detail in the next section, prior studies are limited by their

samples and have produced mixed results. Second, we take the analysis a step further and show

that the governance effect on foreign holdings owes at least in part to information problems.

This conclusion is supported by the finding that the foreign holding effects are particularly

pronounced for poorly governed firms in countries with weak governance and disclosure

regulation, and the finding that foreign holdings are negatively associated with higher levels of

earnings management in weak governance and disclosure countries.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the empirical

literature on international portfolio holdings, particularly as it relates to information and

governance problems. Section 3 describes our data and sample selection. Section 4 presents the

empirical findings. Section 5 concludes.



2. Discussion of Prior Findings

        Prior studies on corporate governance and foreign investment can be divided into those

based on aggregate, country-level portfolio data and those that utilize firm-level data. Country-

level results are somewhat mixed. Both Chan, Covrig, and Ng (2004) and Dahlquist, Pinkowitz,

Stulz, and Williamson (hereafter DPSW) (2003) study a combination of emerging and developed

market countries and find that of a battery of country-level governance variables, only a proxy

for government expropriation risk matters.4             However, the two studies obtain the opposite

results; international investors prefer countries with a lower government expropriation risk in


4
 Overall, DPSW conclude that ‘for a given supply of shares, U.S. investors do not invest less in a country because
minority shareholders are less well protected or because laws are not enforced’ (page 104).


                                                                                                                7
DPSW, but avoid such countries in Chan et al. In contrast to the Chan et al. finding, Giannetti

and Koskinen (2004), using the same source data on holdings, find that funds put a larger share

of their assets in countries with better scores for private enforcement of investor rights. Two

related studies focus exclusively on emerging markets. Aggarwal, Klapper, and Wysocki (2005)

find that U.S. mutual funds overweight emerging markets that have stronger accounting

standards, shareholder rights and legal frameworks, and Gelos and Wei (2005) find that less

opaque emerging market countries have greater weights in mutual funds’ portfolios.

        Firm-level results are also mixed. To our knowledge, tests that incorporate firm-level

governance proxies obtained from ownership structures have been conducted only for Sweden

and show conflicting results. DPSW find no evidence that firm-level ownership matters to

foreign investors, whereas Giannetti and Simonov (2006) find that foreign investors are less

likely to invest when a firm’s controlling shareholders have greater incentives to expropriate

outside investors. It can be argued that another firm-level indicator of strong governance is the

presence of a U.S. exchange listing (see, among others, Foerster and Karolyi (1999), Miller

(1999), Lang, Lins, and Miller (2003), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Doidge, Karolyi,

Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2005)), although this event occurs for only a very small percentage of all

publicly traded non-U.S. firms.          Ammer, Holland, Smith, and Warnock (2004), Bradshaw,

Bushee, and Miller (2004), Edison and Warnock (2004), and Aggarwal, Klapper, and Wysocki

(2005) find that a U.S. listing is associated with a substantial increase in foreign investment.5

        While extant country-level regressions such as DPSW (2003) do not find a link between

governance and foreign investment once a firm’s free float is controlled for, these findings do not

necessarily imply that such a link does not exist. It is possible that foreign investors overweight

5
  Cross listing is also argued to proxy for both an international presence and a lessening of direct and indirect
barriers to international investment (Pagano, Roell, and Zechner (2002), Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler
(2003), and Sarkissian and Schill (2004)), both of which should contribute to increases in foreign holdings.


                                                                                                               8
firms for which governance is expected to be strong (e.g., those with U.S. cross listings) and

underweight firms with weak governance, resulting in no effect in the aggregate. Alternatively,

the country-level governance measures used in previous work could be too coarse to pick up the

effect. One reason why previous studies using firm-level governance variables yield inconsistent

results could be the fact that they have been conducted for Sweden – a country with relatively

strong governance [DPSW (2003) and Giannetti and Simonov (2006)].                             Strong external

governance is known to lessen the impact of potential firm-level governance problems [Lins

(2003), Nenova (2003), Doidge (2004), Dyck and Zingales (2004), and Klapper and Love

(2004)].6 Thus, a more thorough understanding of corporate governance and foreign investment

calls for tests that discriminate, within country, based on firm-level governance parameters and

do so for a wide range of countries to exploit country-level variation in corporate governance.

We conduct such tests in this paper.

        Indeed, our investigation of corporate governance and foreign holdings is unique because

we combine data on a large number of firms that have wide variation in both firm- and country-

level governance parameters with a comprehensive dataset on foreign holdings of these firms.

Prior empirical work on this topic has been hampered by data limitations because comprehensive

data on governance and outside holdings are hard to obtain at the firm level. In addition, our

paper illustrates that it is important to consider both firm and country factors in explaining

whether and why foreign investors shy away from poorly governed firms.




6
 For additional evidence on firm-level and external corporate governance see surveys by Claessens and Fan (2002)
and Denis and McConnell (2003).


                                                                                                                   9
3. Sample Selection and Variable Construction

3.1 A Firm-Level Measure of the Foreign Holdings

         We design our tests to investigate foreign holdings through the eyes of U.S. investors. In

particular, we use a mandatory and confidential survey conducted by the U.S. Treasury

Department and the Federal Reserve Board7 of the holdings of all U.S. investors as of December

1997 to obtain our foreign investment proxy: the percentage of a firm’s free float that is held by

U.S. investors. A more ideal dataset would be a matrix of the security-level investment from

each country into the firms of all other countries, but such a matrix does not exist because so few

countries collect security-level cross-border holdings data. The limitation of including only U.S.

investors’ holdings should not be particularly troubling since these investors collectively hold

47% of the world’s international equity positions.8 While the typical U.S. investor who ventures

abroad is an institution, our data include foreign equity holdings by all types of U.S. investors

and in all types of foreign equities; specifically, they are not limited to institutional holdings of

U.S-traded securities, as are the data contained in SEC 13-f filings.

         It is important to note that, unlike many papers in this literature, we scale U.S. holdings

by float (the percentage of shares not held by 5 percent or greater blockholders). Scaling by

market capitalization – the usual technique – could mechanically produce a negative relation

between governance and foreign holdings, given that our governance measures are derived from

insider holdings. Poorly governed firms would have fewer shares available to outside investors

and would naturally have less outside investment. Scaling by float is more conservative and

avoids potentially hardwiring the results.
7
  For a primer on the surveys, see Griever, Lee, and Warnock (2001). Publicly available country-level data—formed
by aggregating the confidential security-level data used here—have been analyzed in Ahearne, Griever, and
Warnock (2004) and DPSW. The security-level data have been studied by Ammer, Holland, Smith, and Warnock
(2004) and, using a more limited sample, Edison and Warnock (2004).
8
  Of the $2.6 trillion in international equity positions reported to the IMF-led 1997 Coordinated Portfolio Investment
Survey, U.S. investors held $1.2 trillion.


                                                                                                                   10
3.2 Firm-level Corporate Governance

        Our main hypothesis is that information problems are likely to play a major role, if in fact

foreign investors avoid poorly governed firms. Specifically, we maintain that foreign investors

are at an informational disadvantage relative to local investors and that information asymmetries

are particularly pronounced when it comes to evaluating firms’ governance structures. In many

countries around the world, financing arrangements and corporate governance are based on

relatively opaque relationships, rather than arm’s length dealings. Ownership structures are quite

concentrated and families control many businesses. Understanding the relationships that govern

firms and the motives of families and large owners requires an intricate social and institutional

knowledge, which many foreigners lack or find costly to obtain.                       Put differently, poorly

governed firms are particularly taxing to foreign investors in terms of their information and

monitoring costs.

        To examine whether U.S. investment is related to firm-level corporate governance, we

obtain ownership and control structure data for Western European firms from Faccio and Lang

(2002); for emerging market firms from Lins (2003); and for Japan from Claessens, Djankov,

and Lang (2000). Ownership and control data for Japanese and emerging market firms are from

the 1995/1996 period and those from Western Europe range from 1996 to 1999, with the

majority of sample observations occurring in 1996.9 We confine our analysis to non-financial

firms to maintain consistency across the three ownership and control structure datasets.

Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000), Faccio and Lang (2002), and Lins (2003) report ownership


9
  The Treasury/Federal Reserve data on U.S. holdings is compiled for year-end 1997 and 1994. Because our
ownership data are predominantly from 1996, we use the 1997 data in our tests to obtain the best contemporaneous
match. For robustness, we re-estimate our models using the more distant-in-time 1994 U.S. holdings data and find
that our results are qualitatively similar.


                                                                                                               11
and control statistics for various types of blockholders. For instance, all three studies report the

percentage of total ultimate control rights held by Family/Management, Government, Widely-

Held Corporations, Widely-Held Financials, and Miscellaneous (which includes ownership by

Trusts, Cooperatives, Foundations, Employees, etc.).

       In constructing our firm-level governance proxies, we focus on managerial and family

control rights because it is the management group (and their families) that actually makes the

operational and financial decisions of a firm and it is these decisions that potentially expropriate

outside investors.   We seek to construct measures that indicate that a family or a firm’s

management is effectively in full control of the firm because, all else equal, insiders’ ability to

expropriate minority shareholders will be highest when their control of a firm cannot be

challenged by other blockholders or groups of shareholders (e.g., institutional investors).

       As effective managerial control depends on the control rights held by management as

well as the control rights held by outside blockholders, we use both nominal and relative

measures of effective managerial control in our analysis. The nominal one is the percentage of

control rights held by the management group and its family, with the idea that higher levels of

managerial control correspond to more effective control of a firm. The relative measures capture

the idea that high percentage levels of control are not always necessary to establish effective

managerial control and to prevent interference by other blockholders.           Our three relative

measures of effective managerial control are indicator variables set equal to one when

Family/Management control rights exceed: 1) the median level of Family/Management control

rights of all sample firms in the country; 2) the median level of Family/Management control

rights of all sample firms in the country as well as the control rights held by any other




                                                                                                 12
blockholder in the firm; or 3) 50% of the total outstanding shares of a firm. Of these relative

measures, the 50% control threshold is the strongest measure of effective managerial control.

        In our models, we also analyze the importance of non-management blockholdings by

using the percentage of control rights and an indicator variable for non-management control

above 50%. These tests can be viewed as a robustness check that assures us that we do not

simply pick up the effect of concentrated holdings, and that it is, in fact, managerial and family

control that drives our findings.

        We note that, in many cases, our firm-level governance proxies also capture a separation

of managerial control and cash flow rights. To the extent that effective managerial control can

be established at some level below 100% cash flow rights ownership, control and cash flow

rights will be inherently separated. Generally, managerial control of 51% of a firm’s shares will

confer unequivocal control rights. Given the lack of active corporate control markets in most

sample countries as well as laws in some countries that grant special privileges to large but not

necessarily majority blockholders (e.g., Germany), effective managerial control can often be

obtained with substantially less than 51% control, driving a further wedge between control and

cash flow rights. But even in the 51% control case, controlling managers that divert one dollar

from the firm for personal gain will bear at most 51 cents of the cost, giving rise to various

managerial agency problems [e.g., Jensen and Meckling (1976)]. In this sense, our proxies not

only capture the ability but also the incentives of controlling insiders to expropriate outside

shareholders and to consume private control benefits.10

        To explicitly compute the wedge between control and cash flow rights, we would need to

observe the ultimate cash flow ownership stakes held by the management group and its family

10
  While we do not have data to separate the effect of managerial cash flow rights from control rights in our full
sample, the analysis in Faccio and Lang (2002) and Lins (2003) suggests that, for our sample, ultimate managerial
control rights often exceed cash flow rights because of pyramid ownership structures and superior voting shares.


                                                                                                              13
for all of our firms. Unfortunately, the cash flow ownership data presented in Faccio and Lang

(2002), Lins (2003), and Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000) are categorized using different

algorithms, which makes it difficult to construct a consistent measure across datasets. Faccio

and Lang and Claessens et al. report the separation of ownership and control for the largest

blockholder of their sample firms (which may not be the Family/Management group), while Lins

reports this measure for all holdings of the Family/Management group (which may not be the

largest blockholder).        Given these difficulties, we focus on the control rights held by the

management group and its family since this measure can be consistently identified for all sample

countries. However, relative to the wedge that is implicit in the construction of our control

proxies, any further separation of control from cash flow rights via pyramids and superior voting

shares may be a second order effect.11



3.3 Country-level Corporate Governance and Information Parameters

         Our hypothesis focuses not only on expected governance problems at the firm level, but

also on country-level differences in governance and information flow.                              We expect that

information problems faced by foreign investors are more prevalent in countries with weak

disclosure and securities regulation as well as weak governance rules. The idea is that disclosure

rules level the playing field among investors and make it easier to obtain information to evaluate

firms’ governance structures. Strict and well-enforced governance rules make knowledge about

private control benefits and expropriation less important.

         In our analysis, we employ several of the variables that are frequently used in the

international literature on stock market development and corporate governance. First, we use the

11
   Consistent with this conjecture, we find (in untabulated tests) that the ratio of control to cash flow rights for the
largest blockholder from Faccio and Lang (Western Europe) and Claessens et al. (East Asia) is insignificant when
we include it in our models in addition to our managerial and family control proxies.


                                                                                                                     14
Disclosure Requirement values reported in Table 2 of LLS (2004). We differentiate between

low and high disclosure countries based on whether a country is below or above our sample

median score of 0.75 on the Disclosure Requirement measure. We expect that foreign investors

will have less of an information disadvantage in high disclosure countries. Second, we follow

Hail and Leuz (2004) and combine the LLS (2004) Table 2 measures of Disclosure

Requirements, Liability Standards, and Public Enforcement into a measure called Securities

Regulation. This measure is a comprehensive indicator of disclosure rules and their associated

enforcement, both of which should serve to reduce the private benefits of control and thus reduce

the importance of information regarding these benefits. We expect that foreign investors will

suffer less from information problems when Securities Regulation is relatively high. Our high

Securities Regulation subsample consists of countries that score above our sample median score

of 0.58. Third, as an institutional summary measure and a proxy for shareholder protection, we

classify non-English legal origin countries as low protection because La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer, and Vishny (hereafter LLSV) (1997, 1998) suggest that countries with a traditional

English legal origin tend to provide stronger investor protections. Fourth, we use the index for

Antidirector Rights in LLSV (1998) and classify countries with Antidirector Rights below 4 as

low protection countries and those with scores equal to or above 4 as high protection countries.

       Finally, because many emerging market liberalization studies make the point that

attracting foreign capital is particularly important (as these countries often have relatively weak

institutions), we segment countries based on whether they are classified as having emerging

markets by The Economist magazine as of December, 1997. This classification primarily takes

into account a country’s GDP-per-capita, but also considers the strength of various institutions

within the country.




                                                                                                   15
3.4 Sample Selection and Summary Statistics

        We combine the firm-level control structure data presented in Faccio and Lang (2002),

Lins (2003), and Claessens, Djankov and Lang (2000), resulting in 6974 firms. We exclude 976

financial firms. We obtain financial variable data (used in regressions) and float data from the

Worldscope database for the year-end closest to December 31, 1997 as our U.S. holdings data

are from that point in time and it closely corresponds to the date of our ownership and control

data; these data are not available for 1587 firms.12 Our final sample consists of 4411 firms.

        Table 1 provides summary statistics for our sample based on a firm’s country of

domicile. Our sample, which includes firms from 29 countries, is concentrated in Europe (2469

firms) and Asia (979 Japanese firms and another 800 from Emerging Asia), with relatively few

(61) Latin American firms.

        The second column of Table 1 present mean levels of U.S. investment as a percent of

float. In our sample, U.S. investors hold on average 6.4% of the available float. U.S. ownership

is highest in Latin America, particularly Argentina,13 and lowest in Asia. The third column of

Table 1 shows that our firms are quite large overall, with mean assets of 1.75 billion U.S. dollars.

        Columns 4 through 7 detail blockholder statistics for our sample. For the median firm,

Family/Management group control is 13%, with wide variation across countries. The median of

the control rights held by blockholders other than the Family/Management group is 5%, with a

similarly wide variation in this parameter across countries.                      The table shows that the

Family/Management group is by far the dominant type of controlling blockholder.



12
    When calculating a firm’s float, we adjust Worldscope data in two ways. First, we correct the closely-held
variable by subtracting the amount that Worldscope erroneously attributes to depository banks. Second, so that float
is measured at the same time as U.S. holdings, we utilize price data from Datastream to convert Worldscope' s fiscal
year-end data to calendar year-end. See AHSW for details.
13
   Argentina’s median holdings are high because most of its firms in our sample are cross-listed. Removing all
cross-listed firms would change summary statistics but would not alter our main results.


                                                                                                                 16
Family/Management group control rights exceed those of any other blockholder for 53% of the

sample14 and exceed 50% of total control rights in 22% of sample firms.



4. Empirical Tests and Results

4.1 Construction of the Empirical Model

        Firms with substantial insider holdings will almost surely have narrower total shareholder

bases, as fewer shares are available to outside investors. We are interested in assessing whether

there is an additional effect of corporate governance on the shareholder base above and beyond

this supply effect. To control for this effect, we exclude shares tied up by insiders and other

large blockholders and define our proxy for foreign investment as the proportion of firm i’s float

that is held by U.S. investors:



                    USHoldings i
USInvestme nt i ≡                                                                        (1)
                      Float i



        While it is crucial to account for a firm’s float in our tests, scaling by float mechanically

biases our results against finding a significant negative relation between Family/Management

control and U.S. investment.15 This bias occurs because an increase in Family/Management

control reduces the available float. If U.S. investment does not change, U.S. investment as a

percentage of float nonetheless increases. Thus, to the extent we find that Family/Management

control is negatively related to U.S. ownership as a share of float, the inference that poor

14
   For 127 firms, we are unable to unambiguously identify the largest blockholder, so these firms are dropped from
tests using this indicator variable.
15
   We also note that in general not all of a firm’s float is held by foreigners. Estimates based on data contained in
Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004), DPSW (2004), and the International Monetary Fund 1997 Coordinated
Portfolio Investment Survey suggest that about 30% of the world float is held by foreigners. Thus, our tests are
unlikely to merely reflect shifts from one group of foreign investors to another.


                                                                                                                  17
expected governance negatively impacts the foreign investor base – above and beyond the direct

effect through limiting the float – will be particularly robust. Conversely, any positive effect

between U.S. investment and our blockholder control variables has to be interpreted cautiously.

We illustrate this effect by also providing results scaling U.S. holdings by a firm’s market

capitalization and controlling for free float on the right-hand side.

       In our analysis, the primary variables of interest are the control structure variables that

proxy for expected firm-level corporate governance. Before directly assessing these variables, it

is important to control for a firm’s size, leverage, growth prospects, and international presence,

because prior studies show that these factors are related to portfolio investment levels. Kang and

Stulz (1997) and Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001) document that foreign investors in Japan and

Sweden avoid small, highly levered stocks that do not have an international presence, possibly

because information about them is less readily available. Consistent with this interpretation,

Coval and Moskowitz (1999) find that the local bias is greater for such firms. Foreign investors

in Japanese and Swedish equities also show a preference for growth stocks.

       We control for Size, calculated as the log of total assets converted to thousands of U.S.

dollars, and for Leverage using the ratio of total debt to total assets. Firms with higher leverage

are more financially vulnerable and, thus, might attract less outside investment. This variable is

also important as a governance control because Harvey, Lins, and Roper (2004) find that

leverage can mitigate the value loss associated with firm-level agency problems. We include a

cross-listing dummy variable, XLIST, that takes the value of one if the firm is listed on a U.S.

exchange as a proxy for both an international presence and a lessening of direct and indirect




                                                                                                18
barriers to international investment.16 For similar reasons, we also control for a firm’s inclusion

in the MSCI World Index.

         We include two proxies for growth in our models. Book-to-market, calculated as the book

value per share over the year-end market price, is included because a preference for growth

stocks can be reflected in a tendency to hold low book-to-market value stocks. Dividend Yield,

calculated as dividends per share over the year-end market price, could be related to growth if

firms with better growth prospects pay lower dividends as they plow revenues back into the firm.

If U.S. investors prefer growth stocks and these two measures capture growth opportunities, we

would expect to see a negative relation between each measure and U.S. holdings. However, low

dividend payments by non-U.S. firms could also represent expected firm-level governance

problems (LLSV (2000) and Kalcheva and Lins (2005)) in which case dividend yields could be

positively related to U.S. holdings if U.S. investors seek to avoid firms with poor expected

governance. Because investors often favor certain industries, we include industry-fixed effects

(based on the groupings in Campbell (1996)). We include country-fixed effects in our models

because singular country-level variables for disclosure, legal origin, etc., are unlikely to capture

all relevant institutional differences across countries (e.g., both Hong Kong and the U.K. have

English legal origin, yet their ownership structures could not be more different).

         Although more than 75% of the firms in our sample are held by at least some U.S.

investors, the non-trivial number of firms with zero U.S. holdings prompts us to utilize a Tobit

regression model. Specifically, we estimate Tobit regression models of the following form:




16
  A firm’s foreign sales, another measure of international presence, has poor coverage in Worldscope, so we follow
Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001) and utilize a cross-listing variable. As we note earlier, cross listing can also proxy
for improved governance and information flow.


                                                                                                                   19
U.S. investment =    0   +   1   Managerial and Family Control +        2   XLIST +    3   MSCI
                 +   4   Firm Size +     5   Leverage +    6   Book to Market +   7   Dividend Yield   (2)
                 +   8   Country Controls +       9   Industry Controls

       where U.S. investment is U.S. holdings as a percentage of available float and the

Managerial and Family Control variables are the percentage of Family/Management control

rights; an indicator variable set equal to one if the Family/Management group’s control rights are

greater than the median value of the control rights held by the Family/Management group for all

firms in its country; an indicator variable set equal to one if the Family/Management group’s

control rights are greater than the median country value and the Family/Management group is the

largest blockholder of control rights; and an indicator variable set equal to one if

Family/Management has majority (i.e., >50%) control rights, respectively. For comparison

purposes, we also use the percentage of control rights held by Other (i.e., non-

Family/Management) blockholders or an indicator that Other blockholder control rights exceed

50%.



4.2 Firm-level Corporate Governance Results

       The important contribution of this paper is to further advance our understanding of

corporate governance and foreign investment by conducting tests that discriminate within

country based on firm-level governance parameters, and that do so for a wide range of countries.

       Table 2 reports the coefficients of Tobit models estimated on our full sample of 4411

firms from 29 countries.           Model 1 of Table 2 tests our nominal measure of effective managerial

control. The model shows that after controlling for other factors, an increase in the control rights

held by the Family/Management group corresponds to a decrease in U.S. investment. The 25th

percentile for Family/Management control is zero and the 75th percentile is 44%. The coefficient



                                                                                                             20
of –0.018 (significant at the 5% level) indicates that, all else equal, a firm in which

Family/Management control changes from the 25th to the 75th percentile would have U.S.

investment (as a share of market capitalization) that is 0.8 percentage points lower.

       In Models 2 through 4 we use progressively more stringent relative measures of

Family/Management control. Results for the second and third models show insignificant

coefficients on a dummy variable for above-median Family/Management control and a dummy

variable for the combination of above-median Family/Management control and the

Family/Management group being the largest blockholder. Only the strongest relative measure of

control – a dummy for Family/Management control above 50% – is significantly negatively

related to U.S. investment. Model 4 shows that majority Family/Management control rights are

associated with a -0.83 percentage point reduction in U.S. investment (significant at the 10%

level). The fifth and sixth models show that the control held by all blockholder types other than

the Family/Management group is not significantly related to U.S. investment. This lack of

significance is comforting in the sense that it highlights that our results are driven by ownership

structures that are more likely to give rise to governance concerns, rather than ownership

concentration per se. The latter category includes a wide range of blockholders and there is less

of a reason to expect that these outside blockholders have the ability to consume significant

private benefits of control or to distort information flows.

       We also note that control variables included in the models show signs consistent with

expectations. U.S. investment is higher in firms that are cross-listed on a U.S. exchange or are in

the MSCI World Index, and are larger. U.S. investment is lower in firms that have higher

leverage and higher book to market ratios. The coefficient on dividend yield is generally not

significantly different from zero.




                                                                                                21
       Taken together, the significant results in Table 2 for our two strongest measures of

Family/Management control provide moderate, but not overwhelming, support for the hypothesis

that the presence of potentially high private benefits of control at the firm level dissuades equity

investment by foreign investors.



4.3 Firm-level Results Segmented by Country-level Parameters

       We mention at the outset of this paper that increased access to foreign capital is thought

to be particularly important for firms from emerging markets. As such, we next test whether

poor firm level governance is significantly related to foreign investment in the subset of our

sample countries that constitute emerging markets. Table 3 reports the results of these model

estimations for the 1017 emerging market firms from our sample. We find in Models (1)

through (4) that firm-level proxies for governance problems and expropriation are not

significantly related to U.S. holdings in emerging markets (and Models (5) and (6) show that

non-inside blockholdings remain unrelated as well). While the Family/Management control

results seems to go against prevailing intuition, the classification of countries as “emerging

markets” based primarily on per-capita GDP does not account for the substantial variation in

countries’ institutional structures as they relate to disclosure, shareholder protection, and legal

enforcement.

       Empirical evidence across a range of emerging markets shows that insiders’ private

control benefits are particularly high when countries’ shareholder protections are the weakest

[Lins (2003) and Klapper and Love (2004)]. Variation in private control benefits is found across

developed countries as well, and it is again the institutions that matter [Nenova (2003), Doidge

(2004), and Dyck and Zingales (2004)]. In a similar vein, Lang, Lins, and Miller (2004) show




                                                                                                 22
that the combination of firm- and country-level governance problems has particularly negative

implications for a firm’s analyst following and information environment.          Our information

argument suggests that information problems for foreign investors are particularly pronounced

when both firm-level governance and country-level institutions are weak – thus, a more

fundamental test of our hypotheses will take account of particular country-level parameters

related to information flow and governance. It follows that foreign investors are likely to invest

less in countries where information flow and governance is poor. But, given that investors want

to invest in a certain country for portfolio diversification reasons, they are likely to pick those

stocks for which information asymmetry problems should be the smallest.

       To capture this interplay between firm- and country-level governance and information

flow effects, beginning with Table 4 we re-estimate our previous regressions, partitioning the

sample based on our country-level governance and information flow proxies: Disclosure

Requirements, Securities Regulation, Legal Origin, and Antidirector Rights. Our previous full

sample tests and emerging markets subsample tests did not explicitly segment countries on the

basis of these underlying institutional factors. Meaningful cross-sectional variation in the effect

of the control structure variables also alleviates potential concerns that our previous findings are

driven by correlated omitted variables.

       Table 4 presents the association between our firm-level governance proxies and U.S.

investment based on Disclosure Requirements. Panel A reports results for our low Disclosure

Requirements subsample comprised of countries whose score is below our sample median score

of 0.75. Model 1, which tests our nominal measure of effective managerial control, again shows

that an increase in the control rights held by the Family/Management group corresponds to a

decrease in U.S. investment, but the negative coefficient is much larger and more significant than




                                                                                                 23
it was in the all-country model estimated in Table 2. The 25th percentile for Family/Management

control in this subsample is zero and the 75th percentile is 49%. The coefficient of –0.041

indicates that, all else equal, a firm in a low shareholder rights country for which

Family/Management control changes from the 25th to the 75th percentile would have U.S.

investment (as a share of float) that is 2 percentage points lower, an economically significant

amount given that average U.S. investment is 6.4%.

         Results for the second, third, and fourth models – which use relative measures of

Family/Management control – are similarly strong in magnitude and significance. For example,

Model 4 shows that majority Family/Management control rights are associated with a 2.3

percentage point reduction in U.S. investment. As before, the fifth and sixth models show that

the control held by all blockholder types other than the Family/Management group is not

significantly related to U.S. investment. Overall, the low disclosure subsample results are

consistent with the argument that foreign outside investors adjust their quantity of investment

significantly when information asymmetries are likely to most pronounced.

         Panel B reports results for the high Disclosure Requirements subsample. We observe that

none of the blockholder coefficients are negative and significant. We also report in the bottom

row of Panel B the comparison between between the blockholder coefficients in the low and high

protection subsamples.          We find that all four of the managerial control coefficients are

significantly more negative in the low protection subsample (p-values <= 0.01).17 These results

confirm that the country-level disclosure environment has an important impact on how foreign

investors perceive firm-level governance problems.




17
  The significance level is based on (untabulated) combined regressions in which all variables are interacted with an
indicator variable set equal to one when a country belongs to the low protection subsample.


                                                                                                                  24
         In Tables 5 through 7, we split the sample based on three proxies for a country’s overall

level of investor protection. Higher protection reduces the private benefits of control and thus

reduces the importance of information regarding these benefits. We expect that even if firms

themselves have governance structures indicating potentially large private benefits of control,

foreign investors will suffer less from information problems when investor protection is

relatively high, and will therefore invest in greater quantities in these firms. On the flip side, we

expect less foreign investment in firms likely to have high private benefits of control when

external investor protection is relatively weak.

         Table 5 features our Securities Regulation measure of shareholder protection. Panel A

shows that the coefficients on our one nominal and three relative measures of

Family/Management control are always negative and highly significant in the low protection

subsample. The coefficients are similar in economic significance to those found in the low

disclosure subsample reported in Table 4.                   The coefficients on other blockholdings are

insignificant. In Panel B, which reports results for the high Securities Regulation subsample, we

observe that none of the blockholder coefficients are negative and significant. In fact, several

coefficients are significantly positive, but as our float-normalized dependent variable

mechanically induces a positive bias, it is not appropriate to read much into this finding.18

Again, we find that the difference in the four effective managerial control coefficients between

the low and high protection subsamples is always highly significant.

         In Table 6, we split the sample based on non-English and English legal origin. As before,

Panel A shows that the coefficients on all Family/Management control measures are always


18
   Consistent with this claim, we show in subsequent robustness tests (Section 4.5) that scaling U.S. investment by
total equity market capitalization, instead of float, results in insignificant coefficients for all ownership structure
variables in countries with strong governance or securities regulation, but the coefficients on Family/Management
control remain significantly negative in countries with weak institutions.


                                                                                                                    25
negative and highly significant in the non-English subsample and that the coefficients on other

blockholdings are insignificant. Also, we find that the difference in the four effective managerial

control coefficients between the non-Engish and English legal origin subsamples is always

highly significant. In Table 7, we split the sample based on a country’s Antidirector Rights and

find that the coefficients on the effective managerial control measures are all negative and highly

significant in the low shareholder protection subsample (Panel A), insignificant in the high

protection subsample (Panel B), and the coefficient differences between the subsamples are

highly significant.



4.4 Earnings Management and Foreign Investment

        In this section, we attempt to shed some light on the mechanism by which poor

governance manifests itself in lower holdings by U.S. investors. Towards this end, we analyze

whether higher levels of earnings management are associated with lower levels of U.S. holdings.

The basic idea is that earnings management is an indicator of opaque financial statements and

poor information flows, created by poor corporate governance. Supporting this notion, Leuz,

Nanda, and Wysocki (2003) and Ha, Hu, Hwang, and Wu (2004) show that poor country-level

and firm-level governance is associated with higher levels of earnings management. Thus, if

information problems are at the core of the holdings effect, we expect to find a negative

association between earnings management and foreign holdings.19

        To obtain firm-level proxies, we compute the earnings management variables from the

time series of firms’ earnings, accruals and cash flows from 1992 to 1997 and require that each


19
  In a similar vein, Aggarwal, Klapper, and Wysocki (2005) show that investment in emerging market firms is
positively associated with an aggregate accounting transparency measure. Across emerging and developed
economies, Bradshaw, Bushee, and Miller (2004) show that U.S. investment is positively related to a firm’s U.S.
GAAP conformity.


                                                                                                            26
firm has at least three years of relevant data. Cash flow from operations is calculated using the

balance-sheet approach because U.S. style cash flow statements are generally not available for

our sample companies.20 If a firm does not report information on cash or short-term debt, then

the changes in both variables are assumed to be zero. We scale earnings, accruals, and operating

cash flows by lagged total assets prior to further computations to ensure comparability across

firms and truncate extreme observations at the top and bottom percentile.

        We consider two proxies. First, based on Haw, Hu, Hwang, and Wu (2004) and Wysocki

(2004), we compute the time-series median magnitude of accruals relative to the cash flow from

operations. Second, following Leuz et al. (2003), we compute three different proxies capturing a

wide range of earnings management activities: i.e., the magnitude of total accruals, the

smoothness of earnings relative to cash flows, and the correlation of accounting accruals and

operating cash flows.21 Specifically, the first variable is the time-series median of the absolute

value of accruals scaled by the contemporaneous operating cash flow. The second variable is

computed as the time-series standard deviation of operating income over the time-series standard

deviation of operating cash flows. The third variable is the time-series correlation of changes in

the accruals and operating cash flows. The scores are averaged for each firm and are ranked

such that higher values indicate more earnings management.

        We recognize that these proxies are not perfect and indicate earnings management only in

a relative sense. But in their defense, the more extreme the realizations of the measures become,

the less likely it is that they reflect informative earnings, especially when considering that we

compute them as medians of a large set of firms over several years. Moreover, the proxies are

20
    Following Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney (1995), we compute the accrual component of earnings as ( total
current assets – cash) – ( total current liabilities – short-term debt) – depreciation expense, where denotes the
change over the last fiscal year.
21
    We do not compute a proxy for loss aversion as in Leuz, Nanda, and Wysocki (2003) because it cannot be
reasonably computed at the firm level.


                                                                                                              27
constructed relative to outcomes of firms’ economic processes, such as the magnitude or

smoothness of the operating cash flows, which makes it more likely that they capture firms’

reporting choices to make earnings more or less informative. Finally, several recent studies

suggest that these proxies yield country rankings that are consistent with widespread perceptions

of earnings informativeness, and that the proxies behave in a plausible fashion around events

such as U.S. cross listings (Lang, Raedy, and Yetman, 2003; Wysocki, 2004).

       Table 8 reports results from Tobit regressions replacing the firm-level governance

proxies with the two earnings management proxies. For the sake of brevity, we report only the

findings splitting the sample by the level of securities regulation. The results are very similar

using the other split variables (i.e., shareholder protection, disclosure requirements, and English

legal origin) and are also present in the full sample of countries, albeit at a slightly weaker level

(consistent with the results for the governance variables). Table 8 shows that both earnings

management proxies are significantly and negatively associated with foreign holdings in the

countries where securities regulation is weak. In contrast, the coefficients are insignificant in

countries with strong securities regulation. As before, the combination of weak country-level

institutions and poor firm-level governance is important for the holdings effect.

       These findings suggest that U.S. investors hold fewer shares in firms with higher levels of

earnings management, consistent with the hypothesis that information flows play an important

role for foreigners’ investment decisions. While these tests more directly focus on information

flows than our tests using the governance proxies, it should be kept in mind that the quality of

the information flows is in part driven by country-level institutions and firm-level governance.

For this reason, we prefer to use the governance variables for our main analyses, which can be

viewed as estimating a reduced form. The analyses in this section are primarily meant to shed




                                                                                                  28
additional light on the mechanism by which poor governance manifests itself in fewer holdings

by foreign investors.



4.5 Robustness Checks

       In this section, we discuss several tests of robustness of our main firm-level governance

regressions, which are not tabulated for sake of brevity. For instance, there is a clustering of

observations in Japan and the U.K., creating the possibility that the results are dominated by one

or two countries. For Japan, Lins and Servaes (1999) find that strong keiretsu membership is an

indicator of governance problems, whereas ownership structure is not. Claessens, Djankov, Fan,

and Lang (2002) exclude Japan from their analysis of ownership structure in East Asia because

the keiretsu system influences governance in ways that cannot be captured by ownership data.

The country dummies included in our analysis control for unique country parameters, but as a

robustness check we re-estimate our firm-level regressions without Japan, the U.K., or both. In

our study, removing Japan from the sample has virtually no effect on our main results. If we

remove the U.K., our main results continue to hold – foreigners invest less in poorly governed

firms that are in poor governance environments – but due to some wide confidence intervals in

the strong-institution subsample regressions, differences in the coefficients between the strong-

and weak-institution subsamples are in a few cases only marginally significant.

       While we closely follow the literature on the determinants of foreign portfolio holdings

when setting up our tests, it is possible that we have not modeled all of the variables that could

affect foreign holdings. In particular, one might be concerned about the effects of liquidity and

return momentum on the holdings of U.S. investors. Our tests include a firm’s equity market

capitalization and its book-to-market ratio which likely capture aspects of liquidity and return




                                                                                               29
momentum, respectively. But it is possible to construct some more direct measures for liquidity

and momentum. As a robustness check, we re-estimate our models with the inclusion of these

variables. Specifically, we follow Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) and Lesmond (2005)

and proxy for liquidity with the percentage of trading days in the 1997 calendar year in which the

stock had zero return for the day. We compute this measure only for firms with price data

reported for at least 100 trading days in 1997. We compute a momentum variable defined as the

12 month buy-and-hold stock return over the period January 1, 1997 to December 31, 1997,

winsorized at the 1st and 99th percent levels.

         In Panel A of Table 9, we report the main results of the re-estimation of our base case

models with the inclusion of liquidity and momentum variables. For the sake of brevity, we

report only the coefficients on our two strongest measures of effective managerial control

(managerial and family control rights percentage and an indicator variable corresponding to

majority managerial and family control rights) and do so for only two of our country-level

sample splits (Disclosure Requirements and Security Regulation). Despite a slightly smaller

sample size, Panel A shows that the inclusion of liquidity and momentum control variable does

not change our inferences. U.S. holdings are significantly lower when managers are likely to

have effective control of their firms and the firms are domiciled in countries with poor disclosure

and governance requirements.22

         Throughout this paper we have scaled U.S. investment by float, for the reasons described

in Section 4.1. By making this choice, we mechanically bias against finding that any type of

blockholding is negatively related to U.S. investment. On the other hand, scaling by market

capitalization – even when controlling for float on the right hand side – likely biases the results


22
  Results for the other effective managerial control variables and other splits by institutional variables are
qualitatively similar.


                                                                                                                 30
in favor of finding that large blockholdings are related to lower foreign holdings. To illustrate

this issue and gauge the robustness of our findings, we re-estimate our regressions scaling U.S.

holdings by market capitalization (and controlling for float on the right-hand side). We do so for

our base case models and for models which include liquidity and momentum control variables.

For brevity, we again report only a partial set of coefficients.

        Panel B of Table 9 shows that our results hold and even strengthen when we scale U.S.

holdings by equity market capitalization and control for float on the right hand side. We find

that the coefficients and t-statistics on our Family/Management control variables increase sharply

in our low disclosure/protection subsamples relative to the float-normalized measure used thus

far in the paper. While not tabulated, this outcome is true for the other managerial control

variables and institutional country-level sample splits as well.               Further, when scaling U.S.

investment by market capitalization, we find that Other Blockholder control is never significant

in any of the high or low subsample splits or overall and that Family/Management control is

never positively related to U.S. holdings in high disclosure/protection subsamples.                       These

findings show that scaling U.S. investment by float does not unduly affect our results and, if

anything,    biases    against     our    hypothesis.        Furthermore,      the    different    results   for

Family/Management control and Other Blockholders illustrate that our findings are not simply a

manifestation of ownership concentration.

        Finally, Ammer, Holland, Smith and Warnock (2004) find that whether a foreign firm is

cross-listed on a U.S. exchange is the single most important determinant of U.S. investment.23

As such, we control for a U.S. listing in all models. However, as noted by Lang, Raedy, and

Yetman (2003), cross listing is a firm choice that necessitates many substantive changes (which

23
  Indeed, an effort to enhance the shareholder base is often cited as an explanation for why non-U.S. firms
undertake costly information-providing efforts such as listing on U.S. stock exchanges [Reese and Weisbach (2002)
and Lins, Strickland, and Zenner (2005)].


                                                                                                              31
often greatly improve information flow), suggesting that cross-listed firms may not be

representative of a country’s total population of publicly traded firms. To confirm that cross-

listed firms are not unduly influencing our results, we re-estimate our regressions limiting the

samples to non-cross-listed firms. Eliminating the 140 cross-listed firms has no effect on results

for our full or emerging markets samples or for our sample splits by country-level institutional

parameters. These untabulated robustness tests confirm that, net of cross-listing effects, poor

firm-level governance is a deterrent to foreign investment when country-level disclosure and

shareholder protection is weak.



5. Conclusion

       This paper examines the relation between foreign investment and corporate governance.

Foreign investors can play an important role in funding corporations, especially in countries in

which domestic sources of outside finance are limited. However, institutional investors and

regulators frequently claim that poor corporate governance is a substantial deterrent. As outside

investors who fear governance problems can protect themselves by lowering the price they are

willing to pay for a poorly governed firm’s shares, it is not obvious that governance concerns

will manifest themselves in fewer holdings. On the other hand, poorly governed firms from

countries with weak institutions are likely to be particularly taxing on foreign investors in terms

of their information and monitoring costs, which could explain why foreigners shy away from

these firms.

       We conduct tests on the relation between foreign investment and corporate governance

for a sample of 4,411 firms from 29 countries. Using U.S. holdings as a proxy for foreign

investment, we show that foreigners invest less in firms that are poorly governed. Specifically,




                                                                                                32
we find that firms with ownership structures that are more conducive to outside investor

expropriation attract significantly less U.S. investment. We show that this finding is not simply a

matter of a country’s economic development but appears to be directly related to a country’s

legal institutions and information rules. Our paper is the first to provide compelling evidence for

a large sample across many countries that foreigners do indeed invest less in poorly governed

firms. We argue that information problems faced by foreign investors play an important role in

this result. Supporting this explanation, we show that foreign investment in firms that appear to

engage in more earnings management is lower in countries with poor information frameworks

and legal institutions.

        Our findings provide a sense that country-level improvements in disclosure and

governance practices and firm-level improvements in governance or information flows are likely

to attract more U.S. investment. To the extent that this attracts more total investment into a

country, it implies that the home bias may be attenuated with such governance and information

flow improvements. A test of changes in governance and information flows and changes in

foreign investment choices across time may therefore be a potentially fruitful topic for future

research.




                                                                                                33
References

Aggarwal, Reena, Leora Klapper, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2005, Portfolio Preferences of Foreign
       Institutional Investors, Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 2919-2946.
Akerlof, George, 1970. The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
       Mechanism, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488-500.
Ammer, John, Sara Holland, David Smith, and Francis E. Warnock, 2004, Look at Me Now: The
       Role of Cross-Listings in Attracting U.S. Shareholders, Working Paper, Board of
       Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Ahearne, Alan G., William L. Griever, and Francis E. Warnock, 2004, Information Costs and
       Home Bias: An Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities, Journal of International
       Economics 62, 313-336.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Robin Lumsdaine, 2002, Dating the Integration of
       World Capital Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 203-249.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2001, Emerging Equity Markets
       and Economic Development, Journal of Development Economics 66, 465-504.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Does Financial
       Liberalization Spur Growth?, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 3-55.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Liquidity and Expected
       Returns: Lessons from Emerging Markets, Working Paper, Duke University.
Bradshaw, Mark, Brian Bushee, and Gregory Miller, 2004, Accounting Choices, Home Bias, and
       U.S. Investment in non-U.S. Firms, Journal of Accounting Research, 42, 795-841.
Brealey, Richard, Ian Cooper, and Evi Kaplanis, 1999, What is the International Dimension of
       International Finance?, European Finance Review 3, 103-119.
Campbell, John, 1996, Understanding Risk and Return, Journal of Political Economy 104, 298-
       345.
Chan, Kalok, Vicentiu M. Covrig, and Lilian K. Ng, 2004. What Determines the Domestic Bias
       and Foreign Bias? Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide, Journal
       of Finance, 60, 1495-1534.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz, 2005, Do Domestic Investors Have an Edge?
       The Trading Experience of Foreign Investors in Korea. The Review of Financial Studies
       18, 795-829.


                                                                                         34
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2000, The Separation of Ownership and
       Control in East Asian Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, J.P.H. Fan, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the
       Incentive and Entrenchment Effects of Large Shareholdings, Journal of Finance, 57,
       2741-2771.
Claessens, Stijn, and Joseph P.H. Fan, 2002, Corporate Governance in Asia: A Survey,
       International Review of Finance 3, 71-103.
Claessens, Stijn, Daniela Klingebiel and Sergio Schmukler, 2003, Accessing International Equity
       Markets: What Firms from Which Countries Go Abroad?, working paper, World Bank.
Cooper, Ian, and Evi Kaplanis, 1986, Costs to Crossborder Investment and International Equity
      Market Equilibrium, in J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer, and S. Schaefer, eds.: Recent
      Developments in Corporate Finance (Cambridge University Press).
Cooper, Ian, and Evi Kaplanis, 2000, Partially Segmented International Capital Markets and
      International Capital Budgeting, Journal of International Money and Finance 19, 309-
      329.
Coval, Josh, and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
       Domestic Portfolios, Journal of Finance 54(6), 1-39.
Dahlquist, Magnus, and Goran Robertsson, 2001, Direct Foreign Ownership, Institutional
       Investors, and Firm Characteristics, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 413-440.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Pinkowitz, Lee, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate
       Governance and the Home Bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-
       110.
Dechow, Patricia, Richard Sloan, and Amy Sweeney, 1995, Detecting Earnings Management,
      The Accounting Review 70, 193-225.
Denis, Diane, and John J. McConnell, International Corporate Governance, Journal of Financial
       and Quantitative Analysis 38, 1-36.
Doidge, Craig, 2004, U.S. Cross-listings and the Private Benefits of Control: Evidence from
       Dual-Class Shares, Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 519-553.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, Karl V. Lins, Darius P. Miller, and René Stulz, 2005, Private
       Benefits of Control, Ownership, and the Cross-Listing Decision, NBER Working Paper
       Number 11162.



                                                                                              35
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the
       U.S. worth more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Dyck, A., and L. Zingales, 2004, Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison,
       Journal of Finance 59, 537-600.
Edison, Hali J., and Francis E. Warnock, 2004, U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity
       Portfolios: A Security-Level Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 84(3), 691-
       704.
Faccio, Mara, and Larry H.P. Lang, 2002, The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
       Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics, 65, 365-395.
Fan, Joseph P.H., and T.J. Wong, 2002, Corporate Ownership Structure and the Informativeness
       of Accounting Earnings in East Asia, Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 401-425.
Foerster, S., and G. Andrew Karolyi, 1999, The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
       Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the U.S., Journal
       of Finance 54(3).
Gelos, Gaston, and Shang-jin Wei, 2005, Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings,
       forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Yrjo Koskinen, 2004, Investor Protection and the Demand for
       Equity, Stockholm School of Economics Working Paper # 526.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Andrei Simonov, 2006, Which Investors Fear Expropriation?
       Evidence from Investors’ Portfolio Choices, Journal of Finance 61, 1507-1547.
Glosten Lawrence, and Paul Milgrom, 1985, Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialized
       Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 71-
       100.
Griever, William L., Gary A. Lee, and Francis E. Warnock, 2001, The U.S. System for
       Measuring Cross-Border Investment in Securities: A Primer with a Discussion of Recent
       Developments, Federal Reserve Bulletin 87(10), 633-650.
Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2004, International Differences in the Cost of Equity Capital: Do
       Legal Institutions and Securities Regulation Matter? Working paper, Wharton.
Harvey, Campbell R., Karl V. Lins, and Andrew H. Roper, 2004, The Effect of Capital Structure
       when Expected Agency Costs are Extreme, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 3-30.




                                                                                              36
Haw, In-Mu, Bingbing Hu, Lee-Seok Hwang, and Woody Wu, 2004, Ultimate Ownership,
       Income Management, and Legal and Extra-Legal Institutions, Journal of Accounting
       Research 42(2), 423-462.
Henry, Peter Blair, 2000, Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market
       Equity Prices, Journal of Finance 55, 529-564.
Kalcheva, Ivalina, and Karl V. Lins, 2005, International Evidence on Cash Holdings and
       Expected Managerial Agency Problems, Working Paper, University of Utah.
Kang, Jun-Koo, and Rene Stulz, 1997, Why is There a Home Bias? An Analysis of Foreign
       Portfolio Equity Ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46, 3-28.
Karmin, Craig, 2000, Corporate Governance Issues Hamper Emerging Markets, Wall Street
       Journal 8, C1.
Karolyi, G. Andrew, and Rene Stulz, 2003, Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or Globally? in
       Constantinides, George, Milton Harris and René Stulz (eds.), The Handbook of the
       Economics of Finance, North Holland Publishers.
Klapper, Leora F., and Inessa Love, 2004, Corporate Governance, Investor Protection, and
       Performance in Emerging Markets, Journal of Corporate Finance 10, 703-728.
Kyle, Albert, 1985, Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1355.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997,
       Legal Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131-1150.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998,
       Law and Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate Ownership
       Around the World, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2004, What Works in
       Securities Laws?, Working Paper, Dartmouth College (June version).
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2000,
       Agency Problems and Dividend Policies Around the World, Journal of Finance, Vol. 55,
       1-33.
Lang, Mark H., Karl V. Lins, and Darius P. Miller, 2003, ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy:
       Does Cross-Listing in the U.S. Improve a Firm’s Information Environment and
       Increase Market Value? Journal of Accounting Research 41, 317-345.



                                                                                           37
Lang, Mark H., Karl V. Lins, and Darius P. Miller, 2004, Concentrated Control, Analyst
       Following and Valuation: Do Analysts Matter Most When Investors are Protected
       Least?, Journal of Accounting Research 42, 581-623.
Lang, Mark H., Jana Raedy, and Michelle Yetman, 2003, How Representative are Firms that are
       Cross Listed in the United States? An Analysis of Accounting Quality, Journal of
       Accounting Research 41.
Lemmon, Michael L., and Karl V. Lins, 2003, Ownership Structure, Corporate Governance, and
       Firm Value: Evidence from the East Asian Financial Crisis, Journal of Finance 58(4),
       1445-1468.
Lesmond, David A., 2005, Liquidity of Emerging Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 77,
       411-452.
Leuz, Christian, Dhananjay Nanda, and Peter Wysocki, 2003, Investor Protection and Earnings
       Management: An International Comparison, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 505-
       527.
Lins, Karl V., 2003, Equity Ownership and Firm Value in Emerging Markets, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 159-184.
Lins, Karl, and Henri Servaes, International Evidence on the Value of Corporate Diversification,
       Journal of Finance 54, 2215-2239.
Lins, Karl V., Deon Strickland, and Marc Zenner, 2005, Do Non-U.S. Firms Issue Equity on
       U.S. Stock Exchanges to Relax Capital Constraints?, Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 40, 109-133.
McKinsey and Company, 2002, Global Investor Opinion Survey, July.
Milgrom, Paul, 1981, Rational Expectations, Information Acquisition, and Competitive Bidding,
       Econometrica 49, 921-943.
Miller, Darius P., 1999, The Market Reaction to International Cross-Listings: Evidence from
       Depositary Receipts, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 103-123.
Nenova, Tatiana, 2003, The Value of Corporate Votes and Control Benefits: A Cross Country
       Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 325-351.
Pagano, Marco, Ailsa Roell, and Josef Zechner, 2002, The Geography of Equity Listing: Why do
       Companies List Abroad?, Journal of Finance, 2651-2694.




                                                                                              38
Reese, William, and Michael Weisbach, 2002, Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests,
       Cross Listings in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings, Journal of
       Financial Economics 66, 65-104.
Sarkissian, Sergei, and Michael Schill, 2004, The Overseas Listing Decision: New Evidence of
       Proximity Preference, Review of Financial Studies 17, 769-809.
Stulz, Rene, 1981, On the Effects of Barriers to International Investment, Journal of Finance 36,
       923-934.
Wysocki, Peter, 2004, Earnings Management, Tax Compliance, and Institutional Factors: A
       Discussion of Haw et al. [2004], Journal of Accounting Research 42, p. 463.
Zingales, Luigi, 1994, The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
       Experience, Review of Financial Studies 7, 125-148.




                                                                                              39
                                             Table 1
                                 Basic Summary Statistics by Country
U.S. Investment, obtained from AHSW, is the percent of the firm’s float that was held by U.S. portfolio investors as of
end-1997, where float is the percentage of shares not held by large blockholders (as given by Worldscope’s Closely Held
variable) multiplied by the market value of equity in billions of U.S. dollars. Size is the value of FY1997 total assets in
millions of U.S. dollars. Ownership data list the median value of total direct and indirect control rights held by
blockholder type. Family/Management (Mgmt) refers to total control rights held by family groups and the top
management group. Other Blockholders (BH) refers to total control rights held by blockholders other than
Family/Management. Ownership structure data are obtained from Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000), Faccio and Lang
(2002), and Lins (2003). N is the number of firms that have data on ownership structure, end-1997 market capitalization
from Datastream, and basic balance sheet variables from Worldscope. Numbers in parentheses indicate the smaller
sample sizes for data on the frequency that Family/Mgmt control is greater than control by any other type of BH.
                                                                                                    Frequency (%) that
                                                    Size                                          Family/Mgmt Control
                                                   (Total      Family/Mgmt        Other BH                  is:
  Country              N      U.S. Investment     assets in        Control          Control         Greater     Greater
                               as a % of float  $millions)           %                 %           than any than 50%
                                   (mean)       (mean)            (median)         (median)       other BH
  Argentina            6            54.0            4595             0                57              17          0
  Austria             23            12.7            1429             38                0              52          43
  Belgium             57             3.5            2275             45                0              72          42
  Brazil              16            27.0            6408              0               22             25 (8)       13
  Chile               39            11.7            1323              0                0            89 (19)       21
  Czech Republic       6            13.9             169              0                5             67 (3)       17
  Finland             60             9.9              913            23                0              58          25
  France              359            7.5            2205             51                0              83          55
  Germany             375            4.9            2383             56                0              82          60
  Hong Kong           183           11.2            1035             42                0           80 (169)       40
  Indonesia           19            10.5             217              0                7            64 (11)       32
  Ireland             38            10.6             410              0               12              29           8
  Israel               7            19.9            1647             50                0              71          57
  Italy               53             9.0            4063             45                0              72          43
  Japan               979            3.5            3012              0               10              14           0
  Korea (South)       165            4.5            1996             14                5          75 (150)         1
  Malaysia            250            4.6             586             30               16           71 (236)       18
  Norway              90             9.4             799             25                0              61          16
  Philippines         20            13.7             324              3                0             67 (9)       15
  Portugal            32            11.2             744             49                0            84 (31)       50
  Singapore           133            7.1             611             29               21           65 (126)       33
  South Africa        102            8.0             775              7                9            57 (82)       41
  Spain               63             8.4            2083             27                0              59          30
  Sweden              136            9.2            1328             22                0              59          21
  Switzerland         84             9.8            1390             50                0              73          50
  Taiwan               9             1.8             659              0                0            100 (4)        0
  Thailand            14            13.3             372             25               10            69 (13)       14
  Turkey              16            32.8             211             19               48              44          38
  UK                 1077            5.7            1010             11                0              47          11
  Total              4411            6.4            1754             13                5          52 (4284)       22
    Europe           2469            6.9            1519             22                0          62 (2464)       30
    Latin America     61            19.8            2978              0                0            61 (33)       16
    Emerging Asia     800            7.1             975             25                7           73 (725)       23
    Other            1081            3.9            2800              0               10          17 (1061)        4




                                                                                                                  40
                                     Table 2
          U.S. Investment and Blockholder Control – Full Sample of Countries
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float on blockholder control variables of interest and firm-
level controls. U.S. Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of U.S. investors’ portfolio
holdings as a share of float, where float is defined as the percentage of shares not held by large blockholders (as
given by Worldscope’s Closely Held variable) multiplied by the market value of equity in billions of U.S. dollars.
XLIST and MSCI are indicator variables that take on the value one if the firm’s equity is listed on a U.S. exchange
or in the MSCI World Index, respectively. Ln(Size) is the log of total assets in millions of U.S. dollars. Leverage is
the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Book-to-market is book equity value over market equity value. Dividend
yield is the preceding twelve months dividends paid over price. Financial variables are from Worldscope and are for
fiscal year 1997. Indicator variables for countries and industry groups (based on the classification of Campbell,
1996) are included but not reported. For each coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is
reported in parentheses.

                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                 -0.018
                                              (0.021)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                   -0.099
                                                            (0.784)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                            -0.286
                                                                          (0.435)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                               -0.829
                                                                                        (0.082)
Other BH control percentage                                                                            0.005
                                                                                                      (0.560)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                              0.357
                                                                                                                   (0.604)
XLIST                                          9.952         9.978         9.420         9.982         9.987        9.983
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
MSCI Membership                                3.549         3.631         3.459         3.568         3.642        3.639
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                       3.115         3.152         3.137         3.138         3.152        3.153
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Leverage                                       -0.103        -0.104        -0.103        -0.103        -0.103       -0.103
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Book-to-market                                 -1.021        -1.019        -1.061        -1.032        -1.016       -1.017
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Dividend Yield                                 -0.105        -0.104        -0.092        -0.101        -0.106       -0.104
                                              (0.254)       (0.261)       (0.326)       (0.272)       (0.250)      (0.256)

Industry Controls?                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                                             4411          4411          4284          4411          4411          4411
Pseudo R2                                      0.07          0.07          0.07          0.07          0.07          0.07




                                                                                                                     41
                                        Table 3
              U.S. Investment and Blockholder Control – Emerging Markets
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float on blockholder control variables of interest and firm-
level controls in emerging markets. Emerging markets are defined based on classifications in the Economist
magazine in December, 1997. U.S. Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of U.S. investors’
portfolio holdings as a share of float, where float is defined as the percentage of shares not held by large
blockholders (as given by Worldscope’s Closely Held variable) multiplied by the market value of equity in billions
of U.S. dollars. XLIST and MSCI are indicator variables that take on the value one if the firm’s equity is listed on a
U.S. exchange or in the MSCI World Index, respectively. Ln(Size) is the log of total assets in millions of U.S.
dollars. Leverage is the ratio of total liabilities to total assets. Book-to-market is book equity value over market
equity value. Dividend yield is the preceding twelve months dividends paid over price. Financial variables are from
Worldscope and are for fiscal year 1997. Indicator variables for countries and industry groups (based on the
classification of Campbell, 1996) are included but not reported. For each coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-
test of equality with zero is reported in parentheses.

                                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                 0.017
                                              (0.917)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                  0.459
                                                           (0.558)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                          0.566
                                                                        (0.496)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                             0.917
                                                                                      (0.343)
Other BH control percentage                                                                         0.019
                                                                                                   (0.298)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                           0.724
                                                                                                                (0.546)
XLIST                                           11.75        11.79        7.828         11.86        11.49        11.66
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
MSCI Membership                                 8.185        8.190        8.441         8.271        8.145        8.166
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                        3.786        3.795        3.749         3.783        3.732        3.766
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Leverage                                       -0.138       -0.138       -0.138        -0.138       -0.135       -0.136
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Book-to-market                                 -0.834       -0.834       -0.889        -0.816       -0.817       -0.829
                                              (0.016)      (0.016)      (0.017)       (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.017)
Dividend Yield                                  0.180        0.180        0.267         0.176        0.168        0.173
                                              (0.282)      (0.281)      (0.131)       (0.292)      (0.315)      (0.300)

Industry Controls?                             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
 N                                             1017         1017          890          1017         1017          1017
Pseudo R2                                      0.08         0.08          0.09         0.08         0.08          0.08




                                                                                                                    42
                                        Table 4
           U.S. Investment, Blockholder Control, and Disclosure Requirements
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float on blockholder control variables of interest and
controls estimated on subsamples of countries with low and high disclosure requirements. “Disclosure
Requirement” values potentially range from 0 to 1 and are obtained from Table 2 of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2004). The “High Disclosure Requirements” subsample contains countries that score above our sample
median of 0.75 on the Disclosure Requirement measure. U.S. Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar
value of U.S. investors’ portfolio holdings as a share of float, where float is defined as the percentage of shares not
held by large blockholders (as given by Worldscope’s Closely Held variable) multiplied by the market value of
equity in billions of U.S. dollars. Other model variables are described previously in Table 2. Indicator variables for
countries and industry groups (based on the classification of Campbell, 1996) are included but not reported. For each
coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is reported in parentheses. At the bottom of
Panel B, we report the p-value of the difference in coefficients on the blockholder variable of interest in the low and
high disclosure requirement subsamples.

Panel A: Low Disclosure Requirements
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                 -0.041
                                              (0.000)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                  -1.046
                                                           (0.025)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                           -1.201
                                                                         (0.013)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                              -2.295
                                                                                       (0.000)
Other BH control percentage                                                                           -0.012
                                                                                                     (0.355)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                            -0.470
                                                                                                                  (0.606)
XLIST                                          9.948       10.094         8.952        10.031        10.095       10.104
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
MSCI Membership                                2.111        2.236         2.223         2.161         2.246        2.264
                                              (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                       3.134        3.187         3.179         3.169         3.263        3.254
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Leverage                                       -0.132       -0.133        -0.134        -0.132        -0.134       -0.134
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Book-to-market                                 -0.852       -0.845        -0.668        -0.866        -0.848       -0.843
                                              (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.037)       (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.006)
Dividend Yield                                 -0.164       -0.164        -0.117        -0.157        -0.172       -0.174
                                              (0.219)      (0.217)       (0.390)       (0.238)       (0.196)      (0.191)

Industry Controls?                             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                                             2626          2626         2569          2626          2626          2626
Pseudo R2                                      0.08          0.08         0.08          0.08          0.08          0.08




                                                                                                                    43
Panel B: High Disclosure Requirements
                                          (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage           0.006
                                        (0.601)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                         0.814
                                                  (0.142)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                              0.647
                                                            (0.250)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                            0.9050
                                                                      (0.226)
Other BH control percentage                                                      0.024
                                                                                (0.094)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                    1.237
                                                                                          (0.238)
XLIST                                    9.443     9.511     9.569     9.422     9.464     9.446
                                        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
MSCI Membership                          6.169     6.162     5.892     6.252     6.095     6.094
                                        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                 2.935     2.960     2.921     2.930     2.932     2.930
                                        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Leverage                                 -0.049    -0.050    -0.045    -0.049    -0.047    -0.047
                                        (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.007)
Book-to-market                           -1.269    -1.276    -1.638    -1.247    -1.263    -1.266
                                        (0.001)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
Dividend Yield                           -0.105    -0.098    -0.087    -0.106    -0.047    -0.119
                                        (0.420)   (0.451)   (0.511)   (0.414)   (0.007)   (0.361)

Industry Controls?                       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country Controls?                        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 N                                       1779      1779      1712      1779      1779      1779
Pseudo R2                                0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05

P-value on blockholder coefficient      0.002     0.008     0.010     0.001     0.331     0.224
difference between subsamples




                                                                                           44
                                      Table 5
           U.S. Investment, Blockholder Control, and Securities Regulation
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float estimated on subsamples of countries with low and high
scores on securities regulation. “Securities Regulation” values potentially range from 0 to 1 and are defined as in Hail and
Leuz (2004) as the average of the Disclosure Requirements, Liability Standards, and Public Enforcement indexes, which
are obtained from Table 2 of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004). The “High Securities Regulation”
subsample contains countries that score above our sample median of 0.58 on the Securities Regulation measure. U.S.
Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of U.S. investors’ portfolio holdings as a share of float, where
float is as defined in Table 2. Other model variables are described previously in Table 2. Indicator variables for countries
and industry groups (based on the classification of Campbell, 1996) are included but not reported. For each coefficient,
the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is reported in parentheses. At the bottom of Panel B, we report the
p-value of the difference in coefficients on the blockholder variable of interest in the low and high Securities Regulation
subsamples.

Panel A: Low Securities Regulation
                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                 -0.044
                                              (0.000)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                   -1.277
                                                            (0.005)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                            -1.450
                                                                          (0.002)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                               -2.454
                                                                                        (0.000)
Other BH control percentage                                                                            -0.001
                                                                                                      (0.962)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                              0.117
                                                                                                                    (0.893)
XLIST                                          9.463         9.644         8.464         9.565         9.660         9.659
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
MSCI Membership                                2.408         2.549         2.614         2.471         2.605         2.610
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                       3.118         3.163         3.145         3.153         3.231         3.228
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Leverage                                       -0.132        -0.134        -0.135        -0.132        -0.134        -0.134
                                              (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Book-to-market                                 -0.661        -0.650        -0.494        -0.671        -0.634        -0.634
                                              (0.027)       (0.030)       (0.117)       (0.025)       (0.035)       (0.035)
Dividend Yield                                 -0.144        -0.149        -0.125        -0.138        -0.163        -0.163
                                              (0.267)       (0.250)       (0.346)       (0.287)       (0.210)       (0.210)

Industry Controls?                              Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                               Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                                              2693         2693          2629          2693          2693          2693
Pseudo R2                                       0.08         0.08          0.08          0.08          0.08          0.08




                                                                                                                     45
Panel B: High Securities Regulation
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage         0.016
                                      (0.211)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                       1.256
                                                (0.027)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                            1.063
                                                          (0.064)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                           1.397
                                                                    (0.072)
Other BH control percentage                                                    0.012
                                                                              (0.395)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                  0.553
                                                                                        (0.620)
XLIST                                 10.073    10.194    10.287    10.038    10.136    10.104
                                      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
MSCI Membership                        5.822     5.774     5.279     5.917     5.706     5.699
                                      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Ln(Size)                               2.967     2.998     2.976     2.948     2.944     2.942
                                      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Leverage                               -0.048    -0.049    -0.043    -0.047    -0.047    -0.047
                                      (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.015)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)
Book-to-market                         -1.606    -1.627    -1.935    -1.572    -1.592    -1.593
                                      (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Dividend Yield                         -0.080    -0.071    -0.061    -0.082    -0.101    -0.095
                                      (0.550)   (0.597)   (0.651)   (0.537)   (0.450)   (0.480)

Industry Controls?                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country Controls?                      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 N                                     1712      1712      1652      1712      1712      1712
Pseudo R2                              0.05      0.05      0.06      0.05      0.05      0.05

P-value on blockholder coefficient    0.000     0.000     0.001     0.000     0.703     0.650
difference between subsamples




                                                                                         46
                                       Table 6
                U.S. Investment, Blockholder Control, and Legal Origin
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float on blockholder control variables of interest and
controls estimated on subsamples of countries without and with an English Common Law legal origin as indicated in
Table 2 of LLSV (1998). U.S. Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of U.S. investors’
portfolio holdings as a share of float, where float is defined as the percentage of shares not held by large
blockholders (as given by Worldscope’s Closely Held variable) multiplied by the market value of equity in billions
of U.S. dollars. Other model variables are described previously in Table 2. Indicator variables for countries and
industry groups (based on the classification of Campbell, 1996) are included but not reported. For each coefficient,
the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is reported in parentheses. At the bottom of Panel B, we
report the p-value of the difference in coefficients on the blockholder variable of interest in the non-English and
English legal origin subsamples.
Panel A: Not English Common Law
                                                (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                -0.040
                                             (0.000)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                 -1.107
                                                          (0.022)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                         -1.300
                                                                       (0.006)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                            -2.376
                                                                                     (0.000)
Other BH control percentage                                                                        -0.006
                                                                                                  (0.642)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                          -0.186
                                                                                                                (0.839)
XLIST                                         8.558        8.730        7.509         8.656        8.756         8.757
                                             (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
MSCI Membership                               2.760        2.873        2.615         2.806        2.900         2.911
                                             (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                      3.096        3.145        3.125         3.125        3.211         3.206
                                             (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Leverage                                      -0.132       -0.133       -0.130        -0.131       -0.133        -0.133
                                             (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Book-to-market                                -0.630       -0.622       -0.624        -0.644       -0.622        -0.619
                                             (0.036)      (0.039)      (0.046)       (0.032)      (0.039)       (0.040)
Dividend Yield                                -0.131       -0.136       -0.046        -0.126       -0.148        -0.148
                                             (0.321)      (0.302)      (0.731)       (0.338)      (0.262)       (0.260)

Industry Controls?                            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
 N                                            2607         2607          2536         2607         2607          2607
Pseudo R2                                     0.08         0.08          0.08         0.08         0.08          0.08




                                                                                                                 47
Panel B: English Common Law
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage        0.009
                                     (0.457)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                      0.905
                                               (0.103)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                           0.710
                                                         (0.212)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                          1.085
                                                                   (0.147)
Other BH control percentage                                                   0.018
                                                                             (0.203)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                 0.908
                                                                                       (0.385)
XLIST                                10.866    10.931    10.895    10.842    10.912    10.893
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
MSCI Membership                       5.118     5.091     5.157     5.210     5.032     5.037
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Ln(Size)                              3.012     3.038     3.019     3.003     3.000     2.999
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Leverage                              -0.051    -0.053    -0.055    -0.051    -0.050    -0.050
                                     (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
Book-to-market                        -1.626    -1.635    -1.740    -1.599    -1.623    -1.623
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Dividend Yield                        -0.065    -0.057    -0.100    -0.067    -0.086   -0.0787
                                     (0.620)   (0.661)   (0.455)   (0.607)   (0.514)   (0.554)

Industry Controls?                    Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country Controls?                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 N                                    1804      1804      1748      1804      1804      1804
Pseudo R2                             0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05      0.05

P-value on blockholder coefficient   0.001     0.004     0.004     0.000     0.560     0.465
difference between subsamples




                                                                                        48
                                         Table 7
              U.S. Investment, Blockholder Control, and Antidirector Rights
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float estimated on subsamples of countries with low and
high shareholder rights as measured by Antidirector Rights. “Antidirector Rights” values range from 0 to 5 and are
obtained from Table 2 of LLSV (1998). The “Low Antidirector Rights” subsample contains countries that score
below 4 on the Antidirector Rights measure. U.S. Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of
U.S. investors’ portfolio holdings as a share of float, where float is as defined in Table 2. Other model variables are
described previously in Table 2. Indicator variables for countries and industry groups (based on the classification of
Campbell, 1996) are included but not reported. For each coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality
with zero is reported in parentheses. At the bottom of Panel B, we report the p-value of the difference in coefficients
on the blockholder variable of interest in the low and high Antidirector Rights subsamples.

Panel A: Low Antidirector Rights
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage                 -0.040
                                              (0.004)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                                  -1.466
                                                           (0.047)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                                           -1.613
                                                                         (0.030)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                                              -2.326
                                                                                       (0.005)
Other BH control percentage                                                                           -0.031
                                                                                                     (0.094)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                                            -1.202
                                                                                                                  (0.368)
XLIST                                          6.487        6.588         7.176         6.610         6.647        6.677
                                              (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
MSCI membership                                3.198        3.399         2.957         3.249         3.499        3.530
                                              (0.003)      (0.001)       (0.006)       (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Ln(Size)                                       3.814        3.872         3.827         3.848         4.025        3.978
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Leverage                                       -0.133       -0.135        -0.129        -0.134        -0.137       -0.136
                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Book-to-market                                 -0.301       -0.299        -0.403        -0.316        -0.327       -0.308
                                              (0.499)      (0.501)       (0.394)       (0.477)       (0.462)      (0.489)
Dividend Yield                                 -0.245       -0.246        -0.166        -0.246        -0.266       -0.266
                                              (0.189)      (0.189)       (0.394)       (0.187)       (0.155)      (0.155)

Industry Controls?                             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Country Controls?                              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                                             1445          1445         1396          1445          1445          1445
Pseudo R2                                      0.07          0.07         0.07          0.07          0.07          0.07




                                                                                                                    49
Panel B: High Antidirector Rights
                                        (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
Family/Mgmt control percentage        -0.002
                                     (0.802)
Family/Mgmt control GT med                      0.558
                                               (0.163)
Family/Mgmt GT med & largest BH                           0.428
                                                         (0.303)
Family/Mgmt control GT 50%                                          0.405
                                                                   (0.503)
Other BH control percentage                                                   0.023
                                                                             (0.034)
Other BH control GT 50%                                                                 1.134
                                                                                       (0.156)
XLIST                                11.508    11.526    10.538    11.513    11.507    11.500
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
MSCI Membership                       3.577     3.589     3.641     3.612     3.597     3.585
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Ln(Size)                              2.690     2.719     2.724     2.695     2.694     2.688
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Leverage                              -0.088    -0.088    -0.091    -0.088    -0.087    -0.087
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Book-to-market                        -1.577    -1.581    -1.560    -1.569    -1.564    -1.568
                                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
Dividend Yield                        -0.030    -0.022    -0.038    -0.028    -0.050    -0.038
                                     (0.773)   (0.829)   (0.723)   (0.786)   (0.632)   (0.716)

Industry Controls?                    Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Country Controls?                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 N                                    2960      2960      2885      2960      2960      2960
Pseudo R2                             0.06      0.06      0.06      0.06      0.06      0.06

P-value on blockholder coefficient   0.031     0.016     0.017     0.009     0.194     0.126
difference between subsamples




                                                                                        50
                                    Table 8
        U.S. Investment, Earnings Management, and Securities Regulation
Tobit regression estimates of U.S. Investment scaled by float estimated on subsamples of countries with low and high
scores on securities regulation. “Securities Regulation” values potentially range from 0 to 1 and are defined as in Hail and
Leuz (2004) as the average of the Disclosure Requirements, Liability Standards, and Public Enforcement indexes, which
are obtained from Table 2 of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004). The “High Securities Regulation”
subsample contains countries that score above our sample median of 0.58 on the Securities Regulation measure. U.S.
Investment is as of end-1997 and is defined the dollar value of U.S. investors’ portfolio holdings as a share of float, where
float is as defined in Table 2. The first proxy for earnings management (EM) is based on Haw et al. (2004) and Wysocki
(2004) and computed as the median magnitude of accruals relative to the cash flow from operations. The second proxy is
an aggregate earnings management score based on Leuz et al. (2003). For the aggregate EM proxy, we compute three
scores: (1) the magnitude of accruals relative to the operating cash flow, (2) the standard deviation of operating earnings
over the standard deviation of operating cash flows, and (3) the correlation of changes in accruals and changes in
operating cash flows. All variables are computed by firm from 1992 to 1997. The scores are averaged for each firm and
are ranked such that higher values indicate more earnings management. Other model variables are described previously
in Table 2. Indicator variables for countries and industry groups (based on the classification of Campbell, 1996) are
included but not reported. For each coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is reported in
parentheses. At the bottom of the table, we report the p-value of the difference in coefficients on the earnings management
variable of interest in the low and high Securities Regulation subsamples.

                                                       Panel A:                               Panel B:
                                              Low Securities Regulation              High Securities Regulation
                                                  (1)              (2)                   (3)               (4)
Magnitude of Accruals                           -3.517                                0.3577
                                               (0.000)                                (0.733)
Aggregate EM Score                                              -0.0013                                 0.0000
                                                                (0.001)                                 (0.980)
XLIST                                            8.480           8.359                 6.111             7.494
                                               (0.000)          (0.000)               (0.007)           (0.001)
MSCI Membership                                  2.449           1.599                 5.520             5.548
                                               (0.010)          (0.107)               (0.000)           (0.000)
Ln(Size)                                         3.634           3.876                 2.960             2.845
                                               (0.000)          (0.000)               (0.000)           (0.000)
Leverage                                        -0.131           -0.141                -0.018            -0.011
                                               (0.000)          (0.000)               (0.553)           (0.723)
Book-to-market                                   0.036           -0.023                -2.835            -2.783
                                               (0.955)          (0.973)               (0.000)           (0.000)
Dividend Yield                                  -0.380           -0.187                0.152             0.159
                                               (0.088)          (0.417)               (0.501)           (0.484)

Industry Controls?                               Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Country Controls?                                Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 N                                               1204               1115                786                 732
Pseudo R2                                        0.09               0.09                0.07                0.07
 P-value on EM coefficient difference
    between low and high subsamples                                                     0.004               0.037




                                                                                                                    51
                                                                         Table 9
                                                                      Robustness Tests
The table reports coefficients on Family/Mgmt (F/M) control percentage and on an indicator variable for Family/Mgmt control percentage greater than 50% for a
series of regression models that contain all control variables found in the base case models estimated in Tables 2 through 7, and feature one or more additional
variables for robustness. Liquidity refers to the percentage of trading days in the 1997 calendar year in which the stock had zero return for the day – this measure
is computed only for firms with price data reported for at least 100 trading days in 1997. Momentum refers to the 12 month buy-and-hold stock return over the
period January 1, 1997 to December 31, 1997, winsorized at the 1st and 99th percent levels. In Panel A, the dependent variable is U.S. Investment scaled by float,
consistent with all prior reported regressions. In Panel B, the dependent variable is U.S. Investment scaled by total market capitalization, and float in U.S. dollars
is included as an additional right hand side variable. The models are separately estimated for subsamples of countries with low and high scores on Disclosure
Requirements and on Securities Regulation as described in Tables 4 and 5. For each coefficient, the p-value of the two-tailed t-test of equality with zero is
reported in parentheses.

Panel A: Dependent variable is U.S. Investment as a percentage of float
                                                              Low Disclosure             Low Securities           High Disclosure            High Securities
                                                               Requirements               Regulation               Requirements                Regulation
                                                             F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M
                                                            control      control      control      control      control      control      control      control
                                                                         > 50%                     > 50%                     > 50%                     > 50%
     Includes liquidity and momentum variables               -0.025       -1.835       -0.027       -1.941       0.011        1.132        0.018        1.523
                                                            (0.018)      (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.002)      (0.381)      (0.139)      (0.158)      (0.056)
                            Number of observations            2465         2465         2526         2526        1655         1655         1594         1594

Panel B: Dependent variable is U.S. Investment as a percentage of equity market capitalization
                                                              Low Disclosure             Low Securities           High Disclosure            High Securities
                                                               Requirements               Regulation               Requirements                Regulation
                                                             F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M         F/M           F/M
                                                            control      control      control      control      control      control      control      control
                                                                         > 50%                     > 50%                     > 50%                     > 50%
     Base case model                                         -0.030       -1.856       -0.032       -1.900       -0.005       -0.093       -0.001       0.119
                                                            (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.430)      (0.825)      (0.858)      (0.784)
                            Number of observations            2625         2625         2691         2691         1778         1778         1712        1712

     Includes liquidity and momentum variables               -0.026       -1.713       -0.027       -1.723       -0.002       0.065        0.001        0.212
                                                            (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.730)      (0.881)      (0.936)      (0.633)
                            Number of observations            2465         2465         2526         2526         1655        1655         1594         1594
2
