                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE INTERNATIONAL CAPM AND A WAVELET-
                        BASED DECOMPOSITION OF VALUE AT RISK

                                           Viviana Fernandez

                                         Working Paper 12233
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12233


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




Center for Applied Economics (CEA), Department of Industrial Engineering at the University of Chile.
Postal: Avenida Republica 701, Santiago–Chile. E–mail: vfernand@dii.uchile.cl. Funds provided by
FONDECYT Grant No. 1050486 and by an institutional grant of the Hewlett Foundation to CEA are greatly
acknowledged. All remaining errors are the author’s. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Viviana Fernandez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The International CAPM and a Wavelet-Based Decomposition of Value at Risk
Viviana Fernandez
NBER Working Paper No. 12233
May 2006
JEL No. C22, G15

                                           ABSTRACT

In this article, we formulate a time-scale decomposition of an international version of the CAPM that
accounts for both market and exchange-rate risk. In addition, we derive an analytical formula for
time-scale value at risk and marginal value at risk (VaR) of a portfolio. We apply our methodology
to stock indices of seven emerging economies belonging to Latin America and Asia, for the sample
period 1990-2004. Our main conclusions are the following. First, the estimation results hinge upon
the choice of the world market portfolio. In particular, the stock markets of the sampled countries
appear to be more integrated with other emerging countries than with developed ones. Second, value
at risk depends on the investor’s time horizon. In the short run, potential losses are greater than in
the long run. Third, additional exposure to some specific stock indices will increase value at risk to
a greater extent, depending on the investment horizon. Our results go in line with recent research in
asset pricing that stresses the importance of heterogeneous investors.

Viviana Fernandez
Center for Applied Economics
Department of Industrial Engineering
University of Chile
Avenida Republica 701
Santiago
CHILE
vfernand@dii.uchile.cl
                                                                                            2

1.     Introduction

        The capital asset pricing model (CAPM), a corner-stone of modern finance, states
that the risk premium of an individual asset equals its beta times the risk premium on the
market portfolio. Beta measures the degree of co-movement between the asset’s return and
the return on the market portfolio. In other words, beta quantifies the systematic risk of an
asset––i.e., the amount of risk that cannot be diversified away.

        In recent years, however, the CAPM has been questioned by several empirical
studies. In particular, Fama and French (1992) announced the death of beta based on the
fact that it does a poor job of explaining the cross-section variation of average returns, as
opposed to the book-to-market ratio and market capitalization. Kothari and Shanken
(1998), however, conclude that Fama and French’s results hinge on using monthly rather
than yearly returns. Kothari and Shanken argue that the use of annual returns to estimate
betas helps to circumvent measurement problems caused by non-synchronous trading,
seasonality in returns, and trading frictions.

       Simultaneously, several authors have worked on theoretical extensions of the
CAPM: the after-tax CAPM, which accounts for the fact that investors have to pay higher
taxes on high dividend-yield stocks, and, therefore, they must be compensated with higher
pre-tax returns; the inter-temporal CAPM, which deals with a multi-period setting; the
consumption CAPM, which states that security returns are highly correlated with aggregate
economic output, as investors are concerned with protecting their consumption over
economic slowdowns; and, the international asset pricing model, which establishes the
conditions under which fully integrated capital markets are in equilibrium (see Megginson,
1997, for a thorough discussion and citations).

       Another theme that has been covered by the empirical literature on the CAPM, and
which is related to our article, is the testing of asset pricing models that allow for a time-
varying beta, a time-varying risk premium, or for both. Typically, researchers have resorted
to GARCH and GARCH-in-mean processes for such testing (e.g., Engle, Lilien and
Robins, 1987; Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge, 1988). An alternative, but promising,
approach is wavelet analysis. This is a refinement of the Fourier analysis that, among many
other applications, allows for a time-scale decomposing of financial data (i.e., high-
frequency or noisy components and low-frequency or trend components). Such
decomposition makes it possible to compute pair-wise correlations at different time-
horizons.

       Early studies that utilize wavelet methods are Ramsey, Usikov, and Zaslavsky
(1995) and Ramsey and Zhang (1996, 1997), which concentrate on stock markets and
foreign exchange rate dynamics. More recent contributions have dealt with the permanent
income hypothesis, the relation between futures and spot prices, the estimation of
systematic risk of an asset (beta), seasonality filtering of time-series data, time and scale
dependency of intraday Asian spot exchange rates, and heterogeneous trading in
commodity markets, among other themes (e.g., Ramsey and Lampart 1998; Li and
Stevenson 2001; Gençay, Whitcher, and Selcuk 2001, 2003, 2005; Whitcher 2004;
Karuppiah and Los 2005; Connor and Rossiter 2005). A thorough discussion of the use of
                                                                                              3

wavelets in economics and finance can be found in the survey articles by Ramsey (1999,
2002).

        This article concentrates on a wavelet-based international asset pricing model
(ICAPM). That is, we estimate ICAPM models for different time horizons. A concrete
application of our estimation results is the computation of the value at risk for a multi-
country portfolio. Previous studies have stressed the importance of exchange rate risk.
Indeed, the evidence has shown that there can be considerable departures from the
purchasing power parity (PPP), so exchange risk should be priced (e.g., Adler and Dumas
1983). At the same time, several theoretical models have stressed the importance of this
risk factor (e.g., Solnik 1974; Adler and Dumas 1983; Stulz 1971, 1992). Empirical support
for the existence of a foreign exchange risk premium has been found by Dumas and Solnik
(1995) and De Santis and Gerard (1998). Additional evidence in favor of the ICAPM over
the CAPM is documented by Dumas (1994).

        The contribution of our work is two fold. First, applications of wavelet analysis to
financial risk have dealt exclusively with the single-country CAPM (e.g., Gençay,
Whitcher, and Selcuk 2003, 2005), where exchange-rate risk is non-existent. Second, our
study introduces the concepts of time-scale value at risk and time-scale marginal value at
risk. Recent research in the area of asset pricing has started to account for agents’
heterogeneous time horizons in financial markets. As Connor and Rossiter (2005) point out
for the specific case of commodity markets, long-horizon traders will essentially focus on
price fundamentals that drive overall trends, whereas short-term traders will primarily react
to incoming information within a short-term horizon. Hence, market dynamics in the
aggregate will be the result of the interaction of agents with heterogeneous time horizons. A
similar intuition can be applied to our model: market and exchange risk and, hence,
potential portfolio losses will depend upon the investor’s time horizon. In the aggregate,
market and exchange-rate risks will be the outcome of the different time-horizon investors.

        This article is organized as follows. Section 2 is divided into three parts. Section 2.1
presents a brief theoretical background on the version of the ICAPM we will use in our
empirical analysis. Section 2.2 presents a brief description of the discrete wavelet
transforms (DWT) and the maximal overlap DWT (MODWT). Section 2.3 presents our
derivation of the time-scale value at risk and the marginal value at risk of a portfolio
comprised by an arbitrary number of assets. Section 3 applies our methodology to stock
indices of seven emerging economies belonging to Latin America and Asia, for the sample
period 1990-2004. Finally, Section 4 presents our main conclusions.

2.     Theoretical issues

        For simplicity, we will postulate that an investment in a country portfolio (measured
in local currency) is subject to two sources of risk, namely, the country index’s sensitivity
to a global portfolio and the performance of the domestic currency relative to the foreign
currency. Our viewpoint will be that of an US investor, so we will take the US dollar as the
foreign currency. This formulation is certainly parsimonious, but it simplifies enormously
the derivation of a formula for the value at risk of a portfolio invested on several country
                                                                                             4

indices. Despite the simplicity of our model, we will allow for the existence of correlation
among the exchange rates of different countries.

        Section 2.1 describes the formulation of our two-country CAPM. Section 2.2
focuses on the statistical technique of wavelets, whereas Section 2.3 obtains an analytic
formula for the time-scale value at risk (VaR) of k assets and the time-scale marginal VaR
of an individual asset.

2.1    The international CAPM: the two-country case

       The expected risk premium of a domestic asset is given by (see Sercu and Uppal
1995, chapter 22)

        E (ri − r ) = ψ1 cov(ri , rw ) + ψ 2 cov(ri , s)                           (1)

where ri and rw are the returns on the domestic asset and the world market portfolio,
respectively (both expressed in local currency), s is the percent change in the exchange rate
between the domestic and the foreign currency, and ψ1 and ψ2 represent the prices of the
corresponding covariance risks.

        In this model, the expected risk premium consists of two risk premiums for
covariance risks. The intuition behind the first risk premium is similar to that of the single-
country CAPM. The premium for exchange risk covariance reflects the fact that investors
are also concerned about the covariance of local-currency returns with the exchange rate.

       In order to determine ψ1 and ψ2, two benchmarks are taken, namely, the world
market portfolio and the foreign Treasury bond. Therefore, we have the following system
of two equations in the two unknowns ψ1 and ψ2:

        E (rw ) − r = ψ1 cov(rw , rw ) + ψ 2 cov(rw , s)                           (2a)
                 = ψ1 var(rw ) + ψ 2 cov(rw , s)

        E(s) + r * − r = ψ1 cov(s, rw ) + ψ 2 cov(s, s)                            (2b)
               = ψ1 cov(s, rw ) + ψ 2 var(s)

        The expression E(s)+r* represents the expected return on the Treasury bond in terms
of the local currency. Under the assumption that cov(rw,s)=0, ψ1 and ψ2 boil down to

             E(rw ) − r                     E (s) + r * − r
        ψ1 =                        ψ2 =                                           (3)
              var(rw )                          var(s)

After substituting (3) into (1), we obtain
                                                                                                     5

                            cov(ri , rw )               cov(ri , s)
            E (ri − r ) =                 E (rw − r ) +             E(s + r * − r )
                             var(rw )                    var(s)

                     ≡α1i E(rw–r)+α2i E(s+r*–r)                                           (4)

where α1i is the sensitivity of asset i to the world market portfolio, and α2i is the asset’s
relative exchange rate risk.

       If the world market portfolio is denominated in the foreign currency instead2,
equation (1) can be restated as

            E(ri − r ) = φ1 cov(ri , rw* + s) + φ2 cov(ri , s)                            (5)

       Similarly, by taking as benchmarks the world market portfolio and the foreign
Treasury bond, we have

            E(rw* + s) − r = φ1 var(rw* + s) + φ2 (cov(rw* , s) + var(s))                 (6a)
            E(s) + r − r = φ1 cov(s, r ) + (φ1 + φ2 ) var(s)
                            r                *
                                             w                                            (6b)

After solving for φ1 and φ2 rearranging terms, we get that3

                            cov(ri , rw* )                 cov(ri , s)
            E (ri − r ) =           *
                                           E(rw* − r * ) +             E(s + r * − r )
                             var(rw )                       var(s)

                     ≡ β1i E(rw* − r * ) + β 2i E (s + r * − r )                          (7)

        In practice, however, the world market portfolio (measured in either local or foreign
currency) and the exchange rate variation will not be necessarily orthogonal. Then the
sensitivities to the risk factors, β1 and β2, have to be jointly estimated from a linear
regression model. For instance, let us consider the regression representation of equation (7)

            ri = β0i + β1i rw* + β2is + εi                                                (8)

where εi is an error term that satisfies all the assumptions of the linear regression model.
Estimates of both beta and gamma can be obtained by ordinary least-squares. From
elementary econometrics (see, for instance, Johnston (1984), chapter 3), we have that




2
 In the empirical section of the paper, our proxies of the world market portfolio are denominated in US
dollars, which we take as the foreign currency.
    This calculation assumes that cov( rw , s ) = 0 .
3                                            *
                                                                                                                                 6

                  ˆ         ˆ ˆ                                                         ˆ        ˆ ˆ
             ˆβ = δ ri rw − δ ri s δsrw                                            ˆβ = δ ri s − δ ri rw δ rw s           (9)
               1i                                                                    2i
                    1 − δˆ rw s δˆ srw                                                    1 − δˆ rw s δˆ srw

where δ̂ ri rw is the slope of a regression of ri on a constant term and rw,, that is,
             ∑ (r − r )(r
                      it       i     wt   − rw )
δˆ ri rw =    t
                                                   , etcetera.
               ∑ (r − r
                      t
                             wt       w   )2


             The R2 of the regression model in (8) can be obtained as

                           ρ 2ri rw + ρ 2ris − 2ρ ri rw ρ ris ρ rw s
             R =  2
                                                                                                                          (10)
                                          1 − ρ 2rw s

where ρ ri rw is the sample correlation coefficient between ri and rw, etcetera.

      We will use these equations later as a benchmark for our wavelet-based
decomposition.

2.2          The Discrete Wavelet Transform

        A wavelet or short wave is similar to a sine and cosine function in that it also
oscillates about zero (see, for instance, Percival and Walden, 2000; Gençay, Selçuk, and
Whitcher, 2002). However, as its name indicates, oscillations of a wavelet fade away about
zero, and the function is localized in time or space.4 In wavelet analysis, a signal (i.e., a
sequence of numerical measurements) is represented as a linear combination of wavelet
functions.

        In particular, a wavelet allows for decomposing a signal into multi-resolution
components: fine and coarse resolution components. There are father and mother wavelets.
Father wavelets (φ) are good at representing the smooth and low-frequency parts of a
signal, whereas mother wavelets (ψ) are good at representing the detailed and high-
frequency parts of a signal. In particular, the orthogonal wavelet series approximation to a
continuous signal f(t) is given by

f ( t ) ≈ ∑ s J , k φ J , k ( t ) + ∑ d J , k ψ J , k ( t ) + ∑ d J −1, k ψ J −1, k ( t ) + ... + ∑ d 1, k ψ 1, k ( t )   (11)
             k                             k                           k                          k


where J is the number of multi-resolution components or scales, and k ranges from 1 to the
number of coefficients in the corresponding component. The coefficients sJ,k, dJ,k,..., d1,k are
the wavelet transform coefficients, whereas the functions φj,k(t) and ψj,k(t) are the
approximating wavelet functions. These functions are generated from φ and ψ as follows

4
    Mathematically, a function ϖ(.) defined over the entire real axis is called a wavelet if ϖ(t)→0 as t→±∞.
                                                                                                              7


                                    ⎛ t −2jk ⎞                                         ⎛ t −2jk ⎞
         φ j, k ( t ) = 2 − j / 2 φ⎜⎜    j
                                             ⎟⎟             ψ j, k ( t ) = 2 − j / 2 ψ⎜⎜    j
                                                                                                ⎟⎟ .   (12)
                                    ⎝ 2 ⎠                                              ⎝ 2 ⎠

        Expression (11) is an orthogonal approximation because the basis functions φj,k(t)
and ψj,k(t) are orthogonal by construction. The wavelet coefficients can be approximated by
the following integrals

         s J , k ≈ ∫ φ J , k ( t )f ( t )dt       d j, k ≈ ∫ ψ j, k ( t )f ( t )dt , j=1, 2,..., J.    (13)

These coefficients are a measure of the contribution of the corresponding wavelet function
to the total signal. On the other hand, the approximating wavelet functions φj,k(t) and ψj,k(t)
are scaled and translated versions of φ and ψ. As equation (12) indicates, the scale or
dilation factor is 2j, whereas the translation or location parameter is 2jk. As j gets larger––
i.e., as we move towards the smoother or low frequency components of the data––so does
the scale factor 2j, and the functions φj,k(t) and ψj,k(t) get shorter and more spread out.

       In general, there is no close-form solution for father and mother wavelets, and they
have to be computed by the so-called dilation equations:

         φ( x ) = 2 ∑ l k φ(2x − k )              ψ ( x ) = 2 ∑ h k φ(2x − k )                         (14)
                            k                                      k


         The lk and hk coefficients are called the scaling (low-pass) and wavelet (high-pass)
filter coefficients, respectively, which are defined by

                  1                                                    1
         lk =
                    2
                      ∫ φ(t )φ(2t − k )dt                   hk =
                                                                       2
                                                                           ∫ ψ(t )φ(2t − k)dt          (15)


and, they are related through lk=(–1)k+1hL–1–k, k=0,.., L–1, where L is the width of the
wavelet filter.5

        Applications of wavelet analysis commonly utilize a discrete wavelet transform
(DWT). The DWT calculates the coefficients of the approximation in (1) for a discrete
signal of final extent, f1, f2,.., fn. That is, it maps the vector f=(f1, f2,…,fn)′ to a vector of n
wavelet coefficients that contains sJ,k and dj,k, j=1,2,…, J. The sJ,k are called the smooth
coefficients and the dj,k are called the detail coefficients. Intuitively, the smooth coefficients
represent the underlying smooth behavior of the data at the coarse scale 2J, whereas the
detail coefficients provide the coarse scale deviations from it.



5
 In practical applications, we deal with sequences of values (i.e., time series) rather than functions defined
over the entire real axis. Therefore, instead of using actual wavelets, we work with short sequences of values
named wavelet filters, denoted by {h k }Lk = 0 . The number of values in the sequence is called the width of the
wavelet filter, and it is denoted by L.
                                                                                                                    8

         When the length of the data, n, is divisible by 2J, there are n/2j dj,k-coefficients at
scale j=1,.., J–1. Similarly, at the coarsest scale, there are n/2J dJ,k-coefficients and n/2J sJ,k-
coefficients. Altogether, there are n wavelets coefficients. The number of coefficients at a
given scale is related to the width of the wavelet function. For instance, at the finest scale
j=1, it takes n/2 terms––which are contained in the crystal d1 = (d1,1 , d1, 2 ,..., d1, n / 2 )' ––for the
functions ψ1,k(t) to cover the interval 1≤t≤n. 6

         Expression (1) can be rewritten as

         f(t) ≈ SJ(t)+DJ(t)+DJ–1(t)+...+D1(t),                                                         (16)

where S J ( t ) = ∑ s J , k φ J , k ( t ) and D J ( t ) = ∑ d j, k ψ J , k ( t ) are denominated the smooth and
                       k                                k
detail signals, respectively.
        The terms in expression (10) represent a decomposition of the signal into orthogonal
signal components SJ(t), DJ(t), DJ–1(t), ..., D1(t) at different resolutions. And, hence, the
approximation in (16) is called a multi-resolution decomposition (MRD).

2.2.1 Wavelet variance and covariance: DWT versus MODWT

        Wavelet-variance analysis consists of partitioning the variance of a time series into
pieces that are associated to different time scales. It tells us what scales are important
contributors to the overall variability of a series (see Percival and Walden, 2000). In
particular, let x1, x2,..., xn be a time series of interest, which is assumed to be a realization of
a stationary process with variance σ 2X . If υ 2X (τ j ) denotes the wavelet variance for scale
τj≡2j−1, then the following relationship holds:

                  ∞
         σ 2X = ∑ υ 2x (τ j ) .                                                                        (17)
                 j=1

where the square root of the wavelet variance is expressed in the same units as the original
data.

         Let n ′j = ⎣n / 2 j ⎦ be the number of discrete-wavelet transform (DWT) coefficients at
                                                    ⎡            1 ⎤
level j, where n is the sample size, and let L ′j ≡ ⎢(L − 2)(1 − j )⎥ be the number of DWT
                                                    ⎢           2 ⎥



6
  In practice, the DWT is calculated by using a filter cascade, where the wavelet filter {hk} and its associated
scaling filter {lk} given by (15), are used in a pyramid algorithm to decompose a time series. To generate the
first level of coefficients, the original data is filtered by convolving it separately with the wavelet and scaling
filters. Next, every other point from each filter output is thrown out, and the remaining filter outputs are
defined as the unit level (j=1) wavelet and scaling coefficients. For j=2, the same filtering/decimation scheme
is utilized, but the unit-level scaling coefficients are the input to the filters. At the jth level, the inputs to the
wavelet and scaling filters are the scaling coefficients from the previous (j–1) level, and the outputs are the jth
level wavelet and scaling coefficients.
                                                                                                                    9


boundary coefficients7 at level j (provided that n ′j > L ′j ), where L is the width of the
wavelet filter. An unbiased estimator of the wavelet variance is defined as

                                              n ′ −1
                                               j
                                   1
                                          j ∑ j, t
            ~
            υX2 (τ j ) ≡                            d2 .                                                 (18)
                               ′     ′
                             (n j − L j )2 t = L′j −1

       Given that the DWT de-correlates the data, the non-boundary wavelet coefficients at
a given level (dj) are zero-mean Gaussian white-noise processes.

       Similarly, the unbiased wavelet covariance between time series X and Y, at scale j,
can be defined as
                                     n ′j −1
                           1
        ~
        υXY (τ j ) ≡
          2
                                      ∑ d(j,Xt )d (j,Yt ) ,
                     (n′j − L′j )2 j t = L′j
                                                                             (19)


provided that n ′j > L ′j .

        However, as pointed out by Percival and Walden (2000), the sample properties of
the DWT variance and covariance estimators are inferior to those of non-decimated discrete
wavelet transforms, also known as stationary wavelet transforms. The non-decimated DWT
is a non-orthogonal variant of the DWT, which is time-invariant. That is, unlike the
classical DWT, the output is not affected by the date at which we start recording a time
series. In addition, the number of coefficients at each scale equals the number of
observations in the original time series. A non-decimated form of the DWT is known as the
maximal overlap DWT (MODWT).8 The unbiased MODWT estimator of the wavelet
variance is given by

                             1 n −1 ~ 2
            υˆ 2X (τ j ) ≡         ∑ d j, t
                             M j t = L j −1
                                                                                                         (20)


      ~
where d j2, t is the MODWT-wavelet coefficient at level j and time t, Mj≡n–Lj+1,
L j ≡ (2 j − 1)(L − 1) + 1 is the width of the MODWT filter for level j, and n is the number of
observations in the original time series. While there are n MODWT-wavelet coefficients at
each level j, the first (Lj–1)-boundary coefficients are discarded. (Retaining such boundary
coefficients leads to a biased estimate).



7
    The   ⎣x ⎦   and         ⎡x ⎤   terms represent the greatest integer ≤x and the smallest integer ≥x, respectively.
Boundary coefficients are those that are formed by combining together some values from the beginning and
the end of the time series.
8                ~                 ~
  The scaling ( lk ) and wavelet ( h k ) filter coefficients for the MODWT are rescaled versions of those of the
                            ~                    ~
DWT. Specifically, where lk ≡ l k / 2 and h k ≡ h k / 2 .
                                                                                                                                                                10

       Likewise, the unbiased MODWT estimator of the wavelet covariance can be
obtained as
                       1 n −1 ~ ( X ) ~ ( Y )
       υˆ 2XY (τ j ) ≡      ∑ d j, t d j, t
                       M j t = L′j
                                                                     (21)


        Let us now consider the slope estimates of equation (8). The MODWT-based slopes
at scale j will be given by

                            δˆ r r * (τ j ) − δˆ ri s (τ j )δˆ sr * (τ j )                             δˆ ri s (τ j ) − δˆ r r * (τ j )δˆ r * s (τ j )
           βˆ 1i (τ j ) =       i w                              w
                                                                                      βˆ 2i (τ j ) =                        i w            w
                                                                                                                                                         (22)
                                         ˆ             ˆ
                                   1 − δ * ( τ )δ * ( τ )                                                            ˆ            ˆ
                                                                                                               1 − δ * ( τ )δ * ( τ )
                                            rw s    j     srw       j                                                rw s     j     srw      j



                              υˆ 2r r * (τ j )
where δˆ r r * (τ j ) =          i w
                                                  , υˆ 2r r * (τ j ) is the MODWT-wavelet covariance of asset i and the
             i w
                              υˆ 2r* (τ j )             i w
                                  w


world market portfolio at scale j, and υˆ 2r* (τ j ) is the MODWT-wavelet variance of the
                                                                                  w

world market portfolio at scale j. The other terms can be obtained in a similar fashion.

           Likewise, the R2 at scale j can be defined as

                             ρ 2r r* (τ j ) + ρ 2ris (τ j ) − 2ρ r r* (τ j )ρ ris (τ j )ρ r* s (τ j )
           R (τ j ) =
              2                  i w                                        i w                          w
                                                                                                                                                         (23)
                                                                1 − ρ 2r* s (τ j )
                                                                        w




                                        υ 2r r* (τ j )
where ρ r r* (τ j ) =                       i w
                                                                   is the wavelet-based correlation coefficient between ri
             i w
                                  υ (τ j )υ 2r* (τ j )
                                       2
                                       ri           w

       *
and r at scale j, etcetera.
       w


2.3        Wavelet-based Value at Risk (VaR)

        VaR is a popular measure of market risk (see, for example, Jorion 2001, chapter 1),
whose origin dates back to the late 1980’s at J.P. Morgan. In particular, VaR answers the
question of how much we can lose, with a given probability, over a certain time horizon. In
this section, we derive a time-scale decomposition of VaR.

        In order to facilitate the presentation of the algebraic expressions, let us consider the
following alternative representation of equation (8), in terms of two risk factors, for the
return on a given asset of country i, i=1,..k:

           ri = β0i+β1iF1+β2iF2i+εi                                                                                                                      (24)

where F1 represents the return on the world market portfolio ( rw* ), common to all assets,
and F2i is the exchange rate variation of the domestic currency against the foreign currency
                                                                                                                          11

(i.e., US dollar). Under the assumption that the error terms are uncorrelated across
countries, that is cov(εi, εj)=0 ∀i≠j, we can obtain the following expression for the
covariance between returns i and j:

         cov(ri , rj ) = β1iβ1 j var(F1 ) + β1iβ2 j cov(F1 , F2 j ) + β1 jβ2i cov(F1 , F2i ) + β2iβ2 j cov(F2i , F2 j )
                                    + cov(εi , ε j )
                                                                                                             (25)
                       ⎧σ i = j
                              2
                              εi
where cov(εi , ε j ) = ⎨                       .
                       ⎩ 0 i≠ j

        Let us define σ12 = var(F1 ) , σ ii2 = var(F2i ) , σ ij2 = cov(F2i , F2 j ) , σ12
                                                                                       ii
                                                                                          = cov(F1 , F2i ) ,
σ12jj = cov(F1 , F2 j ) , and let ωi be the share of country index ‘i’ in the portfolio. The variance
of the portfolio, measured in foreign currency, is given by

                  ⎛ k                ⎞ k k
        σ 2p = var⎜ ∑ ωi (ri − F2i ) ⎟ = ∑∑ ωi ω j cov(ri − F2i , r j − F2 j )                               (26)
                  ⎝ i =1             ⎠ i =1 j=1

   ⎛ k k               ⎞        k    k
                                        ~ ~             k    k
                                                                      ~           ~                k
= ⎜⎜ ∑∑ ωi ω jβ1iβ1 j ⎟⎟σ12 + ∑∑ ωi ω jβ2i β2 jσii2 + ∑ ∑ ωi ω j (β1i β2 jσ12jj + β2iβ1 jσ12
                                                                                          ii
                                                                                             ) + ∑ ωi2σε2i
   ⎝ i =1 j=1          ⎠      i =1 j =1               i =1 j =1                                  i =1


      ~
where β2i ≡ β 2i − 1 .

        For an equally-weighted portfolio of k assets, such that ωi=1/k ∀i, the variance of
the portfolio can be succinctly expressed, in matrix form, as

                   1 ⎛ 2 ′ 2 ~′ ~                    ′~ ~ ′                   ′
        σ 2p =         σ (β1 ι ) + β2 Ω F2 β2 + ι′(β1 β2 + β2 β1 )Ω F1F2 + σ ε σ ε ⎞⎟
                    2 ⎜ 1
                                                                                                             (27)
                   k ⎝                                                              ⎠

                                                                   ~
                ⎛ σ11      σ12       K σ12k ⎞        ⎛ β11 ⎞     ⎛ β21 ⎞  ⎛1⎞            ⎛ σ11  ⎞
                ⎜ 212        2
                                            ⎟        ⎜     ⎟     ⎜~ ⎟     ⎜   ⎟          ⎜ 12   ⎟
                ⎜σ         σ2        K σ2 ⎟          ⎜ β12 ⎟ ~ ~ ⎜ β22 ⎟  ⎜1⎟            ⎜ σ12 ⎟
                            22           2k                                                  22
where Ω F2     =⎜ 2                           , β1 = ⎜ ⎟ , β2 = ⎜ ⎟ , ι = ⎜ ⎟ , Ω F1F2 = ⎜      ⎟ , and
                ⎜ M         M        O M ⎟⎟             M        ⎜  M  ⎟    M
                                                                                         ⎜  M   ⎟
                                                     ⎜ ⎟                  ⎜ ⎟
                ⎜ σ k1     σ k2 2    L σ kk ⎟        ⎜β ⎟        ⎜β~ ⎟    ⎜1⎟            ⎜ σ kk ⎟
                ⎝ 2                      2 ⎠         ⎝ 1k ⎠      ⎝ 2k ⎠   ⎝ ⎠            ⎝ 12 ⎠
     ⎛ σ ε1   ⎞
     ⎜        ⎟
     ⎜ σε     ⎟
σε = ⎜ 2      ⎟.
        M
     ⎜        ⎟
     ⎜ σε     ⎟
     ⎝ k      ⎠

        Then the value at risk at the (1–α)-percent confidence level, expressed in units of
the foreign currency, for an equally-weighted portfolio is given by
                                                                                                                                                   12


                   VaR (α) = V0 κ(α)σ p                                                                                              (28)

where V0 is the initial investment, expressed in foreign currency, κ(α)≡Φ−1(1−α), where
Φ(.) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal, and σp is the square root
of the portfolio variance in (27).

         Based on expression (28), we define the (1–α)-confidence level value at risk, at
scale j, as follows
                         (τ j )                      (τ j )
                   VaR            (α) = V0 κ(α)σ p                                                                                   (29)

where
     (τ j )        1    (τ )  ( τ )′     ~ ( τ )′ ( τ ) ~ ( τ )  ( τ )′~ ( τ ) ~ ( τ )′ ( τ ) (τ )  ( τ )′ (τ )
σp            =      σ12 j (β1 j ι ) 2 + β2 j Ω F2 j β2 j + ι′(β1 j β2 j + β2 j β1 j )Ω F1F2 j + σ ε j σ ε j
                   k
                                                                                                                                      ~
                  ⎛ σ11
                     2 (τ j ) σ12
                               2 (τ j )       K σ12k (τ j ) ⎞                                    ⎛ β11 (τ j ) ⎞                     ⎛ β21 (τ j ) ⎞
                  ⎜ 21                                          ⎟                                ⎜            ⎟                     ⎜~           ⎟
                  ⎜ σ (τ ) σ 2 (τ j )         K σ 22 k (τ j ) ⎟                                  ⎜ β12 (τ j ) ⎟                     ⎜ β22 (τ j ) ⎟
                               22
        (τ j )                                                                         (τ j )                             ~ (τ )
Ω F2             =⎜ 2 j                                                           β1            =⎜                        β2 j     =⎜            ⎟,
                                                         M ⎟⎟
                                                                   ,                                            ,
                                                                                                       M ⎟
                  ⎜ M              M          O
                                                                                                 ⎜            ⎟                     ⎜    M       ⎟
                  ⎜ σ (τ ) σ (τ )             L σ kk            ⎟                                ⎜ β (τ ) ⎟                         ⎜β~          ⎟
                                                     2 (τ j ) ⎠                                                                             τ
                     k 1       k 2
                  ⎝ 2 j        2     j                                                           ⎝  1k    j   ⎠                           (
                                                                                                                                    ⎝ 2k j ⎠   )
                    ⎛ σ11 (τ j ) ⎞                ⎛ σ ε1 (τ j ) ⎞
                    ⎜ 12         ⎟                ⎜              ⎟
                    ⎜ σ12 (τ j ) ⎟                ⎜ σ ε 2 (τ j ) ⎟
                       22
          (τ j )                            (τj )
Ω F1F2             =⎜            ⎟ , and σ ε = ⎜ M ⎟ .
                    ⎜ M ⎟                         ⎜              ⎟
                    ⎜ σkk (τ ) ⎟                  ⎜ σ ε (τ j ) ⎟
                    ⎝  12    j   ⎠                ⎝     k        ⎠

and              σ12 (τ j ) = υ 2F1 (τ j ) ,   σ ii2 (τ j ) = υ 2F2 i (τ j ) ,   σ ij2 (τ j ) = υ 2F2 i F2 j (τ j ) ,   σ12
                                                                                                                         ii
                                                                                                                            (τ j ) = υ 2F1F2 j (τ j ) ,
i,j=1,...,k. The variance of the error term for asset i, at scale j, can be obtained from
equation (25) as σ ε2i (τ j ) = υ 2ri (τ j ) − β 12i (τ j )υ 2F1 (τ j ) − β 22i (τ j )υ 2F2i (τ j ) − 2β 1i (τ j )β 2i (τ j )υ 2F1F2i (τ j ) .

       The above formula allow us to obtain an expression for the marginal VaR, which is
defined as (see, for instance, Jorion, 2001, chapter 7)

                                    ∂VaR 1            1 ∂σ p
                                                            2

                   ∆VaR i =                 = κ (α )                                                                                 (30)
                                     ∂ωi V0          2σ p ∂ωi

where ωi is the share of asset i in the portfolio.

       The marginal VaR quantifies the change in the portfolio value resulting from taking
an additional dollar exposure to a given asset of country i in the portfolio. From expression
(26) and for an equally-weighted portfolio, we have:
                                                                                                                                   13


        ∂σ 2p       1 ⎛⎜ ⎛ k              k
                                             ~      ⎞       ⎛ k ~            k       ⎞~            ⎞
                =         ⎜ ∑ β1 jσ12 + ∑ β2 jσ12jj ⎟ β1i + ⎜ ∑ β2 jσii2 + ∑ β1 jσ12
                                                                                  ii
                                                                                     ⎟ β2i + 2σε2i ⎟            (31)
        ∂ωi         k ⎜⎝ ⎜⎝ j=1         j =1
                                                    ⎟
                                                    ⎠
                                                            ⎜
                                                            ⎝ j=1          j =1
                                                                                     ⎟
                                                                                     ⎠
                                                                                                   ⎟
                                                                                                   ⎠
                                                                                                                               (τ j )
                                                                                    (τ j )               1             ∂σ 2p
       A scale-by-scale marginal VaR can be obtained as ∆VaR                                 = κ(α )          (τ j )
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                         ∂ωi
                                                                                    i
                                                                                                       2σ p

3     Empirical results

3.1    Description of the data

        Data on stock indices of seven emerging countries––Brazil, Chile, Mexico,
Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, and Thailand––in both local and US currency was
obtained from Morgan Stanley. In addition, two proxies of the world market portfolio were
considered: the Emerging Markets and the World Indices, both of which are measured in
US dollars and constructed by Morgan Stanley. The Emerging Markets Index is a free
float-adjusted market capitalization index that consists of 26 emerging market country
indices, whereas the World Index is a free float-adjusted market capitalization index that
consists of 23 developed market country indices. The sample period spans from 1990 to
2004, and returns are measured at a daily frequency. The exchange rate variation is
constructed from the daily returns in local currency and US dollar. In particular, given that
returns are computed in logarithms, the daily exchange rate variation is obtained as the
difference between the return in local currency and the return in US dollars.

        Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of returns in local currency for each country in
the sample, the exchange-rate variation of each country’s currency—expressed in units of
local currency per US dollar––, and statistics of daily returns of the two proxies of the
world market portfolio. As we see, exchange rates stand out for their asymmetry and high
kurtosis. In particular, the most extreme values occurred around the Asian crisis,
particularly for Indonesia, Malaysia and South Korea. Very high volatility of Asian stock
markets was also observed around the same period. The range, a very simple measure of
dispersion, shows that in the sample period the most volatile stock markets were those of
Brazil and Malaysia, whereas the most volatile exchange rate markets were those of
Indonesia and Malaysia. In contrast, Chile stood out as one of the countries with the lowest
volatility in both the stock and exchange rate markets.

3.2    Estimates of sensitivities to risk factors

        We use two approaches to estimating the parameters of the international CAPM
(ICAPM). One of them consists of obtaining parameter estimates by linear regression
analysis applied to the recomposed-DWT crystals of each time scale. This is the procedure
that has been commonly used in empirical applications of wavelet analysis (e. g, Ramsey
and Lampart 1998; Norsworthy, Li, and Gorener 2000; Gençay, Selçuk, and Whitcher
2002, chapter 4). Ramsey (1999) carries out a sampling analysis of distributional properties
of regression-parameter estimates in the context of time-scale decomposition. He concludes
that slopes coefficients at the trend and oscillatory components of the data behave like
Gaussian random variables. In addition, Ramsey finds that the level of correlation between
                                                                                                             14

regressions coefficients estimates is very low across time scales. These two results are
important because we can rely on the statistical machinery of linear-regression models.

        The second approach we use is one based on wavelet-variance analysis, which
determines estimates for the slopes and the goodness of fit of the model (R2) by the
MODWT-variance and covariance formulas presented in Section 2.3. In what follows, we
will refer to the estimates obtained using the first approach as “regression-based”, whereas
the estimates from the second approach will be labeled as “MODWT-based”.

        In order to obtain the regression-based estimates, we first compute the multi-
resolution decomposition (MRD) of each time series, namely, the return on the country
index, the return on the proxy of the world market portfolio, and the return on the exchange
rate of the domestic currency against the US dollar. We then run linear regressions of the
recomposed crystals––that is, the time-series reconstructed from the crystals––for each time
scale. The MRD of each time series is computed using the discrete-wavelet transform
(DWT), so that the recomposed crystals are orthogonal across scales.

         Figure 1 depicts MRD for the returns on the Thai index (in local currency) and the
exchange rate of the Thai baht against the US dollar. As we see, most variation of the
original return series (which are labeled as “sum”) is captured at the first three scales. That
is, at a 2-16 day horizon. Specifically, for the exchange rate return the energy contained at
scales 1-3 is 85.7 percent, whereas for the return on the domestic index, it reaches 83.1
percent.9

        Panels (a) and (b) of Tables 2 show our regression-based estimates for each proxy of
the world market portfolio: the Emerging Markets and World MSCI indices. Countries’
sensitivities to the world market portfolio and the exchange rate of the domestic currency
against the US dollar are reported for the raw data and for scales 1 through 6 (i.e., 2-128
day dynamics). In Panel (a), we observe that the country with the greatest sensitivity to the
world market portfolio (Emerging Markets Index) in the raw data is Brazil, followed by
South Korea and Thailand. All countries, except for Brazil, have a positive slope on the
exchange-risk factor in the raw data (for Chile, the slope is statistically insignificant). In
other words, the performance of the Brazilian stock market is inversely correlated with a
depreciation of the real against the US dollar. In other words, Brazilian stocks behave, on
average, like a hedge for a depreciating real. The same phenomenon is observed at scales 1-
3 and 5-6, being the negative correlation strongest at scale 6. That is, at the trend-
component of the time series.

        Chile’s stock index shows no sensitivity to the exchange rate variation at the 2-8 day
horizon, but, similarly to Brazil, exhibits an inverse correlation with it at scales 5 and 6. A
similar pattern to Chile’s is that observed for Mexico. By contrast, the Asian stock indices
tend to exhibit a more homogeneous behavior with respect to the exchange rate-risk factor

9
  The energy in a given crystal is calculated as the sum of squares of all of its elements over the sum of
squares of all observations in the original time series. One appealing characteristic of the DWT is that it is an
energy preserving transform. This means that the energy in all the DWT coefficients equals the energy in the
original time series. (This also holds for the MODWT).
                                                                                             15

across scales. Indeed, at almost all scales, the country indices exhibit a positive and
statistically significant exposure to exchange-rate risk. A graphical representation of the
linear models being estimated at different time scales is depicted in Figure 2 for Thailand.
         With respect to market risk, sensitivities tend to be higher at the upper scales of the
data, particularly for both scales 5 and 6. In addition, the good-of-fit of the regression
models (R2) reaches its peak at either scale 5 or 6, depending on the country. In other
words, the predictions of our ICAPM tend to be more meaningful for a medium- or long-
term horizon. A similar conclusion is reached by Gencay at al. (2003, 2005) for the single-
country CAPM.

         In Panel (b) of Table 2, we have estimation results when using the World Index as a
proxy for the world market portfolio. We observe, in general, that the country indices
exhibit less sensitivity to market risk, but more and positive sensitivity to exchange-rate
risk. An exception is Mexico, whose stock market appears to be more integrated with those
of the developed countries comprising the MSCI World index. For instance, at scale 5, the
beta on the world market portfolio reaches its peak at 1.02. In turn, Brazil’s stock market
performance is again inversely correlated with the exchange rate variation in the raw data,
but to a lesser extent than in Panel (a). At scales 1-3 and 5, the slope on the exchange-rate
risk is small and statistically insignificant, whereas at scale 4 it is both positive and
statistically significant. Only at scale 6, does the sensitivity to exchange-rate risk show the
same negative sign observed in the raw data.

       With respect to the good-of-fit of the ICAPM, the R2 are in general substantially
lower than those reported in Panel (a). This finding suggests that the Emerging Markets
index is a more suitable approximation to the world market portfolio than the World Index.
As noted earlier, this seems indicative of a lower degree of stock market integration of the
sampled countries with those of the countries comprising the World Index.

        Table 3, Panels (a) and (b), shows the estimates using the MODWT variance-
covariance analysis described in Section 2.3. As we see, we can draw similar conclusions to
the ones reported above. However, the magnitudes of the estimates differ, particularly so
for the upper scales 4-6. This is not surprising for two reasons. First, the regression-based
estimates are obtained from recomposed crystals, where the quality of reconstruction will
affect the accuracy of the parameter estimates. Second, the DWT has practical limitations
when compared with non-decimated wavelet transforms, as previously discussed.
Interestingly, the R2 yielded by the two methods are very similar in all cases.

        In order to further investigate how the magnitude of the parameter estimates are
affected by the method utilized, we aggregated time scales to reduce the reconstruction
error of the DWT. Tables 4 and 5 report our results. Scales 1-2 measure the dynamics of
returns over 2-8 days, whereas scales 1-4, the dynamics over 2-32 days. As mentioned
earlier, most variation in returns is captured at the three first scales. Panel (a) of Table 4
shows reports the estimation results when the proxy of the world market portfolio is the
Emerging Markets Index. Our conclusions are similar to those reported before: Brazil
exhibits high market risk and the performance of its stock market is inversely correlated
with the variation of the real/US dollar parity. Both Chile and Mexico’s stock indices
present comparatively little sensitivity to exchange market risk and more moderate market
                                                                                             16

risk. Among Asian countries, South Korea exhibits the highest market and exchange risks
(scales 1-2 and scales 1-4, respectively). When looking at the MODWT estimates of Panel
(a) of Table 5, we see that the magnitudes of the estimated slopes are almost identical to the
regression-based estimates of Table 4. Clearly, the discrepancies between the two methods
are more noticeably at scales 1-2, given that at scales 1-4 most of the variation (energy) of
the original return series is captured by the recomposed crystals.

        Panels (b) of Tables 4 and 5 report analogous results when using the Word Index as
a proxy of the world market portfolio. As we concluded earlier, all indices at scales 1-2 and
scales 1-4 present lower sensitivity to the World than to the Emerging Market index, with
the exception of Mexico. In particular, at scales 1-2, both Indonesia and Malaysia presents
low sensitivity to market risk. In general, Asian countries display higher sensitivities to
exchange rate than to market risk when using the World Index. It is worth noticing that at
scales 1-2, the stock indices of Latin American countries have greater slopes on the World
index than those of the Asian countries. In other words, the former appear as relatively
more integrated with developed markets than the latter.

3.3    Value at Risk estimations

        One application of the time-scale decomposition of returns is to quantify the value
at risk (VaR) of a portfolio for different investment horizons. Table 6 presents 95-percent
VaR estimates for both proxies of the world market portfolio. We assume an equally-
weighted portfolio⎯whose value is measured in US dollars⎯comprised by the seven
country indices. We report VaR estimates for the raw data and for different time scales,
using both the regression-based and the MODWT estimates of risk-factor sensitivities and
variance-covariance matrices of risk factors. If we invested US$100, we have that, with a
95-percent confidence level, our portfolio loss in one day would be less than or equal to
US$2.25, for the raw data, when using the Emerging Markets (EM) index as the proxy of
the world market portfolio. Such a potential loss declines to US$1.85 when the world
market portfolio is the World Index.

        When decomposing the data into time scales, we see that potential losses are greater
at shorter-time horizons (i.e., higher frequencies of the data). For instance, at scale 1 (i.e.,
2-4 days), the 95-percent VaR is US$1.33 and US$1.34 in one day for the MODWT and
regression-based estimates, respectively, when using the EM index as the proxy of the
world market portfolio. Such figures drop to $1.095 and $1.1, respectively, when using the
World index. By contrast, at the lower frequencies of the stock indices (i.e., trend
component), potential daily losses substantially decrease. For instance, at scale 6 (i.e., 64-
128 days), the MODWT estimate of the 95-percent VaR is only US$0.386 per day, when
using the EM index as the proxy of the world market portfolio, and US$0.341 per day,
when using the World index. Such findings are confirmed when aggregating time scales.
For instance, at scales 1-4 (i.e., 2-32 days), the 95-percent daily VaR is relatively close to
that for the raw data. In other words, the contribution of the upper time scales to risk is
relatively marginal.

       Finally, Panels (a) and (b) of Table 7 present estimates of 95-percent marginal VaR
for each country in the sample, for the raw data and for scales 1 through 6, using both
                                                                                            17

proxies of the world market portfolio. For the sake of brevity, we only present estimates
based on the MODWT procedure. (Regression-based estimates are roughly equal). In
general, we see that the countries that contribute the most to risk are Brazil, Mexico, and
Indonesia. For instance for the raw data, Panel (a)—where the EM index is the proxy of the
world market portfolio––shows that if we increased our exposure to the Brazilian index in
US$1, the VaR would rise in 2.4 cents in one day, at the 95 confidence level. Moreover, we
see that at higher frequencies of the data, the marginal VaR is greatest. For instance, for the
Brazilian index, Panel (a) shows that the marginal VaR amounts to 1.6 cents for scale 1, but
to only 0.3 cents at scale 6.

   4   Conclusions

    In this article, we concentrated on a wavelet-based international asset pricing model
(ICAPM). Previous studies have stressed the importance of exchange rate risk, given that in
practice there can be considerable departures from the purchasing power parity. From a
parsimonious ICAPM, which postulates that an investment in a country portfolio is subject
to two sources of risk, namely, the country index’s sensitivity to a global portfolio and the
performance of the domestic currency relative to the foreign currency, we derive an
analytical formula for time-scale value at risk and marginal value at risk (VaR) of a
portfolio.

        We apply our methodology to stock indices of seven emerging economies belonging
to Latin America and Asia––namely, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Indonesia, South Korea,
Malaysia, and Thailand. Our main conclusions can be summarized as follows. First, the
estimation results depend upon the choice of the world market portfolio. In particular, the
stock markets of the sampled countries appear to be more integrated with other emerging
countries than with developed ones. Second, value at risk depends on the time horizon we
consider. In the short run, potential losses are greater than in the long run. Third, some
stock indices are more likely to cause portfolio losses than others. In particular, both Brazil
and Indonesia appear as risky investments whereas both Chile and Malaysia, as safe.

References

Adler, M., and B. Dumas, 1983, International portfolio choice and corporate finance: A
synthesis, Journal of Finance 38(3), 925-984.

Bollerslev, T., Engle, R., Wooldridge, J., 1988. A Capital-Asset Pricing Model with Time-
Varying Covariances. Journal of Political Economy 96, 116-131.

Connor, J., and R. Rossiter, 2005. Wavelet Transforms and Commodity Prices. Studies in
Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 9(1). Article 6, 20 pages.

Copeland, T., Weston, J., Shastri, K., 2004. Financial Theory and Corporate Policy. Fourth
edition. Pearson Addison Wesley.

De Santis, G., and G. Bruno, 1998. How big is the risk premium for currency risk? Journal
of Financial Economics 49, 375-412.
                                                                                       18



Dumas, B., 1994. A Test of the International CAPM Using Business Cycles Indicators as
Instrumental Variables. In The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Jeffrey A. Frankel
ed., pp. 23-50, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

______________and B. Solnik, 1995. The world price of foreign exchange risk, Journal of
Finance 2, 445-479.

Engle R., Lilien, D., Robins, R., 1987. Estimating Time-Varying Risk Premia in the Term
Structure: the ARCH-M Model. Econometrica 55, 391-407.

Fama, E., French, K., 1992. The Cross-section of Expected Returns. Journal of Finance 47,
427-465.

Gençay, R., Whitcher, B., Selçuk, F., 2001. Differentiating Intraday Seasonalities through
Wavelet Multi-Scaling. Physica A, 289, 543–556.

___________________________________, 2002. An Introduction to Wavelets and Other
Filtering Methods in Finance and Economics. Academic Press, San Diego.

____________________________________, 2003. Systematic Risk and Time Scales.
Quantitative Finance 3, 108-116.
____________________________________, 2005. Multiscale Systematic Risk. Journal of
International Money and Finance 24(1), 55-70.

Johnston, J., 1984. Econometric Methods. Third edition. McGraw-Hill.

Jorion, P., 2001. Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk.
McGraw Hill, second edition.

Karuppiah, J., Los, C., 2005. Wavelet multiresolution analysis of high-frequency Asian FX
rates, Summer 1997. International Review of Financial Analysis 14(2), 211-246.
Quantitative Issues in Finance

Kothari, S., Shanken, J., 1998. On defense of beta, in: J. Stern and D. Chew (Eds.), The
Revolution in Corporate Finance, third edition. Blackwell Publishers Inc., pp. 52-57.

Lin, Shinn-Juh, Stevenson, M., 2001. Wavelet Analysis of the Cost-of-Carry Model.
Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 5(1), 87-102.

Megginson, W., 1997. Corporate Finance Theory. Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers
Inc.

Norsworthy J., Li, D., Gorener, R., 2000. Wavelet–Based Analysis of Time Series: An
Export from Engineering to Finance. Manuscript presented at the 2000 IEEE International
Engineering Management Society Conference.
                                                                                             19

Percival, D., Walden, A., 2000. Wavelets Analysis for Time Series Analysis. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, U.K.

Ramsey, J., Usikov, D., Zaslavsky, G., 1995. An Analysis of US Stock Price Behavior
using Wavelets. Fractals 3, 377–389.

Ramsey, J., Zhang, Z., 1996. The Application of Waveform Dictionaries to Stock Market
Data, in: Kravstov, Y.A, Kadtke, J.B. (Eds.), Predictability of Dynamical Systems, Vol. 69.
Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 189-205.

______________________, 1997. The Analysis of Foreign Exchange Rate Data using
Waveform Dictionaries. Journal of Empirical Finance, 4, 341–372.

Ramsey J., Lampart, C., 1998. The Decomposition of Economic Relationships by Time
Scale Using Wavelets: Expenditure and Income. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics &
Econometrics 3(1), 23–42.

Ramsey, J., 1999. Regression over Timescale Decompositions: A Sampling Analysis of
Distributional Properties. Economic Systems Research 11(2), 163-183.

Ramsey, J., 2002. Wavelets in Economics and Finance: Past and Future. Studies in
Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics 6(3), 1-29.

Sercu, P., and Uppal, R., 1995. International Financial Markets and the Firm. South-
Western College Publishing.

Solnik, B. 1974. The International Pricing of Risk: An Empirical Investigation of the World
Capital Structure. Journal of Finance 29(2), 365-378.

Stulz, R., 1981. A model of international asset pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 9,
383-406.

_________, 1992. International portfolio choice and asset pricing: An integrative survey.
Working paper, Ohio State University.

Whitcher, B., 2004. Wavelet-Based Estimation for Seasonal Long-Memory Processes.
Technometrics 46 (2), 225-238.
                                                                                                                    20

                                                       Tables

              Table 1 Descriptive statistics of stock returns and exchange rate variation: 1990-2004

                                        Country index returns in local currency
                      Mean     Std. Dev Minimum Maximum Range Skewness                    Kurtosis      Q1          Q3
      Brazil          0.00       0.03      –0.22         0.25         0.47       0.43      7.78        –0.01       0.02
      Chile           0.00       0.01      –0.06         0.09         0.15       0.23      3.95        –0.01       0.01
     Mexico           0.00       0.02      –0.13         0.12         0.25       0.04       4.71       –0.01       0.01
    Indonesia         0.00       0.02      –0.19         0.17         0.36       0.10      13.27       –0.01       0.01
   South Korea        0.00       0.02      –0.13         0.11         0.25       0.15       3.36       –0.01       0.01
    Malaysia          0.00       0.02      –0.24         0.23         0.47       0.75      36.74       –0.01       0.01
    Thailand          0.00       0.02      –0.10         0.21         0.32       0.87       9.17       –0.01       0.01
                                      Exchange rate variation against the US dollar
                      Mean     Std. Dev Minimum Maximum Range Skewness                    Kurtosis       Q1         Q3
      Brazil          0.00       0.01      –0.15         0.12         0.27       –1.67     27.15       –0.01       0.00
      Chile           0.00       0.01      –0.12         0.05         0.17      –2.94      94.26       0.00        0.00
     Mexico           0.00       0.01      –0.19         0.16         0.34      –2.60     123.37       0.00        0.00
    Indonesia         0.00       0.02      –0.24         0.20         0.44       –1.78     60.29        0.00       0.00
   South Korea        0.00       0.01      –0.14         0.20         0.33       0.87     159.89        0.00       0.00
    Malaysia          0.00       0.01      –0.36         0.19         0.55      –13.58    860.92        0.00       0.00
    Thailand          0.00       0.01      –0.07         0.06         0.13       –0.48     39.47        0.00       0.00
                                       MSCI Global index returns in US dollars
                      Mean     Std. Dev Minimum Maximum Range Skewness                    Kurtosis       Q1         Q3
Emerging Markets       0.00      0.01      –0.07         0.06         0.14       –0.52     4.09         0.00       0.01
     World             0.00      0.01      –0.05         0.05         0.10       –0.09     3.21         0.00       0.00
   Observations       3,824

 Notes: (1) The data were obtained from Morgan Stanley. (2) Stock index returns and exchange rate variations are measure
 at a daily frequency. (3) Q1 and Q3 stand for the first and third quartile, respectively. (4) The range is a measure of
 dispersion that is calculated as the difference between the maximum and the minimum. (5) The MSCI Emerging
 Markets Index is a free float-adjusted market capitalization index that is designed to measure equity market
 performance in the global emerging markets. The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of the following 26
 emerging market country indices: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt,
 Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,
 Poland, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and Venezuela. In turn, the MSCI World Index is a
 free float-adjusted market capitalization index that is designed to measure global developed market equity
 performance. The MSCI World Index consists of the following 23 developed market country indices:
 Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland,
 Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
 United Kingdom and the United States.
                                                                                                  21

                       Table 2 Regression-based estimates of international CAPM

                       (a) World market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index

                      Brazil      Chile       Mexico     Indonesia      Korea      Malaysia    Thailand
Raw data    β̂1        1.50        0.45         0.81        0.47         0.93          0.65      0.87

           β̂ 2       –0.34        –0.01        0.06        0.19         0.39          0.12      0.28

           t βˆ       44.41        28.12       38.22       15.93        31.41          27.15    29.86
                  1

           t βˆ       –11.40       –0.45        2.49       10.31        10.71          4.11      5.63
                  2
                  2
           R           0.34        0.18         0.31        0.10         0.25          0.17      0.21
Scale 1     β̂1        1.52        0.38         0.76        0.30         0.99          0.63      0.76

           β̂ 2       –0.21        0.00         0.08        0.20         0.42          0.04      0.14

           t βˆ       39.60        22.88       30.46        9.42        27.22          22.69    23.26
                  1

           t βˆ       –6.49        –0.18        3.77       10.79        10.53          1.47      2.82
                  2
                  2
           R           0.29        0.12         0.23        0.06         0.20          0.12      0.13
Scale 2     β̂1        1.50        0.49         0.81        0.43         1.01          0.58      0.85

           β̂ 2       –0.19        0.03         0.06        0.24         0.33          0.07      0.46

           t βˆ       46.12        30.33       36.44       13.97        35.15          23.48    28.21
                  1

           t βˆ       –5.88        0.91         1.86       12.39        10.57          2.32      9.37
                  2

           R2          0.36        0.20         0.28        0.10         0.27          0.13      0.21
Scale 3     β̂1        1.40        0.46         0.86        0.60         0.91          0.75      0.97

           β̂ 2       –0.20        0.16         0.05        0.15         0.54          0.31      0.42

           t βˆ       48.00        31.07       47.42       22.69        37.69          37.03    38.44
                  1

           t βˆ       –5.46        4.05         1.96        9.21        16.31          12.62     8.49
                  2

           R2          0.38        0.22         0.43        0.16         0.37          0.33      0.33
Scale 4     β̂1        1.12        0.43         0.91        0.68         0.97          0.59      0.94

           β̂ 2        0.17        –0.18       –0.13        0.06         0.08          0.04      0.23

           t βˆ       34.69        25.09       52.04       24.08        38.75          27.42    34.90
                  1

           t βˆ        4.67        –4.38       –4.08        2.71         1.38          1.51      4.05
                  2
                  2
           R           0.28        0.14         0.42        0.14         0.32          0.17      0.26
Scale 5     β̂1        1.78        0.51         0.86        0.35         0.46          0.69      1.18

           β̂ 2       –0.37        –0.18        0.08        0.28         0.75          0.40     –0.13

           t βˆ       47.58        31.95       52.76       15.90        21.57          39.78    42.16
                  1

           t βˆ       –7.33        –4.65        4.21       16.81        17.14          20.10    –2.20
                  2
                  2
           R           0.37        0.21         0.45        0.15         0.18          0.37      0.34
Scale 6     β̂1        1.62        0.65         0.93        1.12         0.79          0.58      0.85

           β̂ 2       –0.58        –0.60       –0.37        0.36         0.71          –0.05     0.69

           t βˆ       57.77        38.98       57.17       39.80        39.25          28.86    34.28
                  1

           t βˆ       –27.50      –16.32       –13.74      17.77        21.04          –1.42    14.79
                  2

           R2          0.47        0.29         0.46        0.34         0.47          0.18      0.31
                                                                                                              22

                                   (b) World market portfolio is the World MSCI Index

                          Brazil         Chile         Mexico        Indonesia     Korea      Malaysia     Thailand
Raw data        β̂1        0.92          0.37            0.86           0.20        0.48         0.31        0.43

                β̂ 2      –0.18          0.08            0.25           0.23        0.55         0.21        0.53

               t βˆ       18.86          18.03          32.73           5.38        12.05        9.90        10.97
                      1

               t βˆ       –5.00          2.29            9.87          12.41        13.88        6.78        9.72
                      2

                R2         0.09          0.08            0.25           0.05        0.09         0.04        0.06
Scale 1         β̂1        0.86          0.29            0.80          –0.02        0.13         0.10        0.10

                β̂ 2       0.03          0.04            0.21           0.22        0.55         0.11        0.29

               t βˆ
                      1   17.67          15.23          29.41          –0.60        2.90         3.00        2.51
               t βˆ
                      2    0.70          1.41            9.85          11.96        12.92        3.37        5.33
                R2         0.08          0.06            0.21           0.04         0.04        0.01        0.01
Scale 2         β̂1        0.96          0.43            0.86           0.22         0.59        0.32        0.48

                β̂ 2      –0.05          0.11            0.26           0.27        0.41         0.14        0.67

               t βˆ
                      1   20.74          20.73          32.29           5.73        15.17       10.05        12.37
               t βˆ
                      2   –1.34          3.01            8.04          13.86        11.60        4.33        13.03
                R2         0.10          0.11            0.24           0.06         0.09        0.03         0.08
Scale 3         β̂1        0.84          0.42            0.90           0.35         0.73        0.48         0.74

                β̂ 2       0.03          0.32            0.39           0.22        0.79         0.48        0.84

               t βˆ
                      1   18.92          21.59          40.20          10.16        22.48       16.88        21.39
               t βˆ
                      2    0.79          7.51           14.82          13.17        22.68       18.03        15.66
                R2         0.09          0.13           0.36            0.08         0.24        0.15         0.17
Scale 4         β̂1        0.67          0.37           0.93            0.54         0.93        0.67         0.67

                β̂ 2       0.49          0.04            0.12           0.16        0.62         0.10        0.60

               t βˆ
                      1   14.13          15.75          34.06          13.41        26.28       21.91        16.60
               t βˆ
                      2   12.68          0.99            3.14           6.47        10.71        3.84        9.60
                R2         0.11          0.06            0.24           0.06         0.20        0.12        0.09
Scale 5         β̂1        1.01          0.41            1.02           0.16         0.69        0.88        1.27

                β̂ 2      –0.04          –0.01           0.30           0.33        0.74         0.41        0.44

               t βˆ
                      1   15.65          17.20          42.70           5.19        23.08       34.81        31.81
               t βˆ
                      2   –0.66          –0.19          14.31          19.42        17.17       20.08        7.18
                R2         0.06           0.07          0.36            0.10         0.19        0.33        0.24
Scale 6         β̂1        1.46           0.52          0.89            0.93         1.10        0.35        0.54

                β̂ 2      –0.46          –0.48          –0.15           0.35        0.69        –0.07        0.77

               t βˆ
                      1   32.79          21.00          36.55          22.50        43.58       12.29        14.43
               t βˆ
                      2   –17.99        –11.30          –4.84          15.61        21.24       –1.71        14.43
                R2         0.23          0.11           0.26            0.18         0.50        0.04         0.14
   Note: The wavelet function is a symmmlet, s8. Scale 1: 2-4 days, scale 2: 4-8 days, scale 3: 8-16 day, scale 4:
   16-32 days, scale 5: 32-64 days, and scale 6: 64-128 days.
                                                                                                        23

                         Table 3           MODWT-based estimates of international CAPM

                  Brazil           Chile            Mexico         Indonesia        Korea    Malaysia   Thailand
                            (a) World market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index
 Scale 1   β̂1    1.52              0.38              0.74            0.31           0.98      0.66          0.74

           β̂ 2   –0.21            –0.03              0.05            0.21           0.44      0.03          0.25
           R2     0.28              0.12              0.19            0.06           0.19      0.12          0.13
 Scale 2   β̂1    1.48              0.47              0.86            0.45           1.01      0.58          0.87

           β̂ 2   –0.17             0.07              0.15            0.19           0.39      0.16          0.21
           R2     0.36              0.19              0.33            0.09           0.29      0.15          0.20
 Scale 3   β̂1    1.37              0.46              0.84            0.59           0.97      0.71          0.98

           β̂ 2   –0.02             0.12              0.03            0.22           0.36      0.22          0.62
           R2     0.37              0.22              0.41            0.17           0.36      0.28          0.33
 Scale 4   β̂1    1.28              0.43              0.93            0.53           0.86      0.64          0.99

           β̂ 2   –0.27            –0.13             –0.08            0.16           0.11      0.20          0.30
           R2     0.28              0.15              0.40            0.12           0.27      0.21          0.30
 Scale 5   β̂1    1.42              0.55              0.95            0.44           0.65      0.69          1.25

           β̂ 2   –0.52            –0.49              0.05            0.10           0.79      0.50      –0.08
           R2     0.37              0.20              0.49            0.09           0.26      0.36          0.39
 Scale 6   β̂1    1.68              0.93              0.84            1.14           0.84      0.42          0.85

           β̂ 2   –0.82            –0.40             –0.02           –0.07           0.30      0.00      –0.16
           R2     0.45               0.48             0.41             0.29           0.37     0.12          0.23
                                   (b) World market portfolio is the World MSCI Index
Scale 1    β̂1    0.85               0.30             0.80             0.00           0.14     0.09          0.06

           β̂ 2   0.02              0.02              0.18            0.23           0.57      0.10          0.40
           R2     0.07              0.06              0.20            0.04           0.04      0.00          0.02
Scale 2    β̂1    0.95              0.42              0.87            0.21           0.57      0.31          0.50

           β̂ 2   –0.03             0.13              0.36            0.22           0.52      0.24          0.44
           R2     0.11              0.11              0.28            0.05           0.12      0.05          0.07
Scale 3    β̂1    0.88              0.40              0.88            0.34           0.75      0.51          0.74

           β̂ 2   0.19              0.29              0.30            0.29           0.55      0.39          1.02
           R2     0.10              0.12              0.32            0.09           0.18      0.12          0.17
Scale 4    β̂1    0.71              0.38              0.97            0.29           0.84      0.65          0.81

           β̂ 2   0.04              0.07              0.20            0.22           0.48      0.31          0.70
           R2     0.05              0.07              0.27            0.05           0.17      0.14          0.14
Scale 5    β̂1    0.99              0.40              0.96            0.39           0.87      0.70          1.20

           β̂ 2   –0.28            –0.30              0.27            0.12           0.73      0.52          0.28
           R2     0.10              0.07              0.31            0.05           0.26      0.26          0.23
Scale 6    β̂1    1.87              0.86              0.85            1.19           1.29      0.28          0.66

           β̂ 2   –0.70            –0.11              0.22            0.03           0.32     –0.08          0.05
           R2     0.25              0.21              0.24            0.16           0.42      0.03          0.07
                                                                                                          24

                          Table 4 Aggregating time-scales: regression-based estimates

                        Brazil         Chile         Mexico        Indonesia      Korea      Malaysia   Thailand
                        (a) World market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index
Raw data      β̂1        1.50          0.45           0.81           0.47             0.93     0.65       0.87

             β̂ 2       –0.34          –0.01          0.06           0.19             0.39     0.12       0.28

             t βˆ       44.41          28.12         38.22           15.93        31.41       27.15      29.86
                    1

             t βˆ       –11.40         –0.45          2.49           10.31        10.71        4.11       5.63
                    2

             R2          0.34          0.18           0.31           0.10             0.25     0.17       0.21
Scales 1-2    β̂1        1.51          0.43           0.78           0.36             1.00     0.61       0.80

             β̂ 2       –0.20          0.01           0.08           0.22             0.38     0.05       0.27

             t βˆ       42.02          25.98         32.83           11.30        29.98       22.97      25.30
                    1

             t βˆ       –6.27          0.18           3.12           11.41        10.48        1.78       5.41
                    2

             R2          0.32          0.15           0.25           0.07             0.22     0.13       0.16
Scales 1-4    β̂1        1.45          0.43           0.81           0.44             0.98     0.64       0.85

             β̂ 2       –0.18          0.01           0.06           0.20             0.40     0.11       0.30

             t βˆ       42.54          26.91         36.77           14.46        31.85       25.86      28.54
                    1

             t βˆ       –5.39          0.35           2.54           10.50        10.90        3.71       5.87
                    2
                    2
             R           0.32          0.16           0.29           0.09             0.25     0.16       0.20
                                 (b) World market portfolio is the World MSCI Index
Raw data      β̂1        0.92          0.37           0.86           0.20             0.48     0.31       0.43

             β̂ 2       –0.18          0.08           0.25           0.23             0.55     0.21       0.53

             t βˆ       18.86          18.03         32.73           5.38         12.05        9.90      10.97
                    1

             t βˆ       –5.00          2.29           9.87           12.41        13.88        6.78       9.72
                    2

             R2          0.09          0.08           0.25           0.05             0.09     0.04       0.06
Scales 1-2    β̂1        0.90          0.35           0.83           0.07             0.31     0.18       0.25

             β̂ 2        0.00          0.06           0.22           0.24             0.50     0.12       0.44

             t βˆ       18.83          17.47         30.55           1.94             7.20     5.64       6.32
                    1

             t βˆ       –0.05          1.98           9.15           12.75        12.45        3.73       8.36
                    2

             R2          0.09          0.08           0.22           0.04             0.05     0.01       0.03
Scales 1-4    β̂1        0.88          0.36           0.85           0.16             0.44     0.28       0.38

             β̂ 2        0.04          0.09           0.24           0.24             0.56     0.20       0.52

             t βˆ       18.61          18.06         32.48           4.35         11.00        8.74       9.81
                    1

             t βˆ        0.97          2.64           9.56           12.44        14.11        6.39       9.63
                    2
                    2
             R           0.08          0.08           0.25           0.05             0.08     0.03       0.05
                                                                                                                                25

                                  Table 5 Aggregating time-scales: MODWT-based estimates

                               Brazil          Chile           Mexico          Indonesia        Korea       Malaysia     Thailand
                                (a) World market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index
   Scales 1-2        β̂1        1.51            0.42            0.79             0.37           0.99            0.62       0.80

                     β̂ 2       –0.20           0.00            0.08             0.20           0.41            0.07       0.24
                     R2         0.31            0.15            0.23             0.07           0.22            0.13       0.15
   Scales 1-4        β̂1        1.45            0.43            0.81             0.43           0.97            0.65       0.86

                     β̂ 2       –0.18           0.01            0.06             0.20           0.39            0.11       0.30
                     R2         0.31            0.16            0.27             0.09           0.24            0.16       0.19
                                        (b) World market portfolio is the World MSCI Index
   Scales 1-2        β̂1        0.89            0.35            0.83             0.09           0.32            0.18       0.25

                     β̂ 2       0.01            0.06            0.23             0.23           0.55            0.15       0.42
                     R2         0.08            0.08            0.23             0.04           0.06            0.02       0.03
   Scales 1-4        β̂1        0.87            0.36            0.85             0.15           0.44            0.28       0.38

                     β̂ 2       0.03            0.08            0.24             0.24           0.56            0.20       0.53
                     R2         0.08            0.08            0.24             0.05           0.08            0.03       0.05

                            Table 6            95-percent VaR computations for a USD 100-investment

                                          MODWT-based estimates                    Regression-based estimates
                                       EM portfolio   World portfolio            EM portfolio     World portfolio
                Raw data                 2.249             1.853                   2.249                1.853
                Scale 1                  1.332             1.095                   1.341                1.101
                Scale 2                  1.178             1.000                   1.134                0.964
                Scale 3                  1.024             0.857                   1.057                0.896
                Scale 4                  0.623             0.527                   0.611                0.509
                Scale 5                  0.434             0.377                   0.462                0.395
                Scale 6                  0.386             0.341                   0.389                0.343
                Scales 1-4               2.129             1.759                   2.121                1.750
                Scales 1-2               1.760             1.453                   1.679                1.421

                  Table 7               MODWT-based estimates of 95-percent marginal VaR (in US dollars)

                  Brazil            Chile         Mexico           Indonesia        Korea              Malaysia        Thailand
                                 (a) World market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index
Raw data           0.024              0.007          0.025              0.031         0.019             0.014           0.015
Scale 1            0.016              0.004          0.017              0.021         0.013             0.010           0.009
Scale 2            0.011              0.004          0.035              0.016         0.011             0.007           0.008
Scale 3            0.009              0.003          0.030              0.014         0.008             0.006           0.007
Scale 4            0.006              0.002          0.007              0.007         0.004             0.004           0.004
Scale 5            0.004              0.001          0.008              0.005         0.003             0.003           0.003
Scale 6            0.003              0.001          0.008              0.004         0.002             0.001           0.002
                                         (b) World market portfolio is the World MSCI Index
Raw data           0.026              0.006            0.031           0.038            0.020           0.015           0.015
Scale 1            0.017              0.004            0.020           0.025            0.014           0.009           0.009
Scale 2            0.012              0.003            0.036           0.019            0.010           0.007           0.008
Scale 3            0.009              0.002            0.033           0.017            0.008           0.007           0.006
Scale 4            0.008              0.002            0.008           0.008            0.004           0.004           0.004
Scale 5            0.006              0.001            0.009           0.007            0.002           0.004           0.003
Scale 6            0.004              0.001            0.008           0.005            0.002           0.001           0.002
                                                                                                                             26

                         Figure 1                Multi-resolution decomposition (MRD) of Thai data

                   Thai baht/US dollar-exchange rate variation                Return on Thai stock index in local currency



         sum                                                        sum



          D1                                                        D1



          D2                                                        D2



          D3                                                        D3



          D4                                                        D4



          D5                                                        D5



          D6                                                        D6



          D7                                                        D7



          S7                                                        S7




               0            1000        2000         3000                 0            1000          2000       3000




         Figure 2                  Regression-based estimates of market and exchange rate risk for Thailand
                                      Raw data                                             Scale 1




                                       Scale 3                                             Scale 5




Notes to Figures 1 and 2: The time period is 1990-2004. Returns are logarithmic and measured at a daily
frequency. The data source is Morgan Stanley. The wavelet function is a symmmlet, s8. Scale 1: 2-4 days,
scale 2: 4-8 days, scale 3: 8-16 days, scale 4: 16-32 days, scale 5: 32-64 days, and scale 6: 64-128 days. In
Figure 2, the world market portfolio is the Emerging Markets MSCI Index.
