NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUDDEN STOPS AND IMF-SUPPORTED PROGRAMS
Barry Eichengreen
Poonam Gupta
Ashoka Mody
Working Paper 12235
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12235
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

Prepared for the Interamerican Seminar on Macroeconomics, Rio de Janiero, December 3-4, 2005. The first
author is with the University of California, Berkeley, while the second and third authors are with the
International Monetary Fund. We thank Mohammed Dairi, Matthew Fisher, Marianne Schulze-Ghattas,
Jeromin Zettelmeyer and other colleagues at the IMF for comments and Sudarat Ananchotikul and Anna
Unigovskaya for research assistance. The views expressed in this Working Paper are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF or IMF policy. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Barry Eichengreen, Poonam Gupta and Ashoka Mody. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Sudden Stops and IMF-Supported Programs
Barry Eichengreen, Poonam Gupta and Ashoka Mody
NBER Working Paper No. 12235
May 2006
JEL No. F02, F32, F34
ABSTRACT
Could a high-access, quick-disbursing “insurance facility” in the IMF help to reduce the incidence
of sharp interruptions in capital flows (“sudden stops”)? We contribute to the debate on this question
by analyzing the impact of conventional IMF-supported programs on the incidence of sudden stops.
Correcting for the non-random assignment of programs, we find that sudden stops are fewer and
generally less severe when an IMF arrangement exists and that this form of “insurance” works best
for countries with strong fundamentals. In contrast there is no evidence that a Fund-supported
program attenuates the output effects of capital account reversals if these nonetheless occur.
Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.berkeley.edu
Poonam Gupta
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
pgupta@imf.org
Ashoka Mody
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
amody@imf.org

-2-

I. INTRODUCTION
The debate over the role of the International Monetary Fund in a world of capital mobility
shows no signs of dying down. There is broad awareness that the single factor that most
distinguishes our current economic and financial environment from that of the preceding
period is high capital mobility. There is also a widely held view that while exposure to
international capital markets promises benefits, those benefits come packaged with risks. But
there is no consensus on what the IMF should do about it. Should the Fund reduce its role as
emergency lender on the grounds that countries enjoy increasing access to markets as an
alternative source of finance? Or should it expand its role, since relations with international
financial markets expose countries to abrupt and potentially costly reversals in the direction of
capital flows? Are existing IMF facilities adequate for these needs? Or is there a case for a
new facility capable of disbursing large amounts of financial assistance quickly, perhaps on
the basis of prequalification, to countries experiencing sudden shifts in the direction of capital
flows?2
More evidence may help to answer these questions. There exists substantial empirical
literature on both shifts in the direction of capital flows (known by the moniker “sudden
stops”) and the effects of IMF-supported programs (see Tables 1 and 2.). Empirical analyses
focus on the impact of policies and characteristics like a country’s exchange rate regime,
financial openness, and dependence on international trade on the incidence, magnitude, and
effects of sudden stops. Analyses of IMF-supported programs examine the behavior of
inflation, output, fiscal effort and, most relevant to the questions at hand, the balance of
payments, compared to a control group of country-year cases with no program in place. But,
to our knowledge, there exists no study focusing on the impact of such programs on the
incidence, severity, and effects of sudden stops.
In this paper we take a first stab at developing such evidence. Our results suggest that IMFsupported programs and IMF credits reduce the likelihood of sudden stops. There is some
evidence that this stabilizing effect is stronger for countries with strong fundamentals. This
can be interpreted in terms of the literature on global capital account shocks and the stabilizing
effect of liquidity insurance. Even countries with strong policies may experience a sudden
curtailment of capital inflows and a shift to outflows if investors suspect that other investors
for whatever reason are primed to take their money out of the country. Emergency financial
assistance can then reassure individual investors of the country’s continued ability to finance
its international transactions and reduce their incentive to liquidate their positions. Emergency
lending by the IMF can ensure the continued provision of private finance in much the way that
lender-of-last-resort intervention by a central bank can limit the scope for bank runs. But if
country fundamentals are weak, IMF financial assistance may only come in the front door and
go out the back door with no impact on the incidence of the sudden stop.
2

Two recent reviews of the debate that elaborate these points are Ostry and Zettelmeyer
(2005) and Truman (2005).

-3-

There are reasons to treat these results with caution. There is the difficulty of measuring both
IMF-supported programs and sudden stops. There is the challenge of identifying the impact of
the former on the latter—of addressing potential endogeneity. Our solutions to these problems
are imperfect. Our analysis also leaves open a variety of issues such as appropriate modalities
for lending to countries in this position, the feasibility of identifying qualifying countries in
the relevant time frame, and moral hazard. While these are not our topics in this paper, this
does not mean they are unimportant. Still, we believe that our results are the first evidence of
the insurance properties of IMF-supported programs.
II. SUDDEN STOPS AND MULTILATERAL INSURANCE
The fact that sudden stops cluster in time is taken as suggesting that they have more to do with
the behavior of global financial markets than with country policies, which some commentators
take to imply that their incidence would likely decline with the stepped-up provision of
multilateral insurance. Calvo (2005) takes the often rapid recovery of growth from sudden
stops as evidence that country policies are not at the root of this phenomenon. He concludes
that sudden stops in emerging market countries reflect inefficiencies in international financial
markets and argues for emergency financial assistance to countries suffering sharp
interruptions in capital flows.3
A number of questions can be raised about this argument. One is why countries cannot obtain
insurance by establishing credit lines on international capital markets or issuing securities with
embedded options that have the same insurance properties. If the argument for insurance is
strong, then the private sector should be prepared to provide it for a fee. This objection seems
especially compelling in light of the recent growth of international financial markets and
transactions. It is not clear why contracting for private insurance is not more widespread.4
•

One possible explanation is that capital requirements and other regulations prevent
potential suppliers from providing insurance on the requisite scale. Commercial

3

Calvo’s preferred variant of the mechanism would have the stabilization fund purchase the
bonds of adversely-affected economies to prevent their spreads from rising (Calvo 2002).
4

There has in fact been some experimentation with private insurance by, inter alia, Argentina
in the 1990s. (The experiment in question involved a contingent repurchase contract between
the Argentine central bank and a consortium of foreign banks, under which the central bank
was allowed to withdraw funds in the event of a crisis via a renewable credit line collateralized
by dollar-denominated government bonds.) But the Argentine credit line was small, and
execution was delayed until well into the crisis. There is also the recent development of credit
derivatives markets, which offer the possibility of purchasing protection against a range of
emerging market credit events, although data on these markets are hard to come by. This is
especially true of their use—for obvious reasons—by emerging market sovereigns.

-4-

counterparties may also be worried about concentrated country exposures and demand
a prohibitive price for the provision of contingent credit lines. Still, if the case for
private insurance is strong, financial markets and institutions adept at diversifying and
repackaging risks should find a way around these obstacles.
•

Another possibility is adverse selection. If asymmetric information prevents potential
insurers from discriminating among borrowers in different risk categories, then only
risky countries will wish to contract for such lines. The higher are the fees and interest
rates charged, the greater will be the riskiness of willing clients, causing the private
market to collapse. The limitation of this argument is that insurers are far from
ignorant of variations in country risk. Thus, while information asymmetry is a concern,
especially when crisis conditions begin to develop, lenders should still be able to
establish ex ante differences in charges for borrowers subject to different levels of
country risk.5

•

Yet another possibility is that commercial insurance providers have an incentive to
take a short position against the country when the latter is likely to draw down its
credit line. In turn this will destroy the effectiveness of the insurance (Broda and
Levy-Yeyati 2003). Presumably this problem does not carry over to public insurance
providers.6

A second question is whether bunching—that multiple countries tend to experience sudden
stops simultaneously—limits the feasibility of multilateral insurance. If a substantial subset of
IMF members needs to draw on the resources of the Fund simultaneously because they
experience shocks simultaneously, then the financial feasibility of an insurance arrangement
may be questionable.
A third question is whether it is, in fact, correct that sudden stops are not really a function of
country policies. Empirical analyses from Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004) to Edwards
5

A related argument is that a public insurance agency may have more ability or stronger
incentives to gather information on the financial condition of its clients, in turn enabling it to
better tailor incentive-compatible contracts. The obvious objection here is that private
financial institutions with their own performance at stake have at least as strong an incentive
to invest in these monitoring functions.
6

This problem would be ameliorated if the insurance liability was securitized and widely
distributed, since diversification would then provide the insurers with the protection they need
(obviating the need to hedge on a large scale). But in turn this begs the question of why
emerging market countries find it hard to place innovative securities containing put and call
options that kick in, reducing debt service or even calling for reverse payments, when
economic conditions deteriorate.

-5-

(2005) identify roles for both internal and external factors.7 Insofar as the relevant
characteristics include policies under the control of the domestic authorities, this means that
the moral hazard problem must be addressed.8
Moral hazard does not render insurance infeasible, but it requires that a reasonable insurance
scheme be designed to limit its extent. An obvious way of doing so is through surveillance and
conditionality. A key question is whether such conditions are better applied ex post or ex ante.
Specifically, should the IMF announce in advance what countries are eligible for a credit line
and specify the amount of assistance that they can expect to receive? Or should it proceed on a
case-by-case basis and decide whether or not to provide additional credit once the sudden stop
and the severity of the output decline have been observed?
Those who argue for insurance against sudden stops generally favor ex-ante contracts. First,
the problems of illiquidity that arise when capital flows are interrupted can lead to problems of
insolvency unless funds are disbursed quickly. Determining eligibility quickly requires that
countries be deemed eligible for assistance ex ante. Second, if the terms and amounts of
external assistance are specified ex ante, then the government has a stronger incentive to take
steps to expedite the economy’s recovery from the sudden stop.
Cohen and Portes (2004) describe an insurance contract in which countries prequalify for
assistance if their debt ratios remain below a critical ceiling consistent with moderate spreads,
say 400 basis points above LIBOR. By assumption, any crisis that the country then
experiences is a crisis of liquidity, not a crisis of debt sustainability. Payments are triggered
7

To quote Calvo (2005), “econometric studies do not reject the hypothesis that Sudden Stops
are largely prompted by external factors but, at the same time, strongly suggest that the
probability of Sudden Stops reflects domestic characteristics.” In other words, even analysts
emphasizing the importance of global factors acknowledge that domestic characteristics shape
the impact and response to external shocks.
8

The extent and economic importance of moral hazard in this context is disputed; for a review
of the evidence see Lane and Philips (2000). There is also the possibility that, in the presence
of other distortions, adding insurance will lead to less risk taking rather than more. Thus, in a
model of finite-lived governments, where the probability of government survival declines with
the incidence of financial crises, Cordella and Levy Yeyati (2004) show that insurance, by
reducing the risk of financial collapse, may in fact encourage the authorities to invest more in
policy reform (in the present context, to reduce the riskiness of their policies). Of course, there
are actually two effects of insurance here: insurance reduces the pressure on the government to
head off a crisis, but it also strengthens the incentive to pursue reforms that pay off in the
future. Predictably, the net effect is ambiguous. Cordella and Levy Yeyati show that insurance
is more likely to encourage reforms that pay off in good times (since it reduces the risk of
falling into a crisis in the first place) than reforms that reduce the risk of a crisis in the event
that one occurs.

-6-

when spreads on the debt rise above the threshold level. The IMF would then lend to the
country at the threshold spread. It would thus contain the effects of the sudden stop that
caused spreads to rise and prevent the liquidity crisis from degenerating into a solvency crisis.
Cordella and Levy Yeyati (2005) propose a country insurance facility that would provide
eligible countries with automatic access to a credit line at a predetermined interest rate, where
eligibility criteria would again focus on debt sustainability—not just the level of the debt but
also its maturity and currency composition. Dervis and Ozer (2005) similarly propose a
Stability and Growth Facility that would provide insurance against unforeseen shocks and for
which countries would prequalify on the basis of their policies.
Chami, Sharma and Shim (2004) provide a model laying out the analytics of this approach.
They assume that the insurer has two objectives: safeguarding its assets and providing for the
borrowing country’s welfare, which it can enhance by extending a loan. A governmental
counterparty decides in each of two periods how much unobserved effort to exert in order to
avoid and, if necessary, recover from a financial crisis, which in turn affects how much will be
asked to repay to the insurance pool.
In this model it is preferable for the insurer to specify eligibility and the terms of the credit
line—how much assistance will be extended as a function of the severity of the decline in
output that occurs in the first period—before the country enters a crisis and the full output
consequences are revealed. Knowing that it stands to receive official support, the efforts of the
national authorities to avert the crisis are correspondingly less. But the extent of the moral
hazard affecting the authorities’ efforts to recover from the crisis varies with the form of the
contract. Under an ex-post contract, the crisis country repays more if it makes a greater effort
to recover from the crisis, which works to depress adjustment effort. In contrast, under the exante contract, when terms are agreed prior the government’s decision of how much adjustment
effort to extend, repayment is independent of effort; hence adjustment will be greater, and
outcomes will be superior. In general, an insurer that both has a fiduciary responsibility to
safeguard its assets and that cares about the welfare of the crisis country will prefer an ex ante
contract in which the operator of the reserve pool specifies who is eligible and the terms and
amounts of the assistance that will be forthcoming.
But there may be a problem of time consistency with the ex ante contract. The insurer may
want to renege on its fixed commitment if it observes that the recession is unusually severe.
Since it values the welfare of the insured, it may then wish to offer more generous terms.
Hence ex ante contracts fixing the amount and terms of the credit line will not be credible.
And since the insured knows this, moral hazard leading to less adjustment effort will still be a
problem, surveillance and conditionality or not.9

9

Theoretically, this problem could be solved by repeated interaction between the insurer and
the country, through which the former develops a reputation for acting consistently.

-7-

This suggests that the IMF may wish to deem certain countries eligible for a fixed credit line,
since this is better than a discretionary, case-by-case approach at preserving its financial
solvency while at the same time supporting the welfare of its members, but that the timeconsistency problem may undermine the feasibility of this approach and aggravate moral
hazard. And if moral hazard is serious, such an insurance arrangement may turn out to be
welfare reducing rather than welfare improving for the membership as a whole.
Two further questions can be raised about these ideas. First, doesn’t the unsatisfactory
experience of the IMF’s contingent credit line (CCL), for which no country applied prior to its
expiration in 2003, raise questions about the enthusiasm of countries for ex ante insurance?
Insofar as Executive Directors have a responsibility for the IMF’s own solvency, members
running risky policies that may prevent them from paying back credits would have to be
denied the privilege of borrowing. Such an outcome would send a negative signal to the
markets. This seems to have been what deterred governments from applying for a CCL. A
further problem was that eligibility could be rescinded at some future date, sending a negative
signal that might precipitate a crisis.
The Fund could meet its fiduciary responsibility by announcing unilaterally which members
were eligible for financial assistance. But it would then send a negative signal about the
financial condition of other countries when it declared them ineligible for insurance. In turn
this might render countries reluctant to participate in the insurance arrangement in the first
place. And the exit problem would remain.10
Finally, such schemes assume the ability of the agency operating the facility to discriminate
between solvent and insolvent countries, where the solvent countries are still susceptible to
liquidity crises and should thus be made automatic beneficiaries of the new facility. Cohen and
Portes (2004) assume the existence of a well-defined amount of debt that forms the ceiling on
what is sustainable and a stable linkage running from debt levels to spreads. Cordella and
Levy Yeyati (2005) argue that a ceiling should be defined for the overall debt-GDP ratio but
also recommend that foreign-currency debt and short-term debt should receive heavier weights
in the calculation of this total. They suggest imposing a ceiling on the fiscal deficit in each of
the preceding three years.
In the real world, sustainability depends on forecasts of future growth rates and interest rates
that are disputable and uncertain. It depends on estimates of the political will of a government
and society to mobilize and transfer resources for purposes of debt service. Given this
uncertainty, it seems unavoidable that any insurance facility will occasionally lend to countries
10

Cordella and Levy Yeyati (2005) suggest “smoothing” the eligibility criteria so that
exogenous shocks temporarily pushing a country above the eligibility threshold do not
precipitate a sudden jump in interest rates and/or a crisis. While this might help for small
exogenous shocks that the authorities wish to offset, it will not help for large exogenous
shocks that cannot be offset in the medium term.

-8-

that find it impossible to repay. Or it will not lend to countries whose problems are liquidity
related, leading to complaints and recrimination. Any automatic scheme that depends on the
existence of an operational distinction between insolvent and illiquid crisis countries is
unlikely to be feasible in practice.11
III. CAPITAL FLOWS AND SUDDEN STOPS
As our measure of capital flows we use the financial account balance, a summary measure of
net capital flows that includes net foreign direct investment, net portfolio investment, and
other investments. The advantage of this measure is its comprehensiveness; in principle, it
should capture net capital flows of all kinds.12 One exception is that it does not include
official transfers associated with IMF programs, a fact that is important for what follows.
Following Calvo et al. (2004) and Cavallo and Frankel (2004), we consider both the first and
the second moments of the capital flow series in identifying sudden stops. First, we identify
the years where the financial account balance exhibited a large decline relative to its longterm average. We require this to be a large discrete drop and not just a correction of a large
temporary inflow. Second, we calculate the mean and one-standard deviation band of the
financial account balance using the data up to the years identified in the first stage as potential
sudden stops and retain only years that qualify on the basis of this criterion.13 Other authors
have used two-standard deviation bands, but because we are using annual data a two-standard
deviation criterion turns out to be very strict.
Our empirical analysis focuses on emerging market countries significantly involved with
international capital markets. For the period 1980 to 2003, we identified 24 such countries

11

This argument is developed and defended at greater length in Eichengreen (2002).

12

Other investigators, presumably with stronger priors about which capital flows are the
primary source of instability, have focused on narrower measures (considering only financial
flows for example) or on the change in gross rather than net inflows. Some have adjusted their
preferred measure of capital flows for identifiable exogenous shocks to the current account
(exports, the terms of trade, etc.). Some will argue for the exclusion of foreign direct
investment (FDI) from the capital flow measure on the grounds that FDI flows are more stable
and less prone to sudden stops. However this conclusion is not universally accepted (for a
flavor of the debate, see e.g., Sarno and Taylor 1999). If FDI inflows fall dramatically, this is
as much a problem for capital-importing countries as if portfolio inflows fall abruptly. This
approach is not without implications for our sample of sudden-stop cases; see footnote 16
below.
13

The moments were calculated using data up to the crisis year and not including the potential
crisis year.

-9-

(listed in Appendix I), which in turn experienced 35 sudden stop episodes.14 Our dates are
very similar to those of Calvo et al (2004) and Cavallo and Frankel (2004). However, they
differ from those of Edwards (2005), where a sudden stop is said to occur when a country had
previously been receiving significant capital inflows (where it ranked in its region’s third
quartile in terms of capital inflows in the two previous years) and their volume declines by at
least 5 percent of GDP in a given year. This is a lenient criterion that tends to capture episodes
where the financial account balance declines only from, say, 20 percent to 15 percent of GDP,
as well as episodes where there is a correction of a temporary increase in the balance the year
before.15
For this group of countries we present descriptive statistics for the 24-year period 19802003.16 In our sample, there a 5.5 percent probability of a sudden stop in a given country in a
given year. Figure 1 shows the time profile of these events. There is a clear bunching of
sudden stops, as emphasized by Calvo (2005). Peaks coincide with the 1982 debt crisis, the
Asian crisis of 1997, and the aftermath of the Argentine crisis in 2002. Typically, countries
experience a net capital outflow on the order of 5 percent of GDP in the first year of a sudden
stop episode (Figure 2). The swing in the net portfolio capital flow is on the order of 2 percent

14

The “significant contact with international capital markets” criterion means that not all
countries feature for the full length of the period. Thus, of the countries that transitioned from
central-planning, we include only Hungary and Poland and only after 1990, when they had
moved significantly towards functioning markets. We include Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ghana,
and Pakistan, which were recipients of concessional finance and were not as exposed to large
market-based capital inflows. But even if these last four countries are dropped from the
regression analysis, our findings remain robust, as we report below.
15

We note the omission from this list of a couple of cases – Russia and Brazil in 1999 – that
feature prominently in qualitative discussions of capital market disruptions. For Russia, the
short time series precluded the estimation of a reliable measure of standard deviation of the
financial account. Brazil in 1999 is a close call by our measure; in this instance, the decline in
portfolio and bank flows was offset by an increase in FDI, cushioning the decline in the
financial account. In the section on robustness checks below we show that the key results
remain the same when we treat these observations as sudden-stop cases.
16

For purposes of regression analysis, however, we concentrate on the period 1990 through
2003, when capital flows to emerging market countries, bond-market intermediated flows in
particular, were especially prominent. It is this subperiod that is most relevant for thinking
about the future. Calvo et al. (2004) also consider the period since 1990. They draw a sample
of 15 emerging market economies and also include 17 developed economies in their sample.
By using monthly data, they are able to increase the number of their observations. Note that to
ensure that our findings are not dictated by the period considered, in the section on robustness
checks we also present regressions covering a longer period.

- 10 -

of GDP. In contrast, there is no discernible impact on net FDI flows.17 By implication, net
capital outflows consist mostly of other forms of capital, such as funds channeled through the
banking system, commercial credits, and so forth (see also Table 2.)
Typically, countries experiencing a sudden stop also experience an improvement in the current
account balance on the order of 4 percent of GDP (Figure 3). Note that we are not looking
here at “current account reversals,” where a current account reversal is typically defined as an
episode when there is a large reduction in the size of an existing current account deficit; rather,
we are summarizing the average behavior of the current account balance in our episodes of
capital account reversal. The current account being the difference between savings and
investment, the consequences are necessarily reflected in these variables. Figure 3 shows that
the action is mainly on the investment side—that capital formation declines sharply. It
follows that GDP growth is close to zero, although it rebounds after one year. A statistical
summary of these patterns is in Table 2.
Sudden stops are also not the same as currency crises. For comparison, we use crisis dates
from Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999); Berg and Patillo (1999); Frankel and Rose (1996) and
Milesi-Ferreti and Razin (1998).18 Only about one-third of the sudden stops in our sample are
associated with contemporaneous currency crises (see the first panel of Table 3). The picture
is the same when we lag the currency crises (as in the second panel of Table 3). While we
have fewer observations for banking crises, a larger share of sudden stops (about a half)
appears to coincide with banking crises (see third panel of Table 3).19
IV. IMF-SUPPORTED PROGRAMS
Information on IMF programs is drawn from a data base maintained by the Fund’s Policy
Development and Review Department. We have information on the years in which a program
started and ended, whether it was precautionary from the outset or turned precautionary in the
course of its operation, the value of the funds approved, and the amount used under the
program. (Under precautionary programs, the IMF and the country agree on conditionality and
monitoring but the country declares its intention to not draw on resources from the Fund,

17

Recall that above we addressed the question of whether it was appropriate to include
changes in net FDI in our measure of sudden stops, and argued that the answer is yes on the
grounds that one should not prejudge the stability of different forms of imported capital.
Figure 2 suggests that this procedure does not have strong implications for our findings.
18

For recent years we supplement these with the dates from Frankel and Wei (2004). These
data are merged following the procedures in Gupta, Mishra and Sahay (2003).
19

This suggests a complex relationship between sudden stops, currency crises, and banking
crises—which we leave for another paper.

- 11 -

though this declaration is not binding.) Slightly more than 12 percent of the Fund programs in
our sample were precautionary from the start.20
Table 4 is a first look at the association of Fund programs and sudden stops. We differentiate
between “new” programs initiated in either of the two years prior to the sudden stop, and
“existing” programs in place in still earlier years.21 In approximately a third of sudden stop
cases, a new IMF program was negotiated in one of the two years immediately preceding the
sudden stop, and in 20 percent of the sudden stop cases a program was already in place in still
earlier years. Whereas the unconditional probability of a sudden stop in our sample is 5.5
percent, the probability of a sudden stop is about 1 percentage point lower if an IMF program
was in place (whether the program was contracted in the two immediately preceding years or
existed previously). This with and without IMF program differential is more pronounced if we
limit ourselves to data for the period after 1989.
The raw data are consistent with the idea that whether or not a Fund program is in place
matters for consumption, the trade balance, and the current account. Here the averages (in
Figure 4) refer to all programs, whether initiated in the two years immediately preceding the
crisis or prior to that. Program countries indicated by the broken line receive access to credit
from the IMF that enables them, not surprisingly, to run larger current account deficits (or
smaller surpluses) and to maintain higher levels of consumption. The impact on the other
variables is unclear. Program countries appear to enjoy more stable portfolio capital flows
following the sudden stop, but investment is no stronger, and the recovery of growth is not
obviously superior.
V. MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS
We now present a regression analysis of the association of IMF programs with sudden stops,
conditioning on other determinants of the change in the financial accounts and instrumenting
for the endogeneity of the program variable. This section presents the benchmark regressions
20

We use the outstanding amount of the credit disbursed. The alternative is to use the
“approved” lending amount, i.e., the amount that a country can draw on. The approved amount
has the advantage of measuring the prospective envelope of resources. However, the country
must go through a review process to access those resources. In practice the results were more
robust when we used the outstanding credit variable. The implication is that where programs
were precautionary and no amounts were disbursed, IMF credit should take on a value of zero.
This is the approach we use to testing separately for the influence of precautionary programs
in what follows. Finally, because the outstanding credit also includes funds borrowed by a
country under concessional credit programs, we check in our robustness analysis if dropping
those countries (Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ghana, and Pakistan) makes a difference to our results
(the answer is that it does not).
21

The rationale for this will become clear below.

- 12 -

with just the conditioning variables. The choice of conditioning factors is important, since
omitting an important country-specific or global determinant of the risk of sudden stops
creates the danger that we may incorrectly impute this risk to the presence or absence of an
IMF program.
We construct the dependent variable two ways: first, as a simple binary indicator equaling one
in the first year of a sudden stop; second, as the financial account balance if and only if a
sudden stop occurred as a way of capturing the severity of the event.22 Regressions using the
first dependent variable are estimated by probit (we report the marginal probabilities), while
regressions using the second dependent variable are estimated by tobit. In principle, the probit
regressions should make more complete use of the available information. Country fixedeffects are used throughout. But because we also use global time-varying variables, timeperiod fixed effects are not included in the analysis of sudden stops.
The benchmark regressions for the determinants of sudden stops in Table 5 suggest that global
factors matter, as emphasized by, inter alia, Calvo (2005), although the obvious suspects are
not always prominent.23 The U.S. high-yield spread (the spread over risk-free U.S.
government bonds) is generally positive and on the margin of significance. The high-yield
spread is often used as a measure of the global risk premium, with the implication that a rise in
the risk premium can trigger reversals in capital flows to emerging markets. At its strongest,
the coefficient estimate implies that every 100 basis point increase in this spread increases the
probability of a sudden stop by between 1 and 1½ percentage points. In contrast, the U.S.
treasury bill rate is not significant.24 A somewhat surprising result is that an increase in the
22

Instead of financial account balance, we also look at the change in financial account balance
in the year of the sudden stop as compared to the average of pre sudden stop years. The two
measures are highly correlated, and the results are similar across the two measures.
23

We do not claim that we provide here a definitive analysis of the role of global factors in
sudden stops – nor do we attempt to do so, given that the available space is fully occupied by
our analysis of the effects of IMF programs. But this deserves to be a high priority for future
work on the feasibility of an insurance facility, insofar as the importance of common global
factors is directly related to the capacity of the IMF as a financial pool to provide assistance to
different countries experiencing sudden stops.
24

That the usual measures of global financial stress are not prominent in their explanation of
the incidence of sudden stops is not necessarily inconsistent with their bunching in time. It is
possible that measures of “common vulnerability” may attract the attention of international
investors, causing them to retreat from a broad range of countries (see Mody and Taylor
2003). As such, country factors remain important in understanding the frequency of sudden
stops. A previous study showing that the correlation between changes in U.S. treasury yields
and capital flows to emerging markets was not always stable (that the correlation depended on
the reason behind the change in U.S. Treasury yields) is Eichengreen and Mody (1998).

- 13 -

real price of oil appears to reduce the risk of a sudden stop -- surprising since many emerging
markets countries are net oil importers. However, not all emerging-market economies are oil
importers; indeed, some of those that have been historically most susceptible to sudden stops
are substantial oil exporters. High oil prices tend to coincide with high commodity prices
generally, and it is not surprising that emerging market countries, many of which are
commodity exporters, enjoy larger and steadier capital inflows when commodity prices move
in their favor. Moreover, a rise in oil prices also improves global liquidity, since oil-rich
nations accumulate balance of payments surpluses that need to be reinvested, and this may
work to the advantage of emerging market countries.
Among the country-specific factors, high and rising ratios of domestic credit to GDP are
strongly associated with sudden stops, as emphasized in the credit-boom literature (IMF
2004). There is some suggestion that periods of rapid growth associated with credit expansions
are likely to end in sudden stops.25 Presumably, some of these high credit growth episodes are
fuelled by the inflow of foreign capital, which can reverse abruptly. A high ratio of debt to
GDP (in levels but not rate-of-change form) also increases is vulnerability. A smaller trade
balance and a larger ratio of debt service to exports increase the likelihood of a sudden stop.
The message seems to be that the combination of a domestic credit boom and the emergence
of external payment risks heightens the risk of a sudden stop.
A variety of sensitivity analyses left these basic results unchanged.
•

We dropped the country dummies, thus adding cross-section variation, without
significantly altering our findings. However, it remains the case that most of the
variation in the dependent variable is still explained by within-country variations rather
than by cross-country differences.

•

Results for the longer period 1984 to 2003, in the last column of Table 5, continue to
produce qualitatively similar findings.

•

We relaxed our stringent criteria and mechanical procedures for identifying suddenstop episodes, adding additional borderline cases such as Russia and Brazil at the end
of the 1990s. Again, the results carried over.26

25

As in Calvo et al. (2004), we also included a measure of dollarization. Confirming their
finding, dollarization is associated with a higher probability of a sudden stop. However, our
other findings do not change and we do not include dollarization in the regressions to preserve
the sample size.
26

Similarly, all the results reported below continue to obtain when we add these borderline
cases to our list of sudden-stop episodes.

- 14 -

•

Using the Reinhart-Rogoff classification of exchange rate regimes, we added dummy
variables for pegged rates and regimes of limited flexibility (managed- and freelyfloating regimes are the omitted alternative).27 We find (in Table 6) that the more rigid
the regime, the greater the likelihood of a sudden stop.28 This negative association of
sudden stops with exchange rate flexibility is consistent with the literature in which it
is argued that currency flexibility encourages creditors and debtors to more fully
internalize the risks of foreign lending and borrowing (see e.g. Goldstein 1998). This is
also the same result as in Edwards (2005). While the vector of exchange rate regime
variables is not significant here, it turns out to be significant in some of the additional
specifications below.29

•

Because exchange-rate-regime and capital-account-regime choices are related, we also
considered the effects of financial opening. We use a one-period lag of the Mody and
Murshid (2005) measure of financial integration.30 The point estimate (again in Table
6) suggests that countries that are more deeply integrated with global financial markets
are less vulnerable to sudden stops, as if countries better integrated into international
financial markets have stronger institutions. Again, this is the same result as in
Edwards (2005). And although this variable is also not significant here, it turns out to
be significant in some of the further specifications below.
VI. IMF PROGRAMS AND SUDDEN STOPS

Table 7 adds IMF programs. Recall that we distinguish “existing” programs (in place at least
two years prior to the occurrence of the sudden stop) from “new” programs negotiated in the
immediately preceding two years. The coefficient on preexisting programs is arguably less
contaminated by simultaneity (which should in any case bias the coefficient in a positive
direction, the opposite of the sign we find). Preexisting programs, as a measure of the IMF’s
ongoing commitment to the country, may also have a stronger signaling effect. In practice, we
find that both pre-existing and new programs negatively affect the probability of a sudden

27

See Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). In principle, it captures the de facto operative regime.

28

Although the effect is not statistically significant, it is found to be significant in the later
tables.
29

Note, however, that the new IMF classification of exchange rates produces more ambiguous
results.
30

The financial integration index is based on four measures of the intensity of capital controls
that are published in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions.

- 15 -

stop. In the present specification, the coefficient on new programs is larger in absolute value,
although it does not differ significantly from that on existing programs.31
The insurance analogy is sometimes taken as an argument for exceptional access—as
justifying a credit line sufficiently large to reassure private investors. This suggests
distinguishing effects by the size of the program. We do so in two ways, scaling programs by
short-term external debt and GDP. Both ratios are lagged by one period. IMF credit as a share
of GDP is negative and significant at conventional confidence levels, but not so IMF credit
scaled by short-term debt.
Next we test for whether IMF programs have a more powerful preemptive effect in countries
with strong fundamentals, as suggested by the insurance analogy. We construct the first
principal component of the vector of variables capturing country policies and conditions
included in Table 7 above.32 We normalize the resulting variable so that it has zero mean and
so that a positive value indicates worsening fundamentals. We then interact the resulting index
of fundamentals with the new IMF program variable. The positive and significant coefficient
on the interaction term in Table 7 suggests that as the strength of domestic fundamentals
declines, the effectiveness of IMF programs in reducing the likelihood of a sudden stop
diminishes.33
A key question is whether the negative association of programs and sudden stops reflects
causality running from the latter to the former. Actually, it is not clear that endogeneity is a
serious problem; one can argue that reverse causality should bias the coefficient toward zero,
since a sudden stop will increase the likelihood of a Fund program and thus produce a positive

31

The size of the coefficients differs more noticeably when we correct for endogeneity, as
suggested by the observation that pre-existing programs should be less contaminated by this
bias (see below).
32

We use high yield spreads, oil prices, real GDP growth, the trade balance/GDP ratio, the
debt service/export ratio, and the domestic credit measure in calculating principal components.
The first principal component captures 21 percent of the variation in the underlying series. In
theory it would be possible to interact the IMF program dummy with each of the variables
used to represent fundamentals (or to include additional principal components beyond the
first), but this creates problems of multicollinearity and complicates interpretation. We could
also construct our own linear combination of the variables representing fundamentals, but it
seems preferable to let this simple statistical methodology do so for us.
33

This is a congenial finding for those who advance the insurance analogy for IMF programs.
In earlier work analyzing the catalytic effect of the IMF on capital flows, we similar find
evidence of threshold effects, especially for access to bond markets (Mody and Saravia, 2003
and Eichengreen, Kletzer, and Mody, 2005). In particular, countries in an intermediate state of
vulnerability seemed to benefit from improved market access while others did not.

- 16 -

relationship, whereas we find a negative coefficient.34 Be that as it may, the appropriate
treatment is instrumental variables. We follow the strategy of Barro and Lee (2004) for
instrumenting IMF programs. These authors argue that decision making in the Fund is
influenced by the organization’s principal shareholders, above all the United States. They
model the likelihood of a program as a function not just of country characteristics but also of
its links with the United States.35 To capture the latter they include U.S. aid as a percentage of
total foreign aid received by the country and the share of votes in the UN General Assembly in
which the country voted the same way as the United States, both lagged.36 In our sample U.S.
aid enters the first-stage regression positively, as predicted, and is significantly different from
zero.37 UN voting patterns, in contrast, do not exhibit the expected sign.38 Given the

34

We provide some evidence on this below.

35

Dreher and Jensen (2003) take a similar empirical approach but take as their dependent
variable the number of conditions attached to a program. Oatley (2003) considers instead the
political determinants of the size of IMF loans.
36

The authors also use past participation in Fund programs as an instrument. The problem
with using lags of the endogenous variable as an instrument is of course that it may be picking
up omitted country characteristics that are slow to change and durably associated with
financial problems; see Mody and Stone (2005). Alternatively, we can follow Celasun and
Ramcharan (2005) by using the share of G-3 exports going to each subject country as a
measure of the importance the principal shareholders may attach to extending assistance
through the Fund. However this variable turns out to be a poor instrument for the incidence of
the IMF program. The coefficient of this variable is consistently negative and significant in the
first stage regressions of IMF programs. One interpretation is that it is a proxy for the size of
the country and the larger countries are probably less susceptible to problems necessitating an
IMF program.
37

Use of voting in the UN General Assembly has been criticized in the political-science
literature for being dominated by non-consequential votes and thus containing relatively little
information on political affinity. This is one interpretation of what we find in the first-stage
regressions.
38

Note that we include also a number of additional global and country-specific variables that
may influence the decision to approach the Fund (and the Fund’s decision to extend
assistance). While these variables do not provide identification in the second stage (they do
not plausibly satisfy the exclusion criterion for an instrumental variable), they reassure us that
any significance we impute to the U.S. aid in the first stage is really attributable to these other
characteristics.

- 17 -

counterintuitive sign on this variable, we rely on the specification in the first column of
Table 8, which excludes UN voting patterns, for purposes of instrumentation.39
Table 9 shows the second-stage estimates. The presence of a new IMF program continues to
negatively influence the probability of a sudden stop. Both the statistical significance and
absolute value of the coefficient are greater than before. This is to be expected: if
susceptibility to a sudden stop increases the likelihood of an IMF program, then reverse
causality will bias the coefficient in a positive direction; correcting for simultaneity thus yields
a more significant negative coefficient whose absolute value is larger. Pre-existing programs
are significant as well. All this is consistent with the hypothesis that IMF programs provide
valuable insurance against sudden stops.
Given the strong policy implications of these findings, we considered a number of further
robustness checks.
•

When we consider the period longer period starting in 1984, as in the last column of
Table 9, the strength of pre-existing programs remains. In contrast, the coefficient on
new programs becomes less significant. It would thus appear that the signaling effect
of an ongoing IMF commitment to the country is particularly important in the more
recent period. The interaction between new programs and fundamentals remains
unchanged even in the longer period, pointing to continued importance of country
fundamentals in determining the influence of IMF programs.
•

As above, we analyzed whether our results held up when we relaxed the stringent
criteria used to identify sudden stops. First, we added Brazil and Russia in 1999, two
cases that many would regard as sudden stops but which are not picked up by our
criteria. Second, we dropped, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Ghana, and Pakistan, which drew
on the Fund’s concessional financing facilities, indicating that their international
capital market linkages were qualitatively different from those of the other country
samples. The results remained the same.40

39

Of interest also in the determinants of IMF programs are the similarities and contrasts with
the determinants of sudden stops. External debt and debt service indicators work in the same
way (though with differing strengths): more debt and debt service increase the likelihood of
both IMF programs and of sudden stops. In contrast, domestic growth based on high and
growing levels of credit are associated with a lower likelihood of IMF programs. Thus,
countries experiencing such exuberant growth are unlikely to contract with the IMF and
remain susceptible to sudden stops.
40

In fact, dropping the country with concessional financing strengthens the results, pointing
especially to the risks to the others of pegging exchange rates and indicating greater value to a
more open capital account (see Appendix I, Tables A1 and A2).

- 18 -

•

We considered alternative instrumentation strategies. For example, following Oatley
(2003), we constructed a measure of country indebtedness to U.S. banks as a further
instrument. Adding it has relatively little impact on the results (perhaps because this
variable turns out to be a relatively weak instrument in this context).
VII. EXTENSIONS

We also asked whether IMF programs reduce the intensity (as opposed to the frequency) of
sudden stops. For this purpose we constructed our dependent variable as the financial account
outflow if and only if a sudden stop occurs. Regressions using this dependent variable are
estimated by tobit.
The results, in Table 10, are similar to the earlier probit estimates, though with some
noteworthy differences. There is stronger evidence for an increase in high-yield spreads,
reflecting a rise in risk aversion, to be associated with a reduction in capital inflows. As
before, a rise in oil prices works in the opposite direction. Among country factors, a high
credit-to-GDP ratio and rapid credit growth are associated with larger capital outflows, and a
more open capital flows regime appears to reduce the intensity of a sudden stop.41 Compared
to new programs, pre-existing programs seem to have a clearer effect in reducing the intensity
of capital outflows; also while new programs and their interaction with fundamentals work in
the same way as before, the statistical significance is weaker. Note that when new programs
are instrumented, the size of the coefficient again becomes noticeably, even implausibly,
larger in absolute-value terms. Finally, when all the relevant IMF variables are included, as in
the last two columns of Table 10, the precision of the estimates declines.
We also considered the impact of IMF programs on growth around the time of sudden stops.
The raw data in the second panel of Table 11a suggest the recessionary impact of sudden stops
in countries both with and without Fund programs. Growth is even slower following sudden
stops in those cases where IMF programs are present. But the financial balance (in the first
panel of Table 11a) is also worse when a Fund program is present—suggesting, plausibly, that
programs are put in place in cases where economic circumstances are worse—reminds us that
other things are not in fact equal and the slower growth cannot be attributed to IMF programs
without further investigation.
It turns out to be difficult to draw firm conclusions about the impact on output of IMF
programs in these episodes. As a first cut, we regressed annual growth (again in a country
panel covering the period 1990-2003) on a vector of controls, the presence or absence of a
sudden stop, a dummy variable for the presence of a Fund program, and the interaction of the
sudden stop and the presence of a program. In the benchmark regression in the first column,
41

Other conditioning variables are less significant, though virtually always of the same sign as
in the probit estimates.

- 19 -

per capita income in the previous year enters negatively and significantly, suggesting some
short-term mean reversion. More rapid U.S. growth is conducive to more rapid recovery in
emerging market countries. A sudden stop leads to slower growth, as expected. The dummy
for the presence of a Fund program is negative and significant, with two alternative
interpretations: the strict conditionality generally associated with programs leads to slower
growth in the short run or that programs are associated with weak fundamentals not included
in the regression.
Importantly for present purposes, the interaction between the IMF programs and sudden stops
is not significant. In other words, even if Fund programs reduce the incidence of sudden stops,
they do not obviously shape their impact on growth, in one direction or the other. We find the
same basic results on adding additional financial controls in columns 2 and 3.
We know from earlier sections that countries with IMF programs are not randomly selected
from the larger population. Before drawing conclusions about their impact on growth, we
therefore need to control not just for observed differences between program and non-program
countries but also for unobserved heterogeneity. In columns 4-5 we use the two-stage
Heckman procedure, adding as an additional regressor the Inverse Mills ratio, denoted
Lambda, derived from the first-stage regression of the determinants of IMF programs (in the
first column of Table 8).42 Sudden stops continue to exert a negative impact on growth
(significant in column 4, insignificant in column 5 where the financial balance is introduced
directly). IMF programs now have a positive rather than a negative impact on growth (though
with weak statistical significance). The change in sign is consistent with the negative
coefficient on the Inverse Mills ratio, which implies that unobserved country-specific factors
that raise the likelihood of an IMF program also reduce the country’s growth rate. But the tstatistics leave us reluctant to push any conclusion about this too far. The key finding remains:
the interaction of sudden stops and IMF programs is still indistinguishable from zero. Thus,
while the presence of a program may reduce the incidence of sudden stops, there is no
evidence that programs affect short-term output losses, one way or the other, when sudden
stops do occur.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
In this paper we have presented a first attempt to identify the impact of IMF programs on
sudden stops. The literature on self-fulfilling crises and the insurance motive for IMF lending
suggests that Fund programs could reduce the incidence of these episodes characterized by
disruptive capital-flow reversals. In contrast, a literature critical of IMF programs suggests
that such programs, especially those negotiated in the Asian crisis, have tended to be too
42

Dropping the interaction term allows us to estimate the same relationship using STATA’s
more efficient Heckman procedure (where the selection and growth equations are estimated
simultaneously). In the present instance, results using the two estimation procedures are
virtually indistinguishable.

- 20 -

small or too late, and too laden with burdensome economic and political conditions to restore
confidence.43
Much of the evidence invoked in this debate is, however, anecdotal. A more systematic
analysis such as that we have sought to provide here is clearly needed. Our results are broadly
consistent with the notion that IMF programs have some effect in reducing the incidence of
sudden stops. The evidence that negotiation of a Fund program in immediately prior years
reduces the likelihood of a sudden stop is relatively robust. As economic logic suggests, this
finding is, if anything, strengthened when we correct for endogeneity. The results further
suggest that this effect operates more powerfully in countries with strong fundamentals,
consistent with the insurance argument.
One should be cautious with these findings. The literature on the effects of IMF programs is
notorious for its methodological limitations. Countries approaching the Fund differ
systematically from other countries, creating problems of endogeneity and selectivity. In this
paper we have described some instrumental-variables strategies and statistical adjustments for
these problems. However, these approaches have limitations, and many of the same critiques
levied against the related literature apply to the results reported here. These are more reasons
for regarding the results as a first cut and not a definitive guide to policy.
Even if one accepts that there is evidence that IMF programs reduce the incidence and
virulence of sudden stops, this leaves open the question of whether and how the institution’s
lending practices should be adapted. One view would be that such findings strengthen the case
for a generously endowed, quick disbursing, automatic facility for which countries with strong
policies would presumably be prequalified. A different view would be that prequalification is
impractical and automaticity is infeasible but that the Fund can still streamline and enhance
access to its resources for countries with strong fundamentals.44 The results in this paper will
not resolve this debate, but they will be more grist for the mill.

43

Experience during the Asian crisis does not, of course, negate our findings on the insurance
value of IMF programs, since when we limit the sample to the 1990s and after we find that
pre-existing programs were most effective, and in fact programs were not already in place in
the countries with the most severe crises. Thus, in the case of Thailand, it can be argued that
the problem was the absence of a program prior to the sudden stop—and that by the time an
arrangement was negotiated, things had gotten out of hand. In contrast, the Philippines, which
did have a program in place, experienced a milder sudden stop.
44

Thus, the IMF’s Managing Director suggested in a February 9 speech (de Rato 2006) “an
instrument carrying relatively high access, available in a single purchase if a capital account
crisis occurred, subject to a Fund-supported program being in place and on track.”

- 21 -

Figure 1. Year-Wise Probability of a Sudden Stop
Probability of a Sudden Stop
16
14

(In Percent)

12
10
8
6
4
2

Source: Authors’ calculations

2003

2001

2002

2000

1999

1997

1998

1996

1995

1994

1992

1993

1991

1990

1989

1987

1988

1986

1985

1983

1984

1982

1981

0

- 22 -

Figure 2. Magnitude and Composition of Financial Flows (In percent of GDP)45
Financial Account Balance
12
8
4
0
-4
-8
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

1

2

3

2

3

Net FDI Flows
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-3

-2

-1

0

N et Portfolio Flows
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-3

-2

-1

0

1

Net Other Flows
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-3

Source: Authors’ calculations

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

- 23 -

Figure 3. Macroeconomic Effects of Sudden Stops

Gross Capital Formation (% of GDP)

Current Account Balance (% of GDP)

28

2

26

0

24

-2

22

-4

20

-6
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

-1

0

Real Growth of GDP
5
4
3
2
1
0
-3

Source: Authors’ Calculations

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

1

2

3

- 24 -

Figure 4. IMF-Supported Programs and Effects of Sudden Stops
Financial Account Balance (as % of GDP)

Current Account Balance (as % of GDP)
4

10

No IMF
Program

IMF program

8

2

6
4

0

No IMF
Program

2

IMF program

-2

0
-2

-4

-4
-6

-6
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

-1

1

2

3

Real Growth

Net Other Flows (as % of GDP)
8

6

No IMF
Program

IMF program

4

0

6
2

IMF program

No IMF
Program

0

4

-2
2

-4
-6
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

0

3

-3

Capital Formation (as % of GDP)

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Net Portfolio Flows (as % of GDP)
2

34
No IMF
Program

32

IMF program

30

1

28

IMF program

No IMF
Program

26
0

24
22
20

-1
-3

-2

-1

0

1

Source: Authors’ calculations

2

3

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Table 1. Literature on Sudden Stops
Authors/Year
Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia
(2004)

Countries/Types/Years
15 emerging market countries and
17 developed countries, 19902001.

Dependent Variable
Sudden stop dummy

Main Explanatory Variables
1) Degree of domestic liability dollarization.
2) 1 minus (the degree of trade openness)—to proxy
for the sensitivity of the real exchange rate to capital
flow reversals.

Main Results
Domestic liability dollarization and trade closedness are
positively correlated the probability of a sudden stop.

The effect of openness and liability dollarization on the
probability of a sudden stop could be non-linear. High current
account leverage (i.e. less open) is particularly dangerous for
countries with a high degree of dollarization.

Control variables: two measures of exchange rate
regime flexibility, ratio of foreign reserves to current
account deficit, credit growth, FDI, fiscal balance,
terms of trade growth, public sector debt, yearly
dummies.
Frankel and Cavallo (2004)

141 countries, 1970-2002.

Sudden stop dummy

1) Trade openness.
2) Foreign debt to GDP.
3) Current account balance to GDP.

Sudden stops are more likely when initial current account
deficit to GDP is high.
Foreign debt to GDP does not appear to have significant
impact on the probability of a sudden stop.

Hutchison and Noy (2004)

27 emerging market countries,
1975-1997.

GDP growth rate

1) Currency crisis dummy.
2) Current account reversal dummy.
3) Sudden stop crisis dummy (interaction of the two
dummy variables above).

Currency crises and current account reversals have significant
negative effects on output growth. Sudden stop crises have a
large negative, but short-lived, impact on output growth over
and above that currency crises.

Control variables: (lagged) real GDP growth, change
in budget surplus to GDP ratio, credit growth, foreign
output growth, real exchange rate overvaluation,
openness, country dummies.
Edwards (2005)

157 countries, 1970-2000

GDP per capita

1) Sudden stop dummy.
2) Current account reversal dummy.
Control variables: External terms of trade shocks
(change in terms of trade), the growth gap (the
difference between the long run rate of real per capita
GDP and the current rate).

Reversals and sudden stops each have a significantly negative
effect on per capita growth. However, when both reversals
and the sudden stop dummies are included in the growth
regression, the reversal dummy continues to be significantly
negative while the coefficient for the sudden stop dummy
does not.

- 25 -

Control variables: log of reserves in months of
imports, log of GDP per capita, FDI/GDP,
institutional quality ratio of short-term debt to total
debt, and a measure of nominal exchange rate rigidity.

Openness makes countries less vulnerable to sudden stop.
This negative relationship is even stronger when correcting
for the endogeneity of trade using the gravity instrument for
trade openness.

Table 2. Literature on IMF-Supproted Programs
Authors/Year
Goldstein and Montiel (1986)

Countries/Types/Years
58 developing countries
1974-1981

Dependent Variable(s)
1) Overall balance of
payments/ GNP
2) Current account/GNP
3) Inflation rate
4) GDP growth

Measurement of IMF Program Effect
The mean change between the pre- and the
post program periods across the group of
program countries for each of the outcome
variables.
The difference in mean changes of the
outcome variables for program and nonprogram countries.
The sign and statistical significance of the
coefficients of the IMF program dummy.

Control Variables
(For GEE method.)
Policy instruments:
1) The change in domestic credit.
2) The real effective exchange rate.
External exogenous variables:
3) Time dummy variables.
Others:
4) Country dummy variables.
5) Lagged outcome variables.

Pastor (1987)

18 Latin American countries
1965-1981

1) Balance of payments
measures
2) Inflation rate

The mean change between the pre- and the
post program periods across the group of
program countries for each of the outcome
variables

-

Findings regarding IMF programs
Before-after analysis: There is a
marketed difference in the nature and
pattern of estimated program effects
from year to year and none of them is
significant. This could be because this
method does not control for
nonprogram influences on the changes
in outcome variables.
With-without analysis: Program
countries appear to have lower BOP,
lower current account deficit, lower
real growth, and higher inflation rate
than nonprogram countries. However,
these estimates of program effects
could be biased due to nonrandom
selection.
Insignificant changes in current
account.

3) GDP growth

Significant improvements in the
overall balance of payments.

4) Labor'
s share of income

Significant increases in inflation.
Mixed effects on growth.

Khan (1990)

69 developing countries
1973-1988

1) Balance of payments to
GDP
2) Current account surplus
to GDP
3) Inflation rate

The mean change between the pre- and the
post program periods across the group of
program countries for each of the outcome
variables

4) Real GDP growth rate

(For GEE method)
Policy instruments:
1) The change in domestic credit
2) The real effective exchange rate

The difference in mean changes of the
outcome variables for program and nonprogram countries.

3) The ratio of fiscal balance to GDP

The sign and statistical significance of the
coefficients of the IMF program dummy.

4) Changes in terms of trade

External exogenous variables:

5) Time dummy variables

Before-after analysis: Programs lead to
an improvement only in the current
account position.
With-without analysis: Programs lead
to balance of payments improvement,
current account improvement, and
reduced inflation rate. All of these
effects are larger in magnitude relative
to the before-after estimators.
GEE method: The current account
improves and the growth rate is
significantly reduced in program
countries relative to the change in
nonprogram countries.
Two-year comparisons show that the
positive program effects on the BOP,
the current account, and inflation
become stronger, and the negative
effects on growth rate become weaker
over time.

Table 2. Literature on IMF-Supported Programs (Continued)
Authors/Year
Conway (1994)

Countries/Types/Years
74 developing countries
1976-1986

Dependent Variable(s)
1) Economic performance -GDP growth, domestic
investment to GNP ratio,
current account-to-GNP
ratio, inflation rate.

2) Policy variables -- the
ratio of government
consumption to GNP, the
rate of domestic credit
creation, budget
surplus/deficit as a share of
GNP, real exchange rate.

Measurement of IMF
Program Effect
The sign and statistical
significance of the
coefficients of:
1) A binary indicator of
participation (Pit)
2) Percentage of year t that
country participated (Fit)
3) Percentage of available
funds for country i for period
t that is disbursed (Vit)

Control Variables
1) Terms of trade
2) Long- and short-term debt per capita
3) Real interest rate
4) Share of total output coming from
agricultural sector
(proxy for secular stage of economic
development)
5) Foreign reserves to imports
6) Country-specific dummy variables
7) dependent variable lagged once and twice

74 low-income countries

1) Real GDP growth rate

1986-1991

2) Consumer price inflation
3) The ratio of external
debt/service to exports
(measure of external
viability)

Przeworski and
Vreeland (2000)

79 developing countries
1971-1990

Output growth

The sign and statistical
significance of the
coefficients of the IMF
program dummy

Policy instruments:
1) Lagged fiscal balance to GDP

The current account ratio improves concurrently with
participatio in an IMF program, while the investment ratio
declines. Inflation and real GNP growth fall
contemporaneously but effects are insignificantly
different from zero.

The lagged effects of IMF programs on real GNP growth
and the current account are positive and statistically
significant.
Both concurrent and lagged evidence suggests that IMF
program participation is associated with significantly
reduced budget deficits. Reductions in government
current expenditure and depreciation of the real exchange
rate concurrent with the IMF program but are statistically
insignificant
There are statistically significant beneficial effects of IMF
support on output growth and the debt/service ratio, but
no effects on inflation.

2) Lagged net domestic asset growth
3) Lagged percentage change in the nominal
effective
exchange rate
Exogenous external variables:
4) Changes in terms of trade
5) Growth of export markets
Lagged dependent variables:
6) Lagged real GDP growth rate
7) Lagged inflation rate
8) Lagged external debt/service ratio

The difference between
values of growth expected in
the two situations (under and
not under IMF programs)
independently of selection

-

IMF program participation lowers growth rates for as long
as countries remain under a program. Once countries
leave the program, they grow faster than if they had
remained, but not faster than they would have without
participation.

- 27 -

Dicks-Mireaux,
Mecagni, and
Schadler (2000)

Findings regarding IMF programs

Table 2. Literature on IMF Programs (Continued)
Authors/Year
Hutchison
(2001)

Countries/Types/Years
67 developing countries

Dependent Variable(s)
Real GDP growth

1970-1997

Measurement of IMF Program Effect
The sign and statistical significance of the
coefficients of:
1) IMF program dummy
2) Interaction term between the currency
crisis dummy and the IMF program dummy
(measuring additional effects on output
growth arising from a currency crisis that is
immediately followed by an IMF program)

Control Variables
Policy instruments:
1) Lagged change in budget surplus
to GDP
2) Lagged inflation
3) Lagged credit growth
External exogenous factors:
4) trade-weighted lagged external
growth rates of major
trading partners
5) Lagged rate of real exchange rate
overvaluation

Barro and Lee
(2002)

81 developing countries

GDP growth rate

1975-1999

The sign and statistical significance of the
coefficients of:
1) IMF loan size -- the period-average of the
ratio of IMF loans to GDP

Evrensel (2002)

91 developing countries

1) Current account

1971-1997

2) Overall balance of
payments
3) Reserves
4) Domestic credit

The mean change between the pre- and the
post program periods across the group of
program countries for each of the outcome
variables

2) Human resources (educational
attainment, life
expectancy, and fertility)
3) The ratio of investment to GDP
4) Changes in the terms of trade
(export prices relative to
import prices)
5) Institutional and policy variables
(government
consumption, a subjective index of
the rule of law,
international openness, and inflation
-

Both a currency crisis and an IMF program leads to an
output loss. IMF programs lower output growth
somewhat on average, but there is no additional effect
of the program when associated with a severe currency
or balance of payments crisis.

The adverse effects from participating in an IMF
program are significant in the first year of the IMF
program but no significant additional effects in
subsequent years.

With simple OLS, an increase in IMF lending is
associated with a contemporaneous reduction of
economic growth. After controlling for endogeneity
with the instrumental variables, there is no statistically
significant impact of IMF lending on economic growth
in the contemporaneous five-year period, but there is a
statistically significant negative effect on growth in
subsequent five years.

- 28 -

2) IMF participation -- the fraction of months
during each five-year period that a country is
under an IMF loan program

1) Log of initial per capita GDP

Findings regarding IMF programs

The only significant results are:
One year after the program, program participating
countries appeared to have smaller overall BOP deficit,
smaller domestic credit, lower inflation rate, smaller
net foreign borrowing and smaller foreign debt.

5) Inflation rate
6) Budget deficit
7) Net domestic
borrowing
8) Net foreign borrowing
9) Real growth rate

However, all of these effects disappear in subsequent
years.

Table 2. Literature on IMF Programs (Continued)
Authors/Year
Hardoy (2002)

Countries/Types/Years
109 developing countries
1970-1990

Dependent Variable(s)
The annual rate of growth
of real GDP per capita

Measurement of IMF Program
Effect
Matching estimator = average
difference in the values of the
outcome variable between participant
observations and the matched nonparticipant observations.
Difference-in-difference matching
estimator = difference between the
matching estimators in pre-program
and post-program periods.

Hutchison and
Noy (2003)

67 developing countries

Real GDP growth

1975-1997

The sign and statistical significance
of the coefficients of:
1) IMF program dummy

Control Variables
1) Government expenditure to GDP
2) Investment to GDP
3) Exchange rate
4) Level of economic development
5) Dummy = 1 if period 1979-87, 0
if 1973-78
6) Regional dummies
7) Cumulative number of years under
IMF program
8) Past participation index
9) Legislative election index
10) Growth of consumption to GDP
11) Current account balance to GDP
12) Terms of trade index
13) Balance of payment to GDP
14) Total debt service to GNP
15) Political regime dummy
Policy instruments:
1) Lagged change in budget surplus to
GDP
2) Lagged inflation
3) Lagged credit growth

4) Latin American IMF program
dummy in the 1990s

External exogenous factors:
4) trade-weighted lagged external
growth rates of
major trading partners
5) Lagged rate of real exchange rate
overvaluation

No statistically significant effects of IMF program on
growth after program participation. Estimated effects
are always negative three years after participation.

Estimates are sensitive in many respects: the choice of
sample, the reduction of the information set, the
choice of time period, and the method applied.

The average effect of an IMF program on output is
statistically significant and negative. However, once
controlled for the difference between IMF programs
in Latin America and elsewhere, the average effect of
IMF program disappears while the Latin American
IMF program appears to lead to a statistically
significant reduction of output growth.

IMF programs in Latin America are associated with
very small positive output effects in the 1990s, but
large negative effects during the 1975-1989.

Crisis variables:
1) Currency crisis dummy
2) Sudden stop crisis dummy
Bordo, Mody, and
Oomes (2004)

29 emerging market
countries
1980-2002

1) Current account
balance to GDP
2) Reserves to imports
3) Short-term debt to
reserves

Difference between program
participating and nonprogram
participating countries (with similar
fundamentals) in probabilities of
moving to a better state

IMF programs are generally associated with
improvements in external fundamentals, except when
these fundamentals are already in very good shape.

- 29 -

2) Latin American IMF program
dummy
3) IMF program dummy in the 1990s

Findings regarding IMF programs

Table 2. Literature on IMF Programs (Concluded)
Authors/Year
Atoyan and
Conway (2005)

Countries/Types/Years
95 developing countries
1993-2002

Dependent Variable(s)
1) Changes in real per
capita economic growth
rate
2) Changes in fiscal
surplus to GDP ratio
3) Changes in current
account surplus to GDP
ratio

Measurement of IMF Program
Effect
Difference in intercepts from the
two sub-samples

98 developing countries
1970-2000 (5-year
intervals)

Average five-year growth
rate of per capita GDP

Findings regarding IMF programs

For the censored-sample and the
instrumental variable approaches, the
"inverse Mills ratio" (probablity of
selection) is included to control for
selection bias.

IMF programs have little impact on real economic growth in
immediate year following the program initiation, but have an
increasingly positive impact on growth in participating
countries as the time horizon grows longer.

For the matching approach, the "matching"
of
participant and non-participant
observations based on propensity scores
readily controls for potential selection bias.

Both the fiscal ratio and the current-account ratio improve
contemporaneously with IMF participation relative to the
counterfactual, with effects in succeeding years differing little
from the immediate effects.

1) Log of per capita GDP at the beginning
of each period

There is considerable evidence from both SUR and 3SLS
regressions suggesting that participation in IMF programs
reduces economic growth. Compliance with conditionality
mitigates this negative effect on growth, although the overall
impact remains substantially negative.

Coefficient of the propensity
score (predicted value of
probability of participation);

Intercept coefficient
Dreher (2005)

Control Variables

3) Compliance with
conditionality variables:
i) No program suspension
dummy (Edwards 2001)
ii) Equally phased loan
disbursements (Dreher 2003)
iii) The share of the agreed
money actually disbursed (Killick
1995)

2) Human resources (secondary school
enrollment, life expectancy, fertility rate)

- 30 -

The sign and statistical
significance of the coefficients
of:
1) IMF programs -- continuous
variable from 0 to 1, measuring
the fraction of each period that a
country operates under an IMF
program (Barro & Lee 2005)
2) IMF loans to GDP

3) Lagged values of investment to GDP
4) Lagged values of governement
consumption to GDP
5) Inflation rate
6) Terms of trade growth
7) Index of globalization
8) Country dummies
9) Time dummies (5-year periods)

The amount of loans has no significant impact on growth.

- 31 -

Table 2a. Magnitude and Composition of Capital Flows
During and Prior to Sudden Stops
(All expressed as percentage of GDP)

Three Year Average Prior to
a Sudden Stop
Total net financial inflows
4.2
[6.8]
Net FDI
1.5
[1.9]
Net portfolio flows
.62
[1.5]
2.1
Net other capital flows
[6.5]
of which,
.52
Net government flows
[2.8]
.82
Net banks flows
[3.6]
Net other flows
.92
[3.1]
Note: Standard deviations are given in brackets.

During the First Year of a
Sudden Stop
-4.6
[4.8]
1.2
[1.6]
-.21
[1.46]
-5.6
[4.6]
-1.2
[3.5]
-2.0
[3.0]
-1.9
[3.6]

Table 2b. Real Effects of Sudden Stops During and Prior to Sudden Stops

Current account balance (%
of GDP)
Real growth
Export growth
Capital formation (% of
GDP)
Fixed capital formation (%
of GDP)

Three Year Average Prior
to a Sudden Stop
-4.2
[5.2]
3.7
[4.2]
1.2
[5.4]
25.3
[7.4]
23.8
[6.6]

During the First Year of a
Sudden Stop
-0.20
[6.2]
0.39
[5.5]
1.2
[4.1]
22.5
[6.9]
20.8
[6.5]

- 32 Table 3. Sudden Stops and Banking and Currency Crises:
Number of Sample Observations
A. Sudden Stops (SS) and Currency Crises (CC)

No CC
No SS
SS
Total

CC

Total

546

45

591

23

10

33

569

55

624

B. Sudden Stops (SS) and Lagged Currency Crises (CC)

No SS
SS
Total

No CC
(Lag)

CC
(Lag)

Total

544

47

591

25

8

33

569

55

624

C. Sudden Stops (SS) and Banking Crises (BC)

No CC
No SS
SS
Total

CC

Total

430

133

563

13

15

28

443

148

591

D. Sudden Stops (SS) and Lagged Banking Crises (BC)

No SS
SS
Total

No CC
(Lag)

CC
(Lag)

Total

412

135

547

20

8

28

432

143

575

- 33 Table 4. IMF-Supported Programs and Sudden Stops: Number of Sample
Observations
A. New IMF-Supported Programs and Sudden Stops (1980-2003)
IMF Program

Sudden Stop
No
Yes
Total

No
396
26
422

Yes Total
256
13
269

652
39
691

B. New or Existing IMF-Supported Programs and Sudden Stops (1980-2003)
IMF Program

Sudden Stop
No
1
Total

No
300
21
321

Yes Total
373
18
391

673
39
712

C. New IMF-Supported Programs and Sudden Stops (1990-2003)
IMF Program
Sudden Stop
No
Yes Total
No
261
148
409
Yes
18
6
24

Total

279

154

433

D. New or Existing IMF-Supported Programs and Sudden Stops (1990-2003)
IMF Program
Sudden stop
No
Yes
Total
No
185
224
409
Yes
15
9
24

Total

200

233

433

- 34 Table 5. Determinants of Sudden Stops

Dependent Variable

Indicator for the first year of Sudden Stop
1990-2003

Treasury Bill Rate
High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP Growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt Servicing/Exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Debt/GDP
Change in Debt/GDP
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Psuedo R2
Number of Observations

19842003

0.007
[0.97]
0.008

0.006

0.011

0.012*

0.013*

[1.36]

[1.08]

[1.61]

[1.68]

[1.88]

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.002***

-0.001***

[3.29]

[3.08]

[2.98]

[3.10]

[2.91]

0.011***

0.012***

0.008**

0.007**

0.0001

[3.15]

[3.11]

[2.12]

[1.99]

[0.05]

-0.006*

-0.006

-0.006

-0.007*

-0.008***

[1.73]

[1.63]

[1.51]

[1.74]

[2.70]

0.001

0.002

0.002*

0.002*

0.001

[1.64]

[1.64]

[1.81]

[1.89]

[0.99]

0.002***

0.002**

0.002**

0.002**

0.002***

[2.69]

[2.49]

[2.25]

[2.35]

[3.04]

0.004***

0.004***

0.005**

0.005***

0.003**

[2.99]

[2.91]

[2.47]

[2.72]

[2.05]

0.003***

0.003***

[2.87]

[2.83]

0.001

0.001

0.001

[1.23]

[1.25]

[0.86]

Yes
No
0.26

Yes
No
0.26

Yes
No
0.21

Yes
No
0.20

227

227

227

227

Yes
No
0.17
332

Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, **
at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

- 35 -

Table 6. Financial Mobility, Exchange Rate Regimes, and Sudden Stops

Dependent Variable
High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP Growth
Trade Balance/GDP

Indicator for first year of Sudden Stop
0.012*

0.013*

0.011

0.012*

[1.84]

[1.91]

[1.61]

[1.73]

-0.002***

-0.002***

-0.002***

-0.002***

[3.11]

[3.08]

[3.17]

[3.19]

0.007**

0.007**

0.007*

0.007**

[2.16]

[2.21]

[1.90]

[2.02]

-0.006

-0.007*

-0.007*

-0.008**

Debt Servicing/Exports

[1.47]

[1.66]

[1.76]

[2.08]

0.002**

0.002**

0.002**

0.002**

Domestic Credit/GDP

[2.03]

[2.01]

[2.05]

[2.09]

0.003**

0.002**

0.002**

0.002**

[2.41]

[2.28]

[2.35]

[2.41]

0.005***

0.005***

0.005***

0.005***

[2.68]

[2.70]

[2.75]

[2.82]

0.028

0.033

[0.54]

[0.61]

0.03

0.03

[0.69]

[0.53]
-0.03

-0.04

[1.15]

[1.27]

0.02

0.02

[0.52]

[0.57]

Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged (IMF)
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility (IMF)
Financial Mobility
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Psuedo R2
Number of Observations

-0.01

-0.02

[0.75]

[1.06]

Yes
No
0.21

Yes
No
0.21

Yes
No
0.21

Yes
No
0.21

227

227

227

227

Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, **
at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

- 36 Table 7. IMF Program and Probability of Sudden Stops (Probit Estimates)
Dependent Variable
High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP Growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt Servicing/Exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility
Financial Mobility
Existing IMF Program
New IMF Program
New Program*Fundamentals
Precautionary IMF program
IMF Credit/GDP
IMF Credit/Short Term Debt

Indicator for first year of Sudden Stop
0.011*

0.011**

0.011*

0.012**

0.006

[1.81]

[1.98]

[1.94]

[2.04]

[1.03]

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001***

[3.15]

[3.19]

[3.18]

[3.10]

[3.69]

0.006*

0.007**

0.007*

0.007**

0.009***

[1.73]

[2.00]

[1.93]

[2.11]

[2.66]

-0.005

-0.002

-0.002

-0.003

-0.003

[1.37]

[0.63]

[0.62]

[0.96]

[0.99]

0.002**

0.002***

0.002***

0.002**

0.001

[2.29]

[2.69]

[2.70]

[2.46]

[1.49]

0.002***

0.003***

0.003***

0.003***

0.002***

[2.66]

[3.08]

[3.06]

[3.02]

[2.95]

0.004***

0.003**

0.003**

0.004***

0.004***

[2.63]

[2.53]

[2.49]

[2.59]

[3.18]

0.067

0.07

0.071

0.069

0.022

[1.14]

[1.23]

[1.24]

[1.20]

[0.53]

0.007

-0.006

-0.005

-0.006

-0.003

[0.20]

[0.20]

[0.16]

[0.19]

[0.11]

-0.018

-0.017

-0.016

-0.017

-0.016

[1.45]

[1.59]

[1.40]

[1.52]

[1.51]

-0.054***

-0.046**

-0.046**

-0.049**

-0.043**

[2.98]

[2.57]

[2.56]

[2.56]

[2.47]

-0.053**

-0.042*

-0.041

-0.047*

-0.040

[1.99]

[1.73]

[1.63]

[1.81]

[1.64]
0.046**
[2.32]

-0.014

-0.01

[0.51]

[0.38]
-0.008*

-0.008*

[1.66]

[1.66]
-.0001

-.0001

[0.63]

[0.84]

Country Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
No
Psuedo R-squared
0.26
0.28
0.28
0.27
0.30
Number of Observations
227
217
217
217
217
Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, **
at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

- 37 Table 8. Determinants of IMF Programs

Dependent Variable
US Aid
Real Growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt Servicing/Exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic
Credit/GDP
Debt/GDP
Change in Debt
Reserves/Imports
Short Term Debt/Reserves

New IMF Program in T-1 or T-2
0.058*** 0.078*** 0.072*** 0.079*** 0.071***
[3.79]
[3.09]
[3.24]
[3.15]
[3.16]
-0.011 -0.027**
-0.018* -0.027**
-0.018*
[1.53]
[2.56]
[1.76]
[2.51]
[1.68]
0.024*** 0.047*** 0.038*** 0.046*** 0.042***
[3.49]
[3.95]
[3.15]
[3.69]
[3.52]
0.008***
0.009**
0.008**
0.009**
0.009**
[2.95]
[2.36]
[2.11]
[2.37]
[2.06]
-0.004*
-0.006*
-0.006
-0.006*
-0.005
[1.83]
[1.68]
[1.62]
[1.71]
[1.54]
-0.007*
-0.006
-0.008
-0.007
-0.007
[1.79]
[1.23]
[1.38]
[1.35]
[1.25]
0.01***
0.01***
0.01***
0.007*** 0.009***
[3.84]
[3.49]
[3.73]
[3.70]
[3.55]
0.002
0.007*
0.009**
0.008*
0.009**
[0.57]
[1.76]
[2.29]
[1.88]
[2.14]
0.001
-0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
[0.63]
[0.10]
[0.53]
[0.19]
[0.21]
-0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***
[2.68]
[2.76]
[2.63]
[2.82]
[2.58]

Exchange Rate Regime:
pegged

0.28***
[2.69]

0.45**
[2.29]

0.37*
[1.86]

0.46**
[2.21]

0.40**
[2.29]

Exchange Rate Regime:
limited flexibility
UN Voting

-0.006
[0.08]

-0.035
[0.27]
-0.045***
[2.92]

-0.103
[0.75]

-0.071
[0.48]
-0.046***
[3.00]

-0.052
[0.41]

0.080***
[3.15]
-0.028**
[2.47]
0.046***
[3.69]
0.009**
[2.23]
-0.006*
[1.74]
-0.007
[1.37]
0.01***
[3.64]
0.008*
[1.89]
0.0003
[0.13]
-0.001***
[2.77]
0.47**
[2.27]

-0.067
[0.46]
-0.046***
[2.95]
-0.004
-0.011
Exposure of US Banks
[0.18]
[0.51]
Exports by G3 countries
0.017
0.076
0.067
[0.14]
[0.60]
[0.53]
Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Psuedo R-squared
0.27
0.36
0.32
0.37
0.26
0.37
Number of Observations
379
284
302
283
303
283
Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, **
at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

- 38 Table 9. Determinants of Sudden Stops: Dealing with the Endogeneity of Programs

Dependent Variable

Indicator for first year of Sudden Stop
1990-2003

High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP Growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt Servicing/Exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Debt/GDP
Change in Debt/GDP
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility
Financial Mobility
Existing IMF Program
New IMF Program, instrumented
Fundamentals*Program, instrumented

0.001
[0.24]

-0.003
[0.83]

-0.004
[0.95]

-0.0002
[0.28]

-0.001
[0.95]

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.0002***

-0.0002***

0.007
[1.47]
0.001***

[3.17]

[3.90]

[3.98]

[3.14]

[3.68]

[3.13]

0.009**

0.011***

0.009***

0.002***

0.002***

0.007**

[2.40]

[3.11]

[2.98]

[2.84]

[3.00]

[2.20]

-0.001

-0.002

-0.002

0.0004

0.0002

-0.003

[0.37]

[0.65]

[0.79]

[0.81]

[0.40]

[1.36]

0.002**

0.001

0.001

0.001***

0.0003***

0.001

[2.06]

[1.08]

[1.18]

[3.49]

[2.71]

[0.70]

0.001*

0.001

.0005

0.0003**

0.0002**

0.001**

[1.78]

[1.47]

[1.04]

[2.24]

[1.99]

[2.45]

0.003**

0.003***

0.002***

0.0004**

0.0003**

0.003**

[2.51]

[2.90]

[2.93]

[2.12]

[2.26]

[2.55]

0.003***

0.002***

0.002***

0.001***

0.001***

0.001*

[2.97]

[3.20]

[3.24]

[4.26]

[4.27]

[1.92]

0.001

0.001

0.001

0.0002**

0.0002**

0.001

[1.42]

[1.57]

[1.61]

[2.14]

[2.23]

[1.63]

0.118*

0.097

0.115*

0.112**

0.090**

0.185**

[1.65]

[1.52]

[1.82]

[2.48]

[2.37]

[2.22]

0.016

0.007

0.003

0.001

0.001

-0.007

[0.59]

[0.35]

[0.16]

[0.30]

[0.15]

[0.43]

-0.007

-0.001

-0.001

-0.0002

[1.15]

[1.30]

[1.50]

[0.02]

-0.027**

-0.023**

-0.021**

-0.004*

-0.003*

-0.025*

[2.08]

[2.10]

[2.20]

[1.75]

[1.83]

[1.80]

-0.111*

-0.092*

-0.096**

-0.030***

-0.026***

-0.041

[1.81]

[1.90]

[1.99]

[3.04]

[3.10]

[0.90]

0.051**

0.049**

0.006*

0.048**

[2.36]

[2.31]

[1.96]

[2.17]

Precautionary IMF program

-0.014
[1.21]

IMF Credit/GDP
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Psuedo R-squared

19842003

Yes
No
0.30

Yes
No
0.33

Yes
No
0.34

-0.004***

-0.003***

0.001

[2.70]

[2.69]

[0.33]

Yes
No
0.42

Yes
No
0.43

Yes
No
0.25

- 39 Number of Observations
227
227
227
217
217
Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, **
at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels. Probability of IMF program is estimated from the first
column of Table 8. The last column includes 1980s in the sample.

282

- 40 Table 10. IMF Programs and Intensity of Sudden Stops
Dependent Variable
High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt Servicing/Exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility
Financial Mobility
Existing IMF Program
New IMF Program
New IMF Program instrumented

Financial Account Outflow if a Sudden Stop Occurred
1.38**
[2.17]

1.35**
[2.12]

0.49
[0.73]

1.23*
[1.74]

0.73
[1.00]

-0.11*

-0.11*

-0.16**

-0.12*

-0.15**

[1.86]

[1.87]

[2.32]

[1.93]

[2.20]

0.61

0.58

0.97*

0.67

1.04*

[1.30]

[1.24]

[1.72]

[1.26]

[1.71]

-0.35

-0.35

-0.32

0.20

0.17

[0.89]

[0.88]

[0.74]

[0.41]

[0.34]

0.23**

0.23**

0.16

0.38**

0.29*

[2.16]

[2.19]

[1.21]

[2.50]

[1.80]

0.20*

0.19*

0.09

0.21*

0.16

[1.81]

[1.79]

[0.74]

[1.67]

[1.23]

0.53***

0.52***

0.59***

0.51***

0.58***

[3.35]

[3.30]

[3.41]

[3.08]

[3.27]

1.94

1.96

3.16

6.28

5.69

[0.37]

[0.38]

[0.50]

[1.00]

[0.88]

2.47

2.56

2.90

3.06

3.34

[0.54]

[0.56]

[0.63]

[0.59]

[0.67]

-2.73*

-2.57*

-3.23**

-3.48**

-3.62**

[1.85]

[1.70]

[1.99]

[2.06]

[2.09]

-7.98**

-7.79**

-5.44

-6.48

-5.04

[2.03]

[1.99]

[1.62]

[1.54]

[1.46]

-4.75

-4.54

[1.60]

[1.52]
-16.94

-12.60

-18.18

[1.56]

[1.16]

[1.58]

Fundamentals*Program, instrumented
Precautionary IMF program
IMF Credit/GDP

7.80*

6.01

[1.69]

[1.27]

-2.32
[0.37]
-1.23

-1.35

[1.30]

[1.43]
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
Time Fixed effects
0.18
0.18
0.19
0.20
Psuedo R-squared
Number of Observations
227
227
227
217
Note: These estimations are based on the “tobit” procedure, with a cut-off at zero outflows.
*** represents significance at 1 percent, ** at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels.

No
0.21
217

- 41 Table 11a: Unconditional Growth Effects
Financial Account Balance (% of GDP)
Program
No
Yes
Total

Sudden Stop

No

3.05
2.23
2.7

Yes

Total

Yes

Total

-2.73
-6.56
-4.01

2.46
1.61
2.1

Real Growth
Program
No
Yes
Total

Sudden Stop

No

4.18
2.54
3.48

0.68
-2.5
-0.38

3.82
2.19
3.14

- 42 Table 11b: Growth Regressions: Effects of Sudden Stops and IMF Programs

Dependent Variable
(1)
GDP Growth, lagged
Per capita income, lagged
Sudden Stop
IMF Program
Sudden Stop* IMF Program

0.003***
[4.88]
-0.064***
[4.90]
-0.041***
[3.88]
-0.013**
[2.31]
0.002
[0.09]

Debt/GDP
Change in Debt/GDP
Debt Service/ Exports

(2)
0.002**
[2.60]
-0.066***
[3.90]
-0.027***
[2.94]
-0.009*
[1.88]
-0.004
[0.25]
-0.001***
[4.18]
-0.001***
[7.78]
0.0001
[0.81]

Financial Balance/GDP

GDP Growth
(3)
0.001
[1.62]
-0.057***
[3.48]
-0.015
[1.63]
-0.010**
[2.10]
0.003
[0.20]
-0.001***
[2.75]
-0.001***
[6.37]
-0.0002
[0.12]
0.002***
[4.14]

Lambda
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Observations
Number of countries
R-squared

Yes
Yes

238
17
0.32

Yes
Yes

230
17
0.51

Yes
Yes

230
17
0.55

(4)
0.002**
[2.57]
-0.062***
[3.64]
-0.025***
[2.72]
0.007
[0.55]
-0.006
[0.40]
-0.001***
[4.56]
-0.002***
[8.51]
-0.0001
[0.29]

(5)

-0.01
[1.28]

0.001*
[1.93]
-0.050***
[3.02]
-0.011
[1.22]
0.016
[1.24]
0.002
[0.11]
-0.001***
[3.28]
-0.001***
[7.27]
-0.0003
[1.28]
0.003***
[4.42]
-0.016**
[2.11]

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

227
17
0.54

227
17
0.58

*** represent significance at 1 percent, ** at 5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels. Robust t
statistics are presented in brackets. Columns (4) and (5) were estimated to allow for the possibility
of selection bias on account of countries selecting themselves into IMF programs because they
expect slow growth. The two-step “heckman” procedure was used. A first-stage selection equation
estimated the probability of an IMF program (using the specification in Table 8, column 1) and the
estimated inverse-Mills ratio was added to the determinants of growth.

- 43 -

APPENDIX I

Appendix 1: Sudden Stop Dates and Sensitivity of Results to Sudden Stop Sample

As described in the main text, a sudden stop is defined as occurring both when the
financial balance is negative, i.e., there is a capital outflow, and there is a sharp increase in
the capital outflow, measured by an increase equal to at least one standard deviation from the
country’s own history. These criteria lead to the identification of sudden stops listed in
Appendix Table A1.
As also discussed in the text, there remain ambiguities and close calls in identifying a
sudden stop. Some, for example, would argue that Brazil experienced a sudden stop in 1999.
This would be true if attention was focused only on non-FDI flows. However, FDI inflows
partially compensated in that year for non-FDI outflows. Another instance widely viewed as
a sudden stop is Russia in 1999, following the events in the final quarter of 1998. Because we
have only a short time series on Russia, the measured standard deviation of the financial
balance is not very informative. Because these events are plausible candidates for sudden
stops, we examined if our results were robust to their being so identified. The first column in
Appendix Table A2 shows that the results remain largely unchanged. The conditioning
variables retain their direction of influence and statistical strength. A pegged exchange rate
regime is clearly associated with a higher probability of a sudden stop than are more flexible
regimes. All the IMF variables are, in this sample, solidly significant.
There is also a concern that sudden stops measured by our procedure may not always
reflect the same pressures. Specifically, countries differ in the degree to which they have
contact with international financial markets and, hence, in the degree to which they are
subject to sharp changes in market sentiment. One criterion for differentiating countries in
this dimension is the degree to which they have access to concessional official finance.
Presumably, countries that can borrow from the IMF on a concessional basis have less
sustained interactions with financial markets than countries that do not so borrow. Four
instances of sudden stop are associated with countries that borrowed on concessional terms:
Bangladesh (1998), Bolivia (1983), Ghana (2002), and Pakistan (1998). Also, it is possible
that the Ghana’s sudden stop is misidentified to the extent that capital inflows were recorded
as an unusual change in errors and omissions. The second column in Appendix Table A2
reports the results when these four sudden stops are dropped. The results stay robust. Finally,
in column 3, we add Brazil and Russia 1999 and drop the four countries with concessional
finance. Once again, our results are confirmed.

- 44 -

APPENDIX I

Appendix Table A1: Countries in the Sample and Sudden Stop Dates
Country

Year

Argentina
1989
Argentina
2001
Bangladesh
1998
Bolivia
1983
Brazil
1983
Brazil
2002
Chile
1983
Colombia
1991
Costa Rica
1982
Czech Republic
1997
Egypt, Arab Rep.
2002
Ghana
2002
Hungary
1990
Indonesia
1997
Korea, Rep.
1986
Korea, Rep.
1997
Malaysia
1998
Mauritius
1985
Mauritius
2001
Mexico
1983
Mexico
1987
Mexico
1995
Pakistan
1998
Peru
1983
Peru
1986
Philippines
1998
Philippines
2002
Poland
1990
Poland
1994
South Africa
1985
Thailand
1997
Turkey
1994
Turkey
1998
Turkey
2001
Uruguay
2002
China, El Salvador, Jordan, Jamaica, and India were
included in the sample but they did not have a
sudden stop.

- 45 -

APPENDIX I

Appendix Table A2: Determinants of Sudden Stops: Sensitivity to Sample Composition

Dependent Variable

High Yield Spread
Change in Real Oil Prices
GDP growth
Trade Balance/GDP
Debt servicing/exports
Domestic Credit/GDP
Change in Domestic Credit/GDP
Debt/GDP
Change in Debt/GDP
Exchange Rate Regime: pegged
Exchange Rate Regime: limited flexibility
Financial mobility
Existing IMF Program
New IMF Program, instrumented
Fundamentals*Program, instrumented
IMF Credit/GDP
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Psuedo R-squared
Number of Observations

Indicator for first year of Sudden Stop
Added Brazil
and Russia
1999
-0.002

Dropped Bangladesh,
Bolivia, Ghana, and
Pakistan
0.0004

Added Brazil and Russia
1999 and dropped Bangladesh,
Bolivia, Ghana, and Pakistan
0.0004

[1.03]

[0.08]

[0.11]

-0.001***

-0.001***

-0.001**

[3.07]

[3.18]

[2.11]

0.005***

0.002***

0.007***

[2.82]

[3.35]

[3.11]

0.001

0.0002

0.0002

[0.51]

[0.06]

[0.20]

0.001**

0.0002**

0.001**

[2.37]

[2.21]

[2.05]

0.001**

0.0002***

0.001**

[1.97]

[2.76]

[2.39]

0.001*

0.0002**

0.001**

[1.71]

[2.03]

[1.98]

0.002***

0.001***

0.003***

[3.80]

[4.34]

[3.65]

0.001**

0.0001**

0.001**

[2.47]

[2.50]

[2.51]

0.145**

0.188***

0.238***

[2.41]

[2.72]

[2.60]

0.03

-0.004

0.046

[1.41]

[0.22]

[1.42]

-0.004

-0.001*

-0.005

[1.10]

[1.65]

[1.25]

-0.010**

-0.002*

-0.015**

[1.99]

[1.74]

[2.10]

-0.071***

-0.021***

-0.089***

[2.91]

[3.25]

[2.61]

0.020**

0.005**

0.025*

[1.97]

[2.09]

[1.82]

-0.011***

-0.003***

-0.014***

[2.58]

[4.07]

[2.59]

Yes
No
0.38

Yes
No
0.48

Yes
No
0.48

217

175

175

- 46 -

APPENDIX I

Columns reporting probit results present marginal probabilities, based on the STATA command
“dprobit”. Robust z statistics are presented in brackets. *** represents significance at 1 percent, ** at
5 percent, and * at 10 percent levels. Probability of IMF program estimate as in the first column of
Table 8.

- 47 Appendix II: Sources of Data and Construction of Variables
Variable
Sudden stop
Real growth
Export growth
Domestic credit
External debt
Debt servicing
IMF program
Precautionary Program
IMF Credit
Financial account
balance
FDI
Portfolio flows
Other capital flows
Current account balance
Capital formation
Financial integration
Exchange rate regime
Currency crisis
Banking crisis
U.S. aid
UN voting pattern
U.S. bank’s exposure in
emerging market
countries
U.S. growth rate
U.S. treasury bill rate

Data Source and Construction
Identified as described in the text using the annual data on financial
account balance from the BOP database, IMF
Calculated using data from the WEO, IMF
Calculated using data from the WEO, IMF
IMF'
s IFS database
World Bank'
s GDF database
World Bank'
s GDF database
Data from the Policy Development and Review Department of the IMF
Data from the Policy Development and Review Department of the IMF
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s BOP database
IMF'
s IFS database
From Mody and Murshid (2005), updated using data from the IMF
From Reinhart and Rogoff (2004)
From Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Berg and Patillo (1999), Frankel
and Rose (1996), Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998) and Frankel and Wei
(2004)
From Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache supplemented with Goldstein,
Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000), and Caprio and Klingebiel (1996)
OECD'
s DCA database
From the website http://home.gwu.edu/~voeten/UNVoting.htm
Calculated using data from the BIS website.
IMF'
s IFS database
IMF'
s IFS database

- -48
REFERENCES

Atoyan, Ruben and Patrick Conway 2005, “Evaluating the Impact of IMF Programs: A
Comparison of Matching and Instrumental-Variable Estimators,” unpublished,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (May).
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee 2004, “IMF Programs: Who is Chosen and What are the
Effects?” (unpublished manuscript, Harvard University and Seoul National
University).
Berg, Andrew and Catherine Patillo 1999 “Are Currency Crises Predicable? A Test,” IMF
Staff Papers, Vol. 46, pp. 107-38
Bordo, Michael D., Ashoka Mody, and Nienke Oomes, 2004, “Keeping Capital Flowing: The
Role of the IMF,” NBER Working Paper No. 10834 (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
National Bureau of Economic Research).
Broda, Christian., and Eduardo Levy-Yeyati (2003), “Dollarization and the Lender of Last
Resort,” in Eduardo Levy-Yeyati and Federico Sturzenegger (eds), Dollarization:
Debates and Policy Alternatives, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (2002), “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging
Markets,” Economia (Spring), pp.1-29.
_____, (2005), “Crises in Emerging Market Economies: A Global Perspective,” NBER
Working Paper no. 11305 (April).
_____, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis F. Mejia (2004), “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops:
The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper no. 10520 (May).
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen Reinhart (2000), “When Capital Flows Come to a Sudden
Stop: Consequences and Policy,” in Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda (eds),
Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, Washington, D.C.:
IMF, pp.175-201.
Caprio, Gerald. J., and Daniela Klingebiel, 1996, “Bank Insolvencies: Cross Country
Experience,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1620.
Cavallo, Eduardo and Frankel, A. Jeffrey, , 2004, “Does Openness to Trade Make
Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish
Causality,” KSG Working Paper Number No. RWP04-038.
Celasun, Oya and Rodney Ramcharan (2005), “The Design of IMF-Supported Programs:
Does the Balance Sheet of the IMF Matter?” unpublished manuscript, IMF.

- -49
Chami, Ralph, Sunil Sharma and Ilhyock Shim (2004), “A Model of the IMF as a
Coinsurance Arrangement,” IMF Working Paper no. 04/219 (November).
Cohen, Daniel and Richard Portes (2004), “Towards a Lender of First Resort,” CEPR
Discussion Paper no. 4615 (September).
Conway, Patrick (1994), “IMF Lending Programs: Participation and Impact”, Journal of
Development Economics 45, 1994, pp. 365-391.
Cordella, Tito and Eduardo Levy Yeyati (2004), “Country Insurance,” IMF Staff Papers 52
(special issue), pp.85-106.
Cordella, Tito and Eduardo Levy Yeyati (2005), “A (New) Country Insurance Facility,” IMF
Working Paper no. 05/23 (January).
De Rato, Rodrigo (2006), “The IMF’s Medium-Term Strategy: New Priorities, New
Directions,” www.imf.org (9 February).
Dervis, Kemal and Ceren Ozer (2005), A Better Globalization: Legitimacy, Government and
Reform, Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development.
Dicks-Mireaux, Louis, Mauro Mecagni, and Susan Schadler (2000), “Evaluating the Effect
of IMF Lending to Low-Income Countries,” Journal of Development Economics Vol.
61, 2000, pp. 495–526.
Dreher, Axel (2005), “IMF and Economic Growth: The Effects of Programs, Loans, and
Compliance with Conditionality,” Working Paper, Department of Management,
Technology, and Economics ETH Zürich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
Zurich) (August).
_____, and Nathan Jensen (2003), “Independent Actor or Agent? An Empirical Analysis of
the Impact of US Interests on IMF Conditions,” Yale University Leitner Working
Paper no. 2003-4.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals”
NBER Working Paper No. 11170.
Eichengreen, Barry J., Kletzer, Kenneth M. and Mody, Ashoka (2005), “The IMF in a World
of Private Capital Markets” (March 2005). NBER Working Paper no. 11198.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=684724. Forthcoming Journal of Banking and Finance.
Eichengreen, Barry and Ashoka Mody (1998), “Interest Rates in the North and Capital Flows
to the South: Is There a Missing Link?” International Finance 1, pp.35-58.

- -50
Evrensel, Ayse Y. (2002), “Effectiveness of IMF-Supported Stabilization Programs in
Developing countries,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 21, pp.
565-587.
Frankel, Jeffery and Andrew Rose (1996), “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
Empirical Treatment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 41, pp. 351-66.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., David Parsley and Shang-Jin Wei (2004), “Slow Passthrough Around the
World: A New Import for Developing Countries?” NBER Working Paper No. 11199
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Managing Macroeconomic Crises” NBER
Working Paper No. 10907 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Goldstein, Morris and Peter Montiel, (1986), “Evaluating Fund Stabilization Programs with
Multicountry Data: Some Methodological Pitfalls,” IMF Staff Papers 33, 304–344.
Ghosh, Atish, Timothy Lane, Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, Ales Bulir, Javier Hamann, and
Alex Mourmouras (2002), “IMF-Supported Programs in Capital Account Crises,”
IMF Occasional Paper no.210, Washington, D.C.: IMF (February).
Gupta, Poonam, Deepak Mishra, and Ratna Sahay (2003), “Output Response to Currency
Crises,” IMF Working Paper no.03/230.
Hardoy, Ines (2003), “Effect of IMF Programmes on Growth: a Reappraisal Using the
Method of Matching, Institute for Social Research Paper 2003:040.
Hutchison, Michael M., 2001, “A Cure Worse Than The Disease? Currency Crises and the
Output Costs of IMF-Supported Stabilization Programs,” NBER Working Paper No.
8305 (March).
_____, and Ilan, Noy, 2003, “Macroeconomic Effects of IMF-sponsored Programs in Latin
America: Output Costs, Program Recidivism and the Vicious Cycle of Failed
Stabilization,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 22, pp.991-1014.
_____, and Ilan Noy, 2004, "Sudden Stops and the Mexican Wave: Currency Crises, Capital
Flow Reversals and Output Loss in Emerging Markets," Department of Economics,
UCSC Paper 573 (April).
Husain, Aasim, Ashoka Mody and Kenneth Rogoff (2005), “Exchange Rate Regime
Durability and Performance in Advanced and Developing Countries,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 52, pp.35-54.
Independent Evaluation Office (2003), “The IMF and Recent Capital Account Crises,”
Washington, D.C.: IMF (October).

- -51

International Monetary Fund (2004), “Are Credit Booms in Emerging Markets a Concern?”
in World Economic Outlook (April), pp.147-166.
Khan, Mohsin S. (1990) “The Macroeconomic Effects of Fund-Supported Adjustment
Programs,” IMF Staff Papers 37, pp. 195-231.
Kaminksy, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking
and Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Review 93, pp.473-500.
Lane, Timothy and Steve Philips (2000), “Does IMF Financing Result in Moral Hazard?”
IMF Working Paper no. 00/168.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Assaf Razin (1998), “Current Account Reversals and
Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities,” IMF Working Paper, WP/98/89.
Mody, Ashoka, and Antu Murshid (2005), “Growing Up with Capital Flows,” Journal of
International Economics 65, pp.249-266.
Mody, Ashoka, and Diego Saravia (2003), “Catalyzing Capital Flows: Do IMF Programs
Work as Commitment Devices?” IMF Working Paper 03/10 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund). Forthcoming in Economic Journal.
Mody, Ashoka and Randall Stone (2005), “The Scope of IMF Conditionality: How
Autonomous is the Fund?” unpublished manuscript, University of Rochester.
Mody, Ashoka and Mark P Taylor (2003), “Common Vulnerabilities,” CEPR Discussion
Paper No.3759.
Marchesi, Silvia (2001), “Adoption of an IMF Program and Debt Rescheduling: An
Empirical Analysis,” Centro Studi Luca D’ Agliano, Development Studies Working
Paper no. 152.
Ostry, Jonathan D. and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2005), “Strengthening IMF Crisis Prevention,”
IMF Working Paper WP 05/206 (November).
Pastor, Manuel (1987), “The Effects of IMF Programs in the Third World: Debate and
Evidence from Latin America,” World Development 15, pp. 249-262.
Przeworski, Adam and James Raymond Vreeland (2000), “The Effect of IMF Programs on
Economic Growth,” Journal of Development Economics 62, pp. 385–421.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, pp.1-48.
Sarno, Lucio, and Taylor, Mark P. (1999), “Hot Money, Accounting Labels and the

- -52
Permanence of Capital Flows to Developing Countries: An Empirical Investigation”,
Journal of Development Economics v59, n2 (August 1999): 337-64
Truman, Edwin (2005), “International Monetary Fund Reform: An Overview of the Issues,”
unpublished manuscript, Institute for International Economics (November).

