                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MODELING INDIVIDUALS' BEHAVIOR:
                EVALUATION OF A EOLICXMAKER' S WOL


                         Alan L. Gustman


                      Working Paper No. 1223




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ONOMIC REARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambritge, MA 02138
                          October 1983




This paper was rtial1y     supported by the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Policy, Evaluation and Research, U.S. Department of
Labor, under contract/purchase order No. B—9—M—O—2671. I would
like to thank Lee Baldwin, Gary Burtless, Cohn Campbell. Joseph
Hight, Keven Rollenbeck, Daphne Kenyon and Meir Kohn for their
helpful comments. This is a pre—pubhication print of an   article
that is to appear in a forthcoming issue of Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management. Copyright 19814 by the Association for
Public Policy Analysis and Mangement. The research reported
here is rart of the FIBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #1223
                                                           October 1983



                       Modeling Individuals' Behavior
                      Zvaluation of a Policymaker's Tool

                                        ABSTRACT



       With a   continuous decline in the cost of manipulating data and a

continuous   increase   in   the richness of data banks, policymakers have
increasing opportunities to build and apply so—called micro—simulation
models——models that attempt to simulate the behavior of the individuals in

a large population under a specified program. The efforts of the

Department   of Labor to use a model in evaluating proposed changes in the
unemployment insurance system point up both the power and the weaknesses
of   such models. Any    user   who   applies these models without attempting to
understand   which of their strengths and     weaknesses    are   most important for
analyzing the problem at hand is asking for trouble. Easy to use or not,
these models are not user friendly.




                                                    Alan    L. Gustroan
                                                    Department     of Economics
                                                    Dartmouth     College
                                                    Hanover, NH 03755
        With the entry of the era of the computer, policy analysts confront
increasing possibilities of simulating through the use of large—scale models
the likely effects of some existing government program or of weighing the
consequences      of saTe proposed changes      in a program. Building a model      that

can    simulate   such   effects   is   a problem   for specialists;   but those who make

and evaluate policies        increasingly will be relying on the projections pro-

vided by such models as a basis for their work. Accordingly, there is a

growing need for all policy analysts to have a sense of both the strengths

and the limitations of the models.



Nature of the Models

       Among the various tools for simulation, the so—called micro—simulation

model -has been used to an increasing extent by U.S. government agencies and

by various states. So far the principal applications of such models have

been   in assessing the effects of federal programs that entail payments to
individuals,      including food stamps, housing support, and aid to families

with dependent children.

       Micro—simulation models are built up out of two kinds of data.

       To begin with, the U.S. government periodically conducts censuses and

large scale surveys that cover a sufficient number of individuals in the

United States so that reliable information can be gained about differences

among people who live in different states. Censuses and large surveys of

this sort provide some characteristics for each such individual, such as

place of residence, age, family status and so on. They also report whether

the individual is working or not, income from work, and useful but incomplete

information     on income from some       government programs.

       Data   such as these are not sufficient by themselves to simulate effects
                                           2



of any   existing or prospective program. Data of the type collected in a

general   census must be linked to other sources of information. One purpose
of the linkage is to enlarge and enrich the description of the individuals
and their economic activities provided by the census and large survey data.
Another purpose is to permit analysis for zone period other than that of
the census, and thus to specify the behavioral responses of the individuals
concerned. If income taxes are the focus of the study and if the object
is   to simulate the behavior of all taxpayers, it        is obviously necessary to
know much more than a census of population will reveal: for example,

detailed information on the sources of income of each individual, the pro-

pensity of each individual to cheat, and so on. Since estimates of that

kind are not available in the record related to each individual, they must

be obtained either by matching records from        the   census with those from

other    sources, or by enlarging   each   such record by sone approximating process
on the basis of information gleaned from        other sources. These other sources

of   information can come from anywhere: from studies based on smaller
samples of individuals, from the experience of operating officials or
their management information systems, or even from pure guesswork.
        Enlarging individual records by an approximating process is a tricky
operation. The first step is to create         categories in the population that

need    to be separately tracked. The appropriate categories depend on the
subject being studied: a food stamp program        will require one set of

categories,    an income tax program another set. If income taxes are the
subject of the study, for instance, and if outside evidence suggests that
the    incidence of cheating is higher among independent businessmen than among

wage earners whose earnings are reported by their employers, distinguishing
                                           3



between the two groups    in   the general census data will be important.    Each

group    so identified might   be   assigned a different proportion of cheaters,
according   to the outside evidence; and the specific designation of those

assumed to be cheaters could then be determined by random choice within each

group. In that way, the two sources of data will be linked and the model

will be ready to spell out some of the aggregate implications of the income

tax program to be tested.

       A micro—simulation model called TRIM (acronyflforTransferIncoModel) has

provided the core for various micro—simulation models that have been put

to a number of different uses in the U.S. government and elsewhere.         Although

TRIM has been widely used, however, there has been       little critical evalua-
tion of the suitability of such models either for predicting the impact of
existing programs under changing economic circumstances, or for predicting
the effects of changes in the proqrans.1 The opportunity to undertake
such an evaluation arose in connection with a micro—simulation model that
was used to analyze the federal government's unemployment insurance program —
a   model we can call the Unemployment Insurance (u.I.) model.2 - This model,
although used independently of TRIM, both draws on information from the
TRIM model and is meant to serve as an addition to TRIM which would enhance
the power of TRIM in analyzing the phenomenon of unemployment. To get
some sense of the strengths and weaknesses of models such as these, it is
helpful first of all to take a closer look at how the model actually
works.
                                      4.




How   the Model Simulates
       The model's structure. The model may be viewed as a set of simulation
programs which takes as inputs two types of information: data on individ-
uals from a large survey and assumptions made about economic and other
conditions during the period for which the simulation is being run. These
inputs   are processed through three modules, each of which consists of a

set of equations, producing as a product the model's predictions.

       The process begins with relevant information that is available from

the survey record for each individual. To date only one such

survey   has been used as the data input for the   UI model —   the same survey
that   was used to estimate some of the model's equations. As is the case with
the TRIM model in general, with some modification of the progran., this basic
input into the simulation model may be drawn from the census or a large
survey. Included in each survey record are such variables as
age, race, sex, marital and family status,   industry of employment, occupa-

tion, and state of residence. In Figure 1, that      source of data is indicated
in   position 1.

          that at this stage the file can contain no information on the
       Note

employment status of the individuals it covers for the period of the

simulation. The task of the simulation model is to create estimates of
such information, estimates that are consistent with the assumptions about
the year of the simulation and about economic conditions for the simulation
period that have been made in position 2. More specifically, this is the
                                                    Figure 1.

                           Schematic Diagram Indicating 110w the Unemployment
                                     Insurance (UI) Model Simulates
    Information on Individuals               Simulation Program             Assumptions Made By User



                                                                                        2.               I
    Data on individuals from                                                Assumed information on       I

(   large sirvey   (Qr                                                      economic conditions and
    record.                                                                 time period.                 I




                                           The current labor market
                                           module: equations de—
                                           scribing labor market
                                       •

                                           behavior.


                   4.                                                                   5.
    Data on individuals from                                                       Is of program to be
    survey record                                                           tested.
               plus                                                       fDetai
    predicted  market behavior
    for each indiviciua] from
    current labor market module.

                                                        6.
                                           The unemployment insurance
                                           benefits nodule: equations
                                           describing benefits.

                   7.                                                               9.
    Variables from position 1                                               Assumed information from
                plus                                                        position 2.
    predicted labor market be-                                                        plus
    havior from labor market                                                assumed conditions for th
    module                                                                  year preceding the simu-
                plus                                                        lation.
    predicted UI benefits from
    UI   benefits module    -



                   B.
    Information from survey
    record on income in year
    preceding census.

                                           The   income adjustment
                                           equations describing income.

                                                       1
                                                       11.
                                           output providing record of
                                           labor market behavior, Un-
                                           employment insurance and in-
                                           come adjustment.
                                         5




job of the labor market module, which occupies position 3. That module is

comprised   of a set of equations which have been- estimated from a number      of

sources of data. For example, time series       data   from other sources may

provide the rate of participation in the 1.abor force of people in a

given demographic category in different years. Such data may be used

to construct a regression that specifies for each such demographic group

what   proportion is in the labor force at each point in the business     cycle.

These    regressions can   then be used to predict the probability that in-

dividuals within the given demographic group will be in the labor force

during a particular period. Of course, the modeler has no way of knowing

which specific individuals in the demographic group covered by his census

(or other large survey) records will actually be in the labor force. But

that specific designation can be assigned on a random basis to the

appropriate number of individuals who are in that demographic group.

       Using that approach, each individual in the population is described

according to the principal indicators of the individual's status in the

labor market. In addition to indicating whether the individual is in the

labor force, the record will indicate whether the individual is employed

or unemployed; if unemployed, whether a new job seeker or someone who has

lost or quit a job; and if unemployed, for how long. The recàrds so generated

occupy position 4 in the figure. At this point, however, the process of

providing a full record for the experience of each individual has only

begun;    A module in the model, dubbed the    current labor market status

module,   has been completed; but two more stages in the process     still lie

ahead.
                                          6



     As we shall presently see, the fact that the UI model performs in a
series of separate stages has profound implications. In the language of
the statistician the model is recursive and therefore to be distinguished
from a    model that is represented by a system of simultaneous equations. A

simultaneous system generates all its solutions in a single step, producing

values that are consistent with all the equitions. But a recursive model

operates sequentially; each stage builds on what has been learned or

estimated in early stages, but without modifying the solutions provided by

the earlier stages.

     WitW the completion of the current labor market module, the model

enters on the second stage of an estimating process. That stage,

indicated in position 5 on Figure 1, calls for feeding in the details of

the policy whose consequences are to be estimated by the simulation process.

For example, if the purpose of the simulation is to analyze the effects

of a new policy proposal, the information required would be the proposed

changes    in program rules. The program      specifications, together with the

output    from the current labor market module, become inputs into a set of
equations   that predict unemployment benefits; that set of equations is

dubbed    the unemployment insurance benefits module, representing the second
major building block of the model, and is located in position 6.
     A    third module, the income adjustment module, consists of a set of

equations    that estimate the incc.ne   of individuals during the period of the

simulation, and according to categories that are compatible with the output

of the other two modules. Once the income of the individuals has been

introduced in the model, it is possible to relate        the unemployment benefits
                                       7



of individuals to the income of individuals in a variety of ways re].evant
to policy. For instance, the impact of the program on people in different
income categories can be compared; such benefits can be compared to prior
earnings, or to unearned income or to income that will be received from
other transfer programs.
       Among the various estimates that the model has produced are the number
of   persons   that are expected to receive unemployment insurance, the number
of weeks unemployment insurance benefits are received by unemployed persons,

and the fraction of lost incomes which are replaced by unemployment insurance.

But the equations of the nodel——or of any of the modules in the model-—

can generate a wide range of information. Separate values can be calculated

for any group in the population, provided of course that the group has

been distinguished in the equations: whites can be distinguished from

blacks, women from men, northern states from southern states, and so on.

The weights indicated from the population survey would, of course, have to

be appropriately adjusted so that each group of the population was weighted

in accordance with its importance during the year of the sinulation rather

than the year of the survey: but with that adjustment made, values can

then be aggregated to generate information for each distinguished group.

Moreover, the outcomes can be distributed among individuals in the population,

so that when a proposal to alter a program is under consideration, the

characteristics of the winners cdi, be     distinguished from those   of the losers.




The Eauions
       Choosing an approach. When   devising equations that seek to predict
the performance of individuals in a market such as the labor market, the
                                          8




modeler can choose from several quite different approaches. One approach

simply uses a record of behavior in the past, without specifying what

produced     the behavior. Thus, the employment performance of 19-year-old
black males can be traced through the ups and downs of the l9GOs and
lglOs, and the assumption can be made that similar econctnic conditions in
the l980s will produce a similar record of employment for the group. In
essence, this was the approach      most commonly used to dove op the equations

for   the unemployment insurance model.
       the   problems associated with such all approach are welt known. Because

the factors that actually determine employment performance have not been

specified,     the relationships observed in the base period may be altogether
misleading; the observed performance during that period may have been due
to an unspecified factor that is no longer present jn the l9SOs. For
example, if     the   various entitlement programs such as Aid   to   Families with
Dependent Children were a factor in determining the employment performance
of young women during the base period, a change in the program in the 1980s
could   greatly impair the usefulness of the    base period data for projection
purposes.      toialogously, if labor market opportunities were an important

determinant for labor force participation by ninorities or young adults, and

these opportunities were more favorable during the base period than during

the period of projection——due to the presense, for instance of large scale

public service jobs and training programs during that period——then any

equation     which ignored the role of such opportunities may not       be useful

for   simulating behavior     during the period of projection.

        A quite   different way of attempting to project the behavior of various
groups would be to       try explicitly to identify the causal factors that pro-
                                          9



duce    differences in the decisions they make, and thus their performance over
time, and then to express these behavioral relationships in the equations.

In the case of labor market behavior, a number of well developed hypotheses

exist that serve to explain the likelihood of unemployment, the reasons

for unemployment and the duration of unemployment for various groups in

the populition. Consider the decisions made by workers, such as the

decision to quit a job. Young workers learn about jobs by trying then.

Some find a job offering acceptable employment conditions early in their


search. Others may continue to change jobs until they marry or reach their

middle or late twenties, experiencing intermittent       spells of unemployment
as a result. Thus we find that within the group of younger workers——and
indeed for all workers——the longer the worker has held a job, the less likely
he is to quit. The reasons why other Factors in the labor market, such
as unions, reduce quits have been extensively analyzed, as have the conditions
which    influence the decision of an unemployed worker whether to accept art

offer for a job.3

       Factors   affecting   the decisions of firms, and thus the availability of

employment to worker may be a little more obvious. When there is a regular

and well expected cycle in demand, layoffs are well anticipated, and date of

recall   may be made known to     the worker at the time of   layoff,   longer

periods   of slack demand may result in permanent layoffs for some, es-
pecially for those who have not been with the firm long enough to have
received training that is specialized and of greatest use within the firm.
The equations in the model that purport to predict employment behavior, how-
ever, make   none of these distinctions; among those with the same demographic

characteristics    who worked full time last year,. they do not distinguish
the   individuals most likely to experience a layoff nor the individuals whose
                                          io

layoffs are likely to be permanent.
        The modelers problems are exacerbated——and the risk of error enhanced——
by the    fact that there are neither historical records nor well developed

hypotheses     that would account for some aspects of behavior in the labor
market. For example, the previously mentioned layoff decision is not fully
understood. Some firms that      experience    a downturn in demand for their pro-
ducts fire     some employees while retaining the rest on a full—time basis,

whereas   others cut the hours of work for most workers and retain practically
all   of their labor force. Some finns cut wages rather than employment to

cushion the downturn, while others will not reduce wages. When the reasons

for these differences are not well understood, the modeler has little choice

but to rely on hunch. Some of the equations, such as the one predicting

weeks   of   employment, are perforce of this type, being based on simple

mechanistic     assumptions.



        The quality of the data. Somewhat apart from the question of the

nature of the equations being used is the quality of the data on which the

equations are based. In the development of the equations for the labor

market module, no single data source could be used that would permit the

modelers to estimate all of the various relations that they wished to

express. 'or instance, data that described the differences in labor

market status among individuals were not broken down into all the categories

that interested the modelers, even for a single base year.

        Time series that   consistently   described   the employment behavior of
constituent groups were even less adequately disaggregated. For a model
                                           11



that is expected to project the incidence of unemployment through the
business cycle, inadequacies of that sort become particularly threatening.
       In any event, the data on labor market behavior by relevant groups is

developed by splicing various sets of statistics developed for somewhat dif-

ferent primary purposes. One such        set represents a survey at a point in

time   (1976) • the   Survey of Income and Education, which is essentially an
expanded version of the monthly Current Population Survey, asking more ques-
tions and surveying a larger group. The Survey of Income and Education
provides     flare reliable   information about activities in   state of residence

than can be obtained from the monthly surveys        of   the population. The other

sources are a diverse collection of surveys which provide various tine

series of the labor market behavior by month or by year. In order to

generate an estimate for the whole population from the smaller samples

covered in the time series surveys, measures from these surveys of the labor

market behavior of different ages and sex are attributed to those of the

same   age   and sex who were sampled in the    Survey of   Income and Education.

But neither the Survey of Income and Education nor the time series data

present all the variables that are of interest to labor market analysts.

       The   character   of the equations. On the basis of such incomplete

data, the model proceeds in highly eclectic fashion to develop equations

for unemployment behavior in the business cycle. Some of the equations

are naive; for instance. sone assume that a given type of unemployment

will always bear a fixed proportional relationship to another figure,

irrespective     of   the phase in the cycle. For example, unemployment rates

of nonwhites are assumed to be related in the sane way to the unemployment
                                        12



rates of    whites rio matter   what their industry or occupation. Some relations
take what    statisticians would describe as a reduced Eon——they merge
together the    effects   of direct program influences on a particular variable
with the responses of individuals and         firms to   the rules of the program.
For   example, the equations which predict duration of        unemployment and

relate   unemployment duration to state of residence, among other variables,
may be viewed in this way. Strictly speaking, no equation is truly
structural——each equation corresponding to a separate aspect of behavior.
Those equations which night in sane sense be structural, such as the
equation analyzing labor force participation, omit          too   many variables to
allow    them to be clearly classified.

       Some of the implications of this eclectic approach can

be seen by examining more closely the elements that went into the making of the

last equation referred to above——the         one that expresses the   probability that the

individual will be in the labor force during the period to be simulated.

This equation does not incorporate factors reflecting opportunities in

the labor market. For instance, the participation of the individual in

the labor force is not directly related either to the level of wages being

offered or to the availability of jobs. Nor is the influence of such

factors picked up indirectly, through other measures that might reflect the

demand for labor or the Level of wages offered, such as changes in the

level of output over time. Instead, labor force participation is projected

essentially on the basis of three factors: income of the family, personal

and family characteristics, and the labor force participation of the in-

dividual in the prior year. These relationships, in turn, are devised in
                                            13



part from other models, such as the Urban Institute's DYNASIM model.
cice the relationships have been defined, they remain unchanged in the
unemployment insurance model through the business cycle. The danger
of using unchanged relationships of this kind in all phases of the- cycle
is    apparent. For example, although an individual's being in the labor

force nay be related to whether the individual was in the labor force in

the preceding year, that relationship would surely be dirforent            at dif-
ferent stages      in the cycle.

        Another key equation seeks to measure       the   probability of unemployment

for each of various groups. Such groups in the labor force, distinguished

by age and sex, are covered in the model. In this instance, each equation

is derived from annual data on unemployment over a period of eleven years.

The   probability    of   unemployment for any of   these groups is estimated from
equations      that rely on three factors for their predictions: a time trend,

observed in the 11-year base period; the age and sex of the individual; and

the rate of unemployment that is projected for white males of a given age,

for   each age in the 35— to 54—year range. The unemployment rate           for these white

males   embodies some of the market opportunities as they vary over the business
cycle that were not considered in the analysis of labor           force participation.

        The   estimates of the probability of unemployment that emerge from this
procedure, however, are not sufficiently disaggregated for the subsequent
steps in the model, when the effects of various unemployment insurance
systems are to be conSidered. The provisions of unemployment insurance
vary by individual states, each of which lays down different requirenents            for

eligibility with respect to        previous wages and weeks of employment. The
relation      of the level and   duration   of benefits to the individual's work
                                          14



history also varies among states. For later steps, therefore, it is

necessary     to determine unemployment probabilities by state of residence,
and to have the closest possible relation between current unemployment and
past employment history.        Further disaggregation of the unemployment
prediction is achieved by adjusting the probabilities of unemployment with
so—called     adjustment factors derived ftact   the   average relationships   for

state, occupation and industry that      appeared   to exist among these categories

in a base period, 1967 to 1977. Those relationships, in turn, are gleaned

from   an   analysis of surveys which identify the state of residence of the

unemployed.

       Estimates based on techniques such as these raise familiar questions.

For   one thing, the regression equations are obviously vulnerable. With
only   eleven annual observations, how stable should we assume these es-
timates to be? In so brief a time period, how can we distinguish the
effects of an enduring trend from the      effects of a cyclical movement or

of a randtim disturbance?      Inasmuch as any effect ascribed to trend is
simply   an expression of some otherwise unidentified factor, how secure is

the assumption that the 'trend' will continue in the future?

       The   use of simple adjustment factors to estimate the unemployment
experience for those living in different       states, or working in different

industries and     different   occupations, also entails high risks. Presumably,

holding age and sex constant, those in different states or jobs will experience

somewhat different patterns of unemployment through the business cycle.

But because the adjustment factors are unchanged over the cycle, those

possibilities cannot be taken into account.
                                        15




       The    vulnerability of the various equations in the model can be
illustrated frau other elements of the model as well. Within the current
labor market module, for instance, the equations that estimate the
duration of unemployment suffer from essentially the same weaknesses that
are present in the equations that estimate the probability of unemploy-
ment. And added questions are introduced by the equations that are
contained in the unemployment insurance benefit module, That module, in
fact,    illustrates why simulation models often compel modelers to take

great leaps across uncharted territory in order to complete the simulation

process.

        The logic of a simulation model often requires the modeler to fill in

with data for which no empirical basis exists. For instance, in order to

receive unemployment benefits, an individual must make an application. But

no hard data appear to exist on which to base an estimate of the propor-

tions of unemployed that will in fact apply. In developing the model,

analysts assumed—-not unreasonably-—that the probability would vary with

age, sex, student status, and various other characteristics, including

duration of unemployment. But the probabilities that were then assigrrnd

to each of these categories appear to have been nothing more than the

guesses of the modelers.4

        The   income adjustment module also offers numerous illustrations of
the demands that a large—scale model imposes on the modelers. Individuals
that    are laid off, for instance, not      only lose   their current wages but

also may lose pension rights; just what pension rights they lose, however,

depends on the terms of individual pension piaiis, a fact that prevents the

modeler from dealing with such problems in any but a rough—and-ready fashion.
                                             16



        Of course, model—builders are as conscious of the problems described

above    as   those who profess to criticize their handiwork. Accordingly, in

the   process of      structuring the equations in a model such as the unem-

ployment      model, analysts are constantly on the        alert   for opportunities to
align their         equations with reality and experience. For instance, strenuous

efforts      are made   to pick up changes in the composition of the population

over   the years, including changes         in   age, sex, and   marita' status.5

Moreover,      whenever there is an opportunity to compare the estimates pro-
duced by the equations with real data, such comparisons are made; and if

the estimates are materially different from reality1 the estimating equations

are   adjusted to try to bring about a closer fit.
        Some of      these efforts move a step in the right direction. But others
are extremely         dangerous,   such as adjusting   the equations to remove any dif-

ference      between a predicted and actual value without understanding where
the   difference cones from and whether it            will persist. Given the inherent
character      of the model and the      data it   uses, none of these adjustments

increases the reliability of the model by very much, and some of the adjust-

ments may undermine its usefulness.



The Recursive Structure

       It   will be remembered that the unemployment insurance model is
recursive in structure; that is, the             model produces results sequentially

without      allowing for the      possibility that the result generated at later

stages      in the model's operations might be helpful in reestimating the
values generated at earlier stages. The reaSons for employing a recursive
structure      in   this instance are fairly clear. As we saw in our description
                                           17



of the model •   its ultimate results emerge from a series of modules •       each

of   which stands   on its own statistical feet. Linking those modules in a
way that could simultaneously produce solutions for         all   of them would be

a very difficult statistical task. Yet failing to link the modules means

that same major relationships are disregarded in the estimates that the

model produces.

       consider, for example, the equations explaining the probabilities of

labor force participation and unemployment, equations which are found

within the current labor market module. The question whether the

unemployment was temporary or permanent, whether it arose from layoffs.

quits,   or   new entrants, does   not   get introduced until a later stage in the

model.    Because the model is recursive, those questions are not         allowed to

influence     the previously developed estimates of labor force participation
and unemployment. Yet there is no doubt that the nature of the existing
unemployment can, for example, affect the rate of labor force participation.
       Another   illustration of the risks imposed by the recursive structure

of the model is highlighted by the changes that have recently been adopted

in the unemployment insurance programs. As a result of such changes in

federal   law, unemployment insurance benefits are now taxed in all but
lower income families, the maximum—benefit period has been reduced, and
eligibility requirements have been tightened——all these measures having
been taken to reduce the costs of the insurance program. These changes
will   affect the equations of the unemployment insurance benefit module;

but -they are also likely to have an important impact on the values generated

in the current labor market        module, such as duration of unemployment • reason
                                       18



for unemployment, incidence of unemployment, and probability of labor force
participation. Given the way the model has been arranged, however, and
given the structure of each of its equations, the changes in the unemploy-
ment insurance will not affect the values generated by the current labor
market module.
        cinissions of this type have two important consequences——they can cause
errors in prediction even if policy remains unchanged, and they may cause
serious sidE effects of any new policy to be missed. In the past, for
instance, unemployment insurance programs have been made more generous
during recessions, a fact that has increased the likelihood or the duration
of unemployment. Equations in the current labor market module, however,
may attribute labor market outcomes to the cyclical movements in economic
activity when in fact they are due in part to the increase in unemployment
benefits. Accordingly, the predictions of some equations of the current labor
market module may not be correct for any future recessions in which unem-
ployment benefits were not increased.
        More generally, there is considerable evidence that the nature of a

states     unemployment insurance system affects the level of unemployment in
the state as well as the relative incidence of different kinds of unemploy-
ment.     Ample evidence exists, for instance, that where employer payroll

taxes are not raised sufficiently to cover the full cost of benefits for

any additional workers the firm decides to layoff, temporary layoffs are

more frequent.6 In the recursive model, however, the differences in unemploy-

ment among states are estimated without direct reference to the unemployment

insurance system because the insurance characteristics come later in the

recursive sequence. To be sure, the current labor market nodule would be
                                    19



inadequate in its present fonu for reflecting different behaviors at the
finn level; major changes in that module would be required in order to pick
up such effects. Nevertheless, the risk of the recursive structure is

clear: if the analyst accepts the model's logic and assumes that the unen—

ployrnent insurance system does not affect the patterns of uneirloyment,

the analyst is likely to be misled when modeling the effects of any proposed

change in the system.                      -




     None of these problems is easily handled, a fact of which analysts

are acutely conscious. Apart from the fact that each module stands on its
own feet, there is the equally formidable fact that the feedback effects

that have to be stipulated are disconcertingly complex. This is illus-

trated in a recent analysis of the effects that insurance benefit levels

and benefit periods have upon the duration of unemploynnt of insured workers.

It turns out that different individuals have different preferences for

leisure relative to income, a fact that impedes easy generalization

regarding   their responses.7

     All told, therefore, the recursive feature of the model poses

considerable added risks. That fact comes as no surprise to those who

fashion such models; their choice of the recursive approach is imposed on

them by cost and convenience, not chosen by them as a preferred technique.

But policymakers who are the users of the output of such models must

always be aware of the implications of the recursive feature.



Implications for Model Users

     the purpose of exploring this model is not to recommend to the

policyrnaker whether or not to use such models. They may be better than
                                          20



an   educated guess. They may even be better than the predictions that would
be obtained from simpler models, such as a model that focussed only on a
few key aspects of labor market behavior. But then again, they may not.
       Given the state of this art, these models will be subject to consider-
able error. While some of the equations seem perfectly reasonable, others
are incomplete or incorrectly specified. Give the structure of the models,
the errors in the various equations nay be expected to interact in ways
that make it very difficult to determine their overall effect on the model's
predictions,      Particular errors affect the suitability of a model for some

uses more than others. Reduced form equations mix together the effects

of current policy with relevant behavioral responses, undermining the model's

suitability for predicting the effects of major changes in policies. The

sane   is   true for the effects of aligning the model, adjusting the equations

so   that their predictions come closer to currently observed outcomes.
Incompletely specified equations may predict effects that are not there
and will     ignore some effects that are. Instability also appears likely

to characterize the time     series   equations that are used to sintlate the

effectsof policies in future periods, mixing together cyclical influences
and secular trends.                            -


       Where these models seem least prone to error is in projecting the

effects of current progra1.s a few years into the future, under the assumptions

of little change in economic conditions or in program rules. For such a

projection, the biggest source of change is changes in population. Yet

even these projections will be subject to error if the factors that are

omitted from the equations vary in relation to the factors thereare included
                                        21



in   ways that are different from the past. Correspondingly, the fact that

a   model generates   predictions which turn out to be accurate in the short

term   under conditions of unchanging policy is no test of the suitability
of   the modelfor projecting the effects of major      changes in policy; nor has
such   a model been tested for its ability to project effects over a long

horizon.

       However these models are to be applied, considerably    more information
should   be developed about their potential errors in use: what types of

error are involved, how wide their effects are likely to be, and how the

various types of errors nay interact. Such an effort would seem to be

worthwhile even if the funds     required have to be   diverted from further work

on refining and extending the model. Policymakers who use these models

urgently need to know how     sensitive the results of the model may be to
differences   in economic assumptions, inadequacies in the model's structure,

and errors in the underlying data.
                                                22




                                               Notes




1.   For an exception, see General Accounting Office. "An Evaluation of the Use

          of   Transfer Income Model——TRIM——to Malyze Welfare Programs,'

          (Washington, D.C.: November, 1977).
2.   More precisely, the authors call the model "A Simulation Model of Unenploy—

          ment. Insurance." The mode was constructed for the Department of

          labor by researchers at the Urban Institute under the direction

          of Dr. Wayne Vroman. The explanations of the model are in a series of

          memos.     (vroman, Wayne, "A Simulation Model of Unemployment Insurance,"

          Urban    Institute   Working paper number 1280—7, August 1980 and   Vronan, Wayne,
          "The Urban Institute Simulation Model of        Unemployment Insurance

          Detailed Project Memos," Urban Institute Working paper No. 1280—4

          August 1980). The model       has   been used for policy analysis by the Labor

          Department's    Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Evaluation
          and Research, as well as by the Unemployment Insurance Service and
          the National Conr.ission on Unemployment Insurance
                                               23



3.   Behavioral theories which explain unemployment are reviewed in Gustman,
          Alan   L.,   'Analyzing   the Relation between Unemployment Insurance and
          Unemployment," in R. G. Ehrenberg.        editor. Research in   Labor Economics,

          (5) (1982): 69—114.

4.   The memo dated May 24. 1919, contained in Vroman,          .   .Detailed   Project

          Memos," .       cit.,   includes the following quotation onp. 15: 'It

          should be stressed that the Table 6        probabilities   are initial estimates

          based on apriori considerations, and not on any regularly published

          program data."

S.   See, for instance, Sulvetta, Margaret B. • An Analyst's Guide to TRIM — The

          Transfer Income Model, (Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute, June 1976).

6.   Feldstein, Martin S .,"The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary

          Layoff Unemployment," flnerican Economic Review, (68)5 (December 1978):

          834—846; Feldstein, Martin S ., Temporary        Layoffs    in the Theory of

          Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, (84)5 (october 1g76):

          937-957;     Baily,   Martin Neil, "cn the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment,"

          Econoinetrica, (45)5      (July   1977): 1043—1063; Topel, iobert, "Unemploy-

          ment Insurance Financing and Unemployment: apirica1 Investigation

          of Adverse Incentives," Report to the Office of the Assistant Secretary

          for Policy, Evaluation and Research, U.S. Department of Labor, November, 1982.

7.   Hoff itt,   Robert   and Nicholson, Walter, "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance

          on Unemployment: The Case of Federal Supplemental Benefits,' Review of

          Economics and statistics,          (64)4 (February 1982): 1—11.
