                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 STOCK AND BOND RETURNS WITH MOODY INVESTORS

                                             Geert Bekaert
                                             Eric Engstrom
                                          Steven R. Grenadier

                                         Working Paper 12247
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12247


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




Bekaert, Corresponding author: Columbia Business School, 802 Uris Hall, 3022 Broadway, New York New
York, 10027; ph: (212)-854-9156; fx: (212)-662-8474; gb241@columbia.edu. We thank Pietro Veronesi,
John Campbell, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2004 for useful comments. All remaining
errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. This work does not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom and Steven R. Grenadier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Stock and Bond Returns with Moody Investors
Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom and Steven R. Grenadier
NBER Working Paper No. 12247
May 2006
JEL No. G12, G15, E44

                                           ABSTRACT

We present a tractable, linear model for the simultaneous pricing of stock and bond returns that
incorporates stochastic risk aversion. In this model, analytic solutions for endogenous stock and bond
prices and returns are readily calculated. After estimating the parameters of the model by the general
method of moments, we investigate a series of classic puzzles of the empirical asset pricing
literature. In particular, our model is shown to jointly accommodate the mean and volatility of equity
and long term bond risk premia as well as salient features of the nominal short rate, the dividend
yield, and the term spread. Also, the model matches the evidence for predictability of excess stock
and bond returns. However, the stock-bond return correlation implied by the model is somewhat
higher than in the data.

Geert Bekaert
Columbia Business School
802 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Eric Engstrom
Mail Stop 89
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington, DC 20551
eric.c.engstrom@frb.gov

Steven R. Grenadier
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sgren@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

Campbell and Cochrane (1999) identify slow countercyclical risk premiums as the key to explaining
a wide variety of dynamic asset pricing phenomena within the context of a consumption-based asset-
pricing model. They generate such risk premiums by adding a slow moving external habit to the
standard power utility framework. Essentially, as we clarify below, their model generates counter-
cyclical risk aversion. This idea has surfaced elsewhere as well.     Sharpe (1990) and practitioners
such as Persaud (see, for instance, Kumar and Persaud 2002) developed models of time-varying risk
appetites to make sense of dramatic stock market movements.
    The first contribution of this article is to present a very tractable, linear model that incorporates
stochastic risk aversion. Because of the model’s tractability, it becomes particularly simple to address
a wider set of empirical puzzles than those considered by Campbell and Cochrane. Campbell and
Cochrane match salient features of equity returns, including the equity premium, excess return
variability and the variability of the price dividend ratio. They do so in a model where the risk free
rate is constant. Instead, we embed a fully stochastic term structure into our model, and investigate
whether the model can fit salient features of bond and stock returns simultaneously. Such over-
identification is important, because previous models that match equity return moments often do so
by increasing the variability of marginal rates of substitution to the point that a satisfactory fit with
bond market data and risk free rates is no longer possible. Using the General Method of Moments
(GMM), we find that our model can rather successfully fit many features of bond and stock return
data together with important properties of the fundamentals, including a low correlation between
fundamentals and returns.
    The NBER Working Paper version of Campbell and Cochrane also considered a specification
with a stochastic interest rate. While that model matched some salient features of interest rate
data, being a one-factor model, it necessarily could not provide a fully satisfactory fit of term
structure data. Moreover, the one shock nature of the model imposes too strong of a link between
bond and stock returns, an issue not examined in Campbell and Cochrane. The results in Campbell
and Cochrane (1995) were nevertheless suggestive that a joint modeling of bond and stock returns
within their or a related framework might prove successful. In our model, stochastic risk aversion
is not perfectly negatively correlated with consumption growth as in Campbell and Cochrane, but
the perfect correlation case represents a testable restriction of our model.



                                                    1
   Once we model bond and stock returns jointly, a series of classic empirical puzzles becomes
testable. First, Shiller and Beltratti (1992) point out that present value models with a constant risk
premium imply a negligible correlation between stock and bond returns in contrast to the moderate
positive correlation in the data.   We expand on the present value approach by allowing for an
endogenously determined stochastic risk premium.       Second, Fama and French (1989) and Keim
and Stambaugh (1986) find common predictable components in bond and equity returns. After
estimating the parameters of the model to match the salient features of bond and stock returns
alluded to above, we test how well the model fares with respect to these puzzles. Our model
generates a bond-stock return correlation that is somewhat too high relative to the data but it
matches the predictability evidence.
   Third, to convert from model output to the data, we use inflation as a state variable, but ensure
that inflation is neutral: that is the Fisher hypothesis holds in our economy. This is important in
interpreting our empirical results on the joint properties of bond and stock returns. More realistic
modeling of the inflation process is a prime candidate for resolving the remaining failures of the
model.
   Our model also fits into a long series of recent attempts to break the tight link between consump-
tion growth and the pricing kernel that is the main reason for the failure of the standard consumption
— based asset pricing models. Santos and Veronesi (2005) add the consumption/labor income ratio
as a second factor to the kernel, Wei (2003) adds leisure services to the pricing kernel and models
human capital formation, Piazessi, Schneider and Tuzel (2003) and Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2003) model the housing market to increase the dimensionality of the pricing kernel.
   The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the model. Section 2
derives closed-form expressions for bond prices and equity returns. Section 3 outlines our estimation
procedure whereas Section 4 analyzes the estimation results, and the implications of the model at
the estimated parameters. Section 5 tests how the model fares with respect to the interaction of
bond and stock returns. In the conclusions, we summarize the implications of our work for future
research and we discuss some recent papers that have also considered the joint modeling of bond
and stock returns.




                                                  2
2     The “Moody” Investor Economy

2.1     Preferences

Consider a complete markets economy as in Lucas (1978), but modify the preferences of the repre-
sentative agent to have the form:
                                              "∞                               #
                                               X                 − Ht )1−γ − 1
                                                         t (Ct
                                         E0          β                           ,                                  (1)
                                               t=0
                                                                   1−γ

where Ct is aggregate consumption and Ht is an exogenous “external habit stock” with Ct > Ht .
    One motivation for an “external” habit stock is the framework of Abel (1990, 1999) who specifies
preferences where Ht represents past or current aggregate consumption, which a small individual
investor takes as given, and then evaluates his own utility relative to that benchmark.2 That is,
utility has a “keeping up with the Joneses” feature. In Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Ht is taken
as an exogenously modelled subsistence or habit level. Hence, the local coeﬃcient of relative risk
                                    ³        ´
aversion equals γ · CtC−H
                        t
                          t
                            , where   Ct −Ht
                                        Ct     is defined as the surplus ratio3 . As the surplus ratio
goes to zero, the consumer’s risk aversion goes to infinity. In our model, we view the inverse of the
                                                                                             Ct
surplus ratio as a preference shock, which we denote by Qt . Thus, Qt =                    Ct −Ht .   Risk aversion is
now characterized by γ · Qt , and Qt > 1. As Qt changes over time, the representative consumer /
investor’s moodiness changes.
    The marginal rate of substitution in this model determines the real pricing kernel, which we
denote by Mt . Taking the ratio of marginal utilities of time t + 1 and t, we obtain:

                                              (Ct+1 /Ct )−γ
                                 Mt+1     = β             −γ                                                        (2)
                                              (Qt+1 /Qt )
                                          = β exp [−γ∆ct+1 + γ (qt+1 − qt )] ,


where qt = ln(Qt ) and ∆ct = ln (Ct ) − ln (Ct−1 ).
    This model may better explain the predictability evidence than the standard model with power
utility because it can generate counter-cyclical expected returns and prices of risk. To see this, first
    2 For empirical analyses of habit formation models, where habit depends on past consumption, see Heaton (1995)

and Bekaert (1996).
    3 Of course, this is not actual risk aversion defined over wealth which depends on the value function. The Appendix

to Campbell and Cochrane (1995) examines the relation between “local” curvature and actual risk aversion, which
depends on the sensitivity of consumption to wealth. In their model, actual risk aversion is simply a scalor multiple
of local curvature. In the present article, we only refer to the local curvature concept, and slightly abuse terminology
in calling it “risk aversion.”


                                                                 3
note that the coeﬃcient of variation of the pricing kernel equals the maximum Sharpe ratio attainable
with the available assets (see Hansen and Jagannathan, 1991). As Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
also note, with a log-normal kernel:

                                    σ t (Mt+1 )  p
                                                = exp [V art (mt+1 ) − 1].                                       (3)
                                    Et (Mt+1 )

where mt = ln (Mt ). Hence, the maximum Sharpe ratio characterizing the assets in the economy
is an increasing function of the conditional volatility of the pricing kernel. If we can construct an
economy in which the conditional variability of the kernel varies through time and is higher when Qt
is high (that is, when consumption has decreased closer to the habit level), then we have introduced
the required countercyclical variation into the price of risk.
       Whereas Campbell and Cochrane (1999) have only one source of uncertainty, namely, consump-
tion growth, which is modeled as an i.i.d. process, we embed the Moody Investor economy in the
aﬃne asset pricing framework. The unobserved process for qt ≡ ln (Qt ) is included as an element
of the state vector. Although the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution determines the form
of the real pricing kernel through Equation (2), we still have a choice on how to model ∆ct and qt .
Since Qt > 1, we model qt according to the specification,

                                                  √ ³¡       ¢1/2 q           ´
                         qt+1 = µq + ρqq qt + σ qq qt 1 − λ2     εt+1 + λεct+1 ,                                 (4)


where µq , ρq and σ q and λ are parameters4 .            Here, εqt is a standard normal innovation process
specific to qt and εct is a similar process, representing the sole source of conditional uncertainty
in the consumption growth process.            Both are distributed as N (0, 1).        We will shortly see that
λ ∈ [−1, 1] is the conditional correlation between consumption growth and qt . When λ = −1, qt
and consumption growth will be perfectly negatively correlated which is consistent with the habit
persistence formulation of Campbell and Cochrane (1999). The fact that we model qt as a square
root process makes the conditional variance of the pricing kernel depend positively on the level of
Qt .
                              q ¡          ¢
   4σ  is parameterized as f1 µq 1 − ρ2q . It is easily shown that f is the ratio of the unconditional mean to the
        q
unconditional standard deviation of qt . By bounding f below at unity, we ensure that qt is ‘usually’ positive (under
our subsequent estimates, qt is positive in more than 95% of simulated draws).




                                                         4
2.2     Fundamentals Processes

When taking a Lucas—type economy to the data, the identity of the representative agent and the
representation of the endowment or consumption process become critical. Because we price equities
in this article, dividend growth must be a state variable. Section 2.2.1 details the modeling of
consumption and dividend growth.          To link a real consumption model to the nominal data, we
must make assumptions about the inflation process, which we describe in Section 2.2.2. Moreover,
many agents in the economy do not hold stocks at all, and their consumption may not be relevant
for equity pricing. Campbell (1993) used the uncertainty about how to measure consumption as
motivation to substitute consumption out of the budget constraint.


2.2.1   Consumption and Dividends

In the original Lucas (1978) model, a dividend — producing ‘tree’ finances all consumption.                Re-
alistically, consumption is financed by many sources of income (especially labor income) not rep-
resented in aggregate dividends.5 .      We therefore represent dividends as consumption divided by
the consumption-dividend ratio CDt . Because dividends and consumption are non-stationary we
model consumption growth and the consumption-dividend ratio, CDt . The main econometric issue
is whether CDt is stationary or, more generally, whether consumption and dividends are cointe-
grated. Bansal, Dittmar and Lundblad (2002) recently argue that dividends and consumption are
cointegrated, but with a cointegrating vector that diﬀers from [1, −1], whereas Bansal and Yaron
(2004) assume two unit roots.       Table 1 reports some characteristics of the consumption-dividend
ratio using total nondurables consumption and services as the consumption measure in addition to
stationarity tests for CDt . The first autocorrelation of the annual consumption dividend ratio is
in the fairly high range of 0.86. When we test for a unit root in a specification allowing for a time
trend and additional autocorrelation in the regression, we strongly reject the null hypothesis of a
unit root. The test for the null hypothesis of no trend and a unit root only narrowly fails to reject
at the 5% level. As a result we assume dividends and consumption are cointegrated with [1, −1] as
the cointegrating vector, and in our actual specification, we do allow for a time trend to capture the
diﬀerent means of consumption and dividend growth.
   We use aggregate nondurables and services consumption as the consumption measure, but we
  5 In the NBER version of this article, we provide a more formal motivation for our set-up in the context of a

multiple dividend economy. Menzly, Santos and Veronseo (2004) formulate a continuous-time economy extending the
Campbell-Cochrane framework to multiple dividend processes.


                                                      5
checked the robustness of the model to an alternative measure of consumption that attempts to
approximate the consumption of the stockholder.         Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) and Ait-Sahalia,
Parker and Yogo (2004) have pointed out that aggregate consumption may not be representative
of the consumption of stock holders.       In particular, we let the stockholder consumption be a
weighted average of luxury consumption and ‘other’ consumption with the weighting equal to the
stock market participation rate based on Ameriks and Zeldes (2001).            However, our model does
not perform noticeably better with this consumption measure and we do not report these results to
conserve space.
   Our stochastic model for consumption growth and the consumption-dividend ratio becomes

                                                                   √
                           ∆ct+1     = µc + ρcc ∆ct + ρcu ut + σ cc qt εct+1

                            cdt+1    = ζ + δt + ut+1                                                (5)


   where µc , ρcc , ρcu , and σ cc are parameters governing consumption growth, ∆ct .       This speci-
fication implies that consumption growth is an ARMA(1,1) processes.            Bansal and Yaron (2004)
have recently stressed the importance of allowing an MA component in the dividend process, and
Wachter (2005) also models consumption growth as an ARMA(1,1) process.               Note that we have
allowed for heteroskedasticity in the consumption process as the conditional volatility of ∆ct+1 is
proportional to qt . While this is primarily for modelling convenience in arriving at closed form so-
lutions for asset prices, there is substantial evidence for such heteroskedasticity even in annual real
consumption growth, which has (unreported) unconditional excess kurtosis of 7.00 in our sample.
During estimation, we are careful to check that our model implied consumption growth kurtosis
does not exceed that in the data. The constant ζ is without consequences once the model is put in
stationary format, but the trend term, δt, accommodates diﬀerent means for consumption growth
and dividend growth. Specifically,


                                     ∆dt+1 = ∆ct+1 − δ − ∆ut+1                                      (6)


The model for ut+1 , the stochastic component of the consumption dividend ratio, is symmetric with




                                                   6
the model for consumption growth:

                                                          √
                       ut+1 = µu + ρuu ut + ρuc ∆ct + σ uc qt εct+1 + σ uu εut+1 .                      (7)


   The conditional covariance between consumption growth and preference shocks can now be more
explicitly examined. In particular, this covariance equals:


                                      Covt [∆ct+1 , qt+1 ] = σ qq σ cc λqt                              (8)


   so that the covariance is most negative when λ = −1, a restriction of perfectly counter-cyclical
risk aversion under which our model most closely approaches that of Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
Another issue that arises in modeling consumption and stochastic risk aversion dynamics is whether
the model preserves the notion of habit persistence. For this to be the case, even though consump-
tion and risk aversion are negatively correlated, the habit stock should be a slowly decaying moving
average of past consumption. This is the case in this model but the relation is much more complex
than in the univariate i.i.d. Campbell-Cochrane model, because of the presence of three autocor-
related stochastic variables driving the dynamics of consumption. Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
also parameterize the process for the surplus ratio such that the derivative of the log of the habit
stock is always positive with respect to log consumption. The habit stock in our model satisfies,
                              1
Ht = vt Ct , where vt = 1 −   Qt is   in (0,1) and is increasing in Qt .     That is, when risk aversion is
high, the habit stock moves closer to the consumption level as is true in any habit model. It is now
                                                        ³ ´
                                                          σ
easy to see that the derivative condition above requires σqqcc
                                                               λ > 1 − Qt for all t. Note that the
right-hand side is negative and this condition is not necessarily satisfied.


2.2.2   Inflation

One challenge with confronting consumption-based models with the data is that the model concepts
have to be translated into nominal terms. Although inflation could play an important role in the
relation between bond and stock returns, we want to assess how well we can match the salient
features of the data without relying on intricate inflation dynamics and risk premiums. Therefore,
we append the model with a simple inflation process:


                                        πt+1 = µπ + ρπ π t + σ π επt+1                                  (9)


                                                       7
Furthermore, we assume that the inflation shock is independent of all other shocks, in particular
shocks to the real pricing kernel (or intertemporal marginal rate of substitution). These assumptions
impose that the Fisher Hypothesis holds in our economy. The pricing of nominal assets then occurs
                               b t+1 that is a simple transformation of the real pricing kernel, mt+1 .
with a nominal pricing kernel, m


                                         b t+1 = mt+1 − π t+1
                                         m                                                        (10)


2.3    The Full Model

We are now ready to present the full model. The logarithm of the pricing kernel or stochastic
discount factor in this economy follows from the preference specification and is given by:


                                  mt+1 = ln(β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1                                  (11)


Because of the logarithmic specification, the actual pricing kernel, Mt+1 , is a positive stochastic
process that ensures that all assets i are priced such that


                                      1 = Et [Mt+1 (1 + Ri,t+1 )]                                 (12)


where Ri,t+1 is the percentage real return on asset i over the period from t to time (t + 1), and Et
denotes the expectation conditional on the information at time t. Because Mt is strictly positive,
our economy is arbitrage-free (see Harrison and Kreps (1979)). The model is completed by the
specifications previously introduced of the fundamentals processes, which we collect here:

                                                 √ ³¡       ¢1/2 q            ´
                      qt+1    = µq + ρqq qt + σqq qt 1 − λ2     εt+1 + λεct+1
                                                            √
                    ∆ct+1     = µc + ρcc ∆ct + ρcu ut + σ cc qt εct+1
                                                           √
                      ut+1    = µu + ρuu ut + ρuc ∆ct + σuc qt εct+1 + σ uu εut+1

                    ∆dt+1     = ∆ct+1 − δ − ∆ut+1

                      π t+1   = µπ + ρπ πt + σπ επt+1                                             (13)


   The real kernel process, mt+1 , is heteroskedastic, with its conditional variance proportional to




                                                   8
qt . In particular,
                                                        £                            ¤
                                  V art [mt+1 ] = γ 2 qt σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2σ cc σ qq λ

Consequently, increases in qt will increase the Sharpe Ratio of all assets in the economy, and the
eﬀect will be greater the more negative is λ. If qt and ∆ct are negatively correlated, the Sharpe ratio
will increase during economic downturns (decreases in ∆ct ).                 Note that Campbell and Cochrane
essentially maximize the volatility of the pricing kernel by setting λ = −1.



3       Bond and Stock Pricing in the Moody Investor Economy

3.1         A General Pricing Model
                                                                                0
We collect the state variables in the vector Yt = [qt , ∆ct , ut , π t ] .               As shown in the Appendix,
the dynamics of Yt described in Equation (13) represent a simple, first-order vector autoregressive
process:


                                    Yt   = µ + AYt−1 + (ΣF Ft−1 + ΣH ) εt

                                   Ft    = (q φ + ΦYt q)0 ¯ I,                                                     (14)


where Yt is the state vector of length k, µ and φ are parameter vectors also of length k and A,
ΣF , ΣH and Φ are parameter matrices of size (k × k).                 εt ∼ N (0, I), I is the identity matrix of
dimension k, q · q denotes the non-negativity operator for a vector6 , and ¯ denotes the Hadamard
Product.7 Also, let the real pricing kernel be represented by:


                                 mt+1 = µm + Γ0m Yt + (Σ0mF Ft + Σ0mH ) εt+1
    6 Specifically,
                if v is a k-vector, then q v q= w where wi = max (vi , 0) for i = 1, ..., k.
    7 The
        Hadamard Product operator denotes element-by-element multiplication. We define it formally in the Appen-
                                                                                                     0
dix. A useful implication of the Hadamard Product is that if φ + ΦYt ≥ 0, for all elements, then Ft Ft = (φ + ΦYt ) ¯ I.




                                                           9
where µm is a scalar and Γm , ΣmF , and ΣmH are k-vectors of parameters. We require the following
restrictions:


                                              ΣF Ft Σ0H   = 0

                                           Σ0mF Ft ΣmH    = 0

                                            ΣH Ft ΣmF     = 0

                                            ΣF Ft ΣmH     = 0

                                               φ + ΦYt    ≥ 0                                     (15)


The main purpose of these restrictions is to exclude certain mixtures of square-root and Vasicek
processes in the state variables and pricing kernel that lead to an intractable solution for some
assets.
   We can now combine the specification for Yt and mt+1 to price financial assets. The details of
the derivations are presented in the Appendix. It is important to note that, due to the discrete-time
nature of the model, these solutions are only approximate in the event that the last restriction in
Equation (15) is violated. If these variables are forced to reflect at zero, our use of the conditional
lognormality features of the state variables becomes incorrect. It is for exactly this reason that in
the specification of qt in Equation (4), we model f directly and bound it from below thus insuring
that such instances are suﬃciently rare.
   Let us begin by deriving the pricing of the nominal term structure of interest rates. Let the time
t price for a default-free zero-coupon bond with maturity n be denoted by Pn,t . Using the nominal
pricing kernel, the value of Pn,t must satisfy:


                                   Pn,t = Et [exp (m̂t+1 ) Pn−1,t+1 ] ,                           (16)


where m̂t+1 = mt+1 − π t+1 is the log of the nominal pricing kernel as argued above. Let pn,t =
ln(Pn,t ). The n-period bond yield is denoted by yn,t , where yn,t = −pn,t /n. The solution to the
value of pn,t is presented in the following proposition, the proof of which appears in the Appendix.
   Proposition 1 The log of the time t price of a zero coupon bond with maturity n, pn,t can be
written as:
                                            pn,t = a0n + a0n Yt                                   (17)


                                                    10
where the scalar a0n and (k × 1) vector a0n are defined recursively by the equations,

                                                 1                                          0
           a0n   = a0n−1 + (an−1 − eπ )0 µ + µm +  ((Σ0F (an−1 − eπ )) ¯ (Σ0F (an−1 − eπ ))) φ
                                                 2
                     1                                    1
                   + (an−1 − eπ )0 ΣH Σ0H (an−1 − eπ ) + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 φ
                     2                                    2
                     1              1                 0
                   + Σ0mH ΣmH + σ 2m + (an−1 − eπ ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) φ + ΣH ΣmH ]
                     2              2
                                         1                                         0
           a0n   = (an−1 − eπ ) A + Γ0m + ((Σ0F (an−1 − eπ )) ¯ (Σ0F (an−1 − eπ ))) Φ
                                         2
                     1                0
                   + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF ) Φ + (an−1 − eπ ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) Φ]                                        (18)
                     2

and a00 = 0 and a00 = −eπ .
   Notice that the log prices of all zero-coupon bonds (as well as their yields) take the form of
aﬃne functions of the state variables. Given the structure of Yt , the term structure will represent
a discrete-time multidimensional mixture of the Vasicek and CIR models8 .                   The process for the
one-period short rate process, rt ≡ y1,t , is therefore simply −(a01 + a01 Yt ).
        b          b
   Let Rn,t+1 and rn,t+1 denote the nominal simple net return and log return, respectively, on an
n-period zero coupon bond between dates t and t + 1. Therefore:


                             b
                            Rn,t+1    = exp(a0n−1 − a0n + a0n−1 Yt+1 − a0n Yt ) − 1,                       (19)
                              b
                             rn,t+1   = a0n−1 − a0n + a0n−1 Yt+1 − a0n Yt .


   We now use the pricing model to value equity. Let Vt denote the real value of equity, which
is a claim on the stream of real dividends, Dt . Using the real pricing kernel, Vt must satisfy the
equation:
                                      Vt = Et [exp(mt+1 ) (Dt+1 + Vt+1 )] .                                (20)

   Using recursive substitution, the price-dividend ratio (which is the same in real or nominal terms),
P Dt , can be written as:
                                            ⎧        ⎡                    ⎤⎫
                                    Vt      ⎨X∞       X n                  ⎬
                             P Dt =    = Et      exp ⎣     (mt+j + ∆dt+j )⎦ ,                              (21)
                                    Dt      ⎩                              ⎭
                                             n=1       j=1

  8 For   an analysis of continuous time aﬃne term structure models, see Dai and Singleton (2000).




                                                         11
                                                                ⎡                       ⎤
                                                                    n
                                                                    Y
where we impose the transversality condition, limn→∞ Et ⎣               exp (mt+j ) Vt+n ⎦ = 0.
                                                                 j=1
   In the following proposition, we demonstrate that the equity price-dividend ratio can be written
as the (infinite) sum of exponentials of an aﬃne function of the state variables. The proof appears
in the Appendix.
   Proposition 2 The equity price-dividend ratio, P Dt , can be written as:

                                              ∞
                                              X        ¡             ¢
                                     P Dt =         exp b0n + b0n Yt                              (22)
                                              n=1


where the scalar b0n and (k × 1) vector b0n are defined recursively by the equations,

                                               1                                          0
         b0n   = b0n−1 + (bn−1 + ed )0 µ + µm +  ((Σ0F (bn−1 + ed )) ¯ (Σ0F (bn−1 + ed ))) φ
                                               2
                   1                                    1
                 + (bn−1 + ed )0 ΣH Σ0H (bn−1 + ed ) + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 φ
                   2                                    2
                   1               1                 0
                 + Σ0mH ΣmH + σ 2m + (bn−1 + ed ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) φ + ΣH ΣmH ]
                   2               2
                                        1                                         0
         b0n   = (bn−1 + ed )0 A + Γ0m + ((Σ0F (bn−1 + ed )) ¯ (Σ0F (bn−1 + ed ))) Φ
                                        2
                   1
                 + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 Φ + (bn−1 + ed ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) Φ]                                (23)
                   2

        s        s
   Let Rt+1 and rt+1 denote the nominal simple net return and log return, respectively, on equity
between dates t and t + 1. Therefore:

                                                ⎛ P∞       ³         0
                                                                              ´    ⎞
                                                              0
                                                   n=1 exp   bn  + b n Y t+1    +1
                  e
                 Rt+1   = exp(πt+1 + ∆dt+1 ) ⎝      P∞            0       0
                                                                                   ⎠−1            (24)
                                                       n=1 exp (bn + bn Yt )
                                                ⎛ P∞        ³          0
                                                                               ´    ⎞
                                                                0
                                                    n=1 exp bn + bn Yt+1 + 1
                  e
                 rt+1   = (π t+1 + ∆dt+1 ) + ln ⎝    P∞             0       0
                                                                                    ⎠.
                                                        n=1 exp (bn + bn Yt )



The only intuition immediately apparent from comparing Equations (18) and (23) is that the co-
eﬃcient recursions look identical except for the presence of the vector −eπ in the bond equations
and +ed in the equity equations. Because eπ selects inflation from the state variables, its presence
accounts for the nominal value of the bond’s cash flows with inflation depressing the bond price.
Because ed selects dividend growth from the state variables, its presence reflects the fact that equity
is essentially a consol with real, stochastic coupons.




                                                     12
3.2    The risk free rate and the term structure

To obtain some intuition about the term structure, we start by calculating the log of the inverse of
the conditional expectation of the (gross) pricing kernel, finding,

                                           ¡       ¢
                     rtreal   = − ln(β) + γ µc − µq + γρcc ∆ct + γρcu ut
                                  ∙                                       ¸
                                     ¡      ¢ 1 2¡ 2       2
                                                                         ¢
                                + γ 1 − ρq − γ σ cc + σqq − 2σ cc σqq λ qt .                      (25)
                                               2

Hence, the real interest rate follows a three-factor model with two observed factors (consumption
growth and the consumption-dividend ratio) and one unobserved factor - a preference shock. It is
useful to compare this to a standard version of the Lucas economy within which Mehra and Prescott
(1985) documented the so-called low risk-free rate puzzle. The real risk free rate in the standard
Mehra Prescott economy is given by

                                                                1
                          rtreal,M -P = − ln(β) + γEt (∆ct+1 ) − γ 2 Vt (∆ct+1 ).                 (26)
                                                                2

The first term represents the impact of the discount factor. The second term represents a consumption-
smoothing eﬀect. Since in a growing economy agents with concave utility (γ > 0) wish to smooth
their consumption stream, they would like to borrow and consume now. This desire is greater, the
larger is γ. Thus, since it is typically necessary in Mehra-Prescott economies to allow for large γ to
generate a high equity premium, there will also be a resulting real rate that is higher than empir-
ically observed. The third term is the standard precautionary savings eﬀect. Uncertainty induces
agents to save, therefore depressing interest rates and mitigating the consumption-smoothing eﬀect.
Because aggregate consumption growth exhibits quite low volatility, the latter term is typically of
second-order importance.
   The real rate in the Moody investor economy, rtreal , equals the real rate in the Mehra-Prescott
economy, plus two additional terms:

                                             £¡      ¢       ¤ 1 ¡                    ¢
                  rtreal = rtreal,M -P + γ     1 − ρq qt − µq − γ 2 σ2qq − 2σ cc σqq λ qt         (27)
                                                               2

The first of the extra terms represents an additional consumption-smoothing eﬀect. In this economy,
risk aversion is also aﬀected by qt , and not only γ. When qt is above its unconditional mean, µq /(1 −



                                                       13
ρq ), the consumption-smoothing eﬀect is exacerbated. The second of the extra terms represents an
additional precautionary savings eﬀect. The uncertainty in stochastic risk aversion has to be hedged
as well, depressing interest rates. Taken together, these additional terms provide suﬃcient channels
for this economy to mitigate, in theory, the risk-free rate puzzle.
    In the data, we measure nominal interest rates. The nominal risk free interest rate in this
economy simply follows from,

                                        ³    ´
                                     exp −rtf = Et [exp (mt+1 − π t+1 )] .                                          (28)


Because of the assumptions regarding the inflation process, the model yields an “approximate”
version of the Fisher equation, where the approximation becomes more exact the lower the inflation
volatility term.9 :
                                                                     1
                                          rtf = rtreal + µπ + ρπ πt − σ2π .                                         (29)
                                                                     2

    The nominal short rate is equal to the sum of the real short rate and expected inflation, minus
a constant term (σ 2π /2) due to Jensen’s Inequality.
    Because of the neutrality of inflation, the model must generate an upward sloping term structure,
a salient feature of term structure data, through the real term structure. To obtain some simple
intuition about the determinants of the term spread, we investigate a two period real bond. For this
bond, the term spread can be written as:


                   f             1³ h f i       ´ 1    h            i 1     h     i
                  rt,2 − rtf =     Et rt+1 − rtf + Covt mt+1 , rt+1
                                                                f             f
                                                                     − V art rt+1                                   (30)
                                 2                2                   4

    The term in the middle determines the term premium, together with the third term, which is a
Jensen’s inequality term. The full model implies a quite complex expression for the unconditional
term premium that cannot be signed. Under some simplifying assumptions, we can develop some
intuition. First, we proceed under the assumption that the Jensen’s inequality term is second order
and can be ignored. Hence, we focus on the middle term. In general, we can write:

                                              h            i
                                                       f
                                          Covt mt+1 , rt+1   = v0 + v1 qt                                           (31)

   9 The expected gross ex-post real return on a nominal one-period contract, E [exp(r f − π
                                                                               t      t      t+1 )] will be exactly equal
to the gross ex-ante real rate, exp(rtreal ).




                                                           14
The time-variation in the term premium is entirely driven by stochastic risk aversion.        Further
assume that there is little movement in the conditional mean of consumption growth (ρcc = ρcu = 0).
In this case, v0 = 0 and
                                               ¡                   ¢
                                        v1 = γθ σ 2qq − σ qq σ cc λ                               (32)

          ¡      ¢        ¡                         ¢
with θ = γ 1 − ρq − 12 γ 2 σ 2cc + σ 2qq − 2σc σ q λ .   Assuming λ is negative, the interpretation is
straightforward. The parameter θ measures whether the precautionary savings or consumption
smoothing eﬀect dominates in the determination of interest rates. Wachter (2005) also generalizes
the Campbell — Cochrane setting to a two-factor model with one parameter governing the dominance
of either one of these eﬀects.
   If θ > 0, the consumption smoothing eﬀect dominates and increases in qt increase short rates. We
see that this will also increase the term premium and give rise unconditionally to an upward sloping
yield curve: bonds are risky in such a world. In contrast, when θ < 0, the precautionary savings
eﬀect dominates. Increases in qt now lower short rates, driving up the prices of bonds. Consequently,
bonds are good hedges against movements in qt and do not require a positive risk premium.


3.3    Equity Pricing

In order to develop some intuition on the stock pricing equation in Equation (23), we split up the
bn vector into its four components. First, the component corresponding to inflation, denoted bπn , is
zero because inflation is neutral in our model. Second, the coeﬃcient multiplying current dividend
growth is given by
                                   ¡         ¢     ¡         ¢
                              bcn = bcn−1 + 1 ρcc + bun−1 − 1 ρuc − γρcc                          (33)

   This equation has the following interpretation. In our model, dividend growth equals consump-
tion growth minus the change in the consumption-dividend ratio. Dividends are the cash flows of
the equity shares and therefore an increase in expected dividends should raise the price-dividend
                                      ¡         ¢       ¡         ¢
ratio. This is reflected in the terms, bcn−1 + 1 ρcc and bun−1 − 1 ρuc . Consumption growth poten-
tially forecasts dividend growth through two channels - future consumption growth and the future
consumption-dividend ratio. Additionally, consumption growth may forecast itself and because it
is an element of the pricing kernel, this induces a discount rate eﬀect. For example, if consumption
growth is positively autocorrelated, an increase in consumption lowers expected future marginal
utility. The resulting increased discount rate depresses the price-dividend ratio. This eﬀect is rep-


                                                    15
resented by the term, −γρcc . In a standard Lucas-type model where consumption equals dividends
and consumption growth is the only state variable, these are the only two eﬀects aﬀecting stock
prices. Because they tend to be countervailing eﬀects, it is diﬃcult to generate much variability in
price dividend ratios in such a model.
   The consumption-dividend ratio eﬀect on equity valuation is similar. The eﬀect of the consump-
tion dividend ratio, bun is given by,

                                 ¡         ¢     ¡         ¢
                            bun = bcn−1 + 1 ρcu + bun−1 − 1 ρuu + 1 − γρcu                            (34)


   The first three terms represent the eﬀects of the consumption-dividend ratio forecasting dividends
- cash flow eﬀects - and the fourth term arises because the consumption-dividend ratio may forecast
consumption growth, leading to a discount rate eﬀect.
   Finally, the price dividend ratio is aﬀected by changes in risk aversion, qt . The eﬀect of qt on
the price dividend ratio is very complex:


  bqn   = bqn−1 ρqq
               ¡        ¢ 1                 2    1     ¡       ¢
          +γ ρqq − 1 + γ 2 (σ qq λ − σ cc ) + γ 2 σ 2qq 1 − λ2
                             2                   2
             1¡     ¡ c        ¢     ¡ u       ¢           ¢2 1 ¡               ¢2 ¡       ¢
          + σ cc bn−1 + 1 + σuc bn−1 − 1 + σ qq λbqn−1 +             σ qq bqn−1     1 − λ2
             2                                                     2
                             ¡¡ c     ¢       ¡ u      ¢                    ¢     ¡          ¢2 ¡       ¢
          +γ (σ qq λ − σ cc ) bn−1 + 1 σ cc + bn−1 − 1 σ uc + bn−1 σqq λ + γ σqq bqn−1
                                                                 q
                                                                                                 1 − λ2(35)


   It is tempting to think that increases in risk aversion unambiguously depress price dividend
ratios, but this is not necessarily true because qt aﬀects the price-dividend ratios through many
channels. The first term on the right hand side of Equation (35) arises only due to persistence in
qt . The second line of Equation (35) summarizes the eﬀect of qt on real interest rates. The first of
these terms captures the intuition that if risk aversion (low surplus consumption) is high today, it
is expected to be lower in the future. This induces a motive for investors to borrow against future
better times, so interest rates must increase in equilibrium to discourage this borrowing, inducing a
fall in the prices of long lived assets. The second and third terms on the second line of Equation
(35) are precautionary savings eﬀects. High qt implies high uncertainty, which serves to lower rates
and raise prices of long lived assets.
   The third line of Equation (35) is comprised of Jensen’s inequality terms, in eﬀect reflecting an


                                                    16
additional precautionary savings eﬀect for assets with risky cash flows. High qt raises the volatility
of the dividend stream, and in a log-normal framework, this increases valuations.
    The fourth line of Equation (35) is the most interesting because it captures the eﬀect of the
riskiness of the dividend stream on valuations, or more precisely, the eﬀect of qt on that riskiness.
To clean up the algebra, let us consider the direct impact of qt (that is, excluding the bn−1 terms).
Then the last line of Equation (35) reduces to


                                              γ (σ qq λ − σ cc ) (σ cc − σ uc )                                         (36)


    Assuming that λ < 0, the second term is negative.                        Now, if dividend growth is procyclical,
covarying positively with consumption growth, then (σ cc − σ uc ) > 0 and the overall expression in
(36) is negative. Hence, in times of high risk aversion and high market volatility (high qt ), equity
valuations fall.



4     Estimation and Testing Procedure

4.1    Estimation Strategy

Our economy has four state variables, which we collect in the vector Yt .                            Except for qt , we can
measure these variables from the data without error, with ut being extracted from consumption-
dividend ratio data. We are interested in the implications of the model for five endogenous variables:
the short rate, rtf , the term spread, spdt , the dividend yield, dpt , the log excess equity return, rtex ,
and the log excess bond return, rtbx . For all these variables we use rather standard data, comparable
to what is used in the classic studies of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and Shiller and Beltratti (1992).
Therefore, we describe the extraction of these variables out of the data and the data sources in
a Data Appendix (Appendix A). We collect all the measurable variables of interest, the three
observable state variables and the five endogenous variables in the vector Zt . Also, we let Ψ denote
the structural parameters of the model:

              £                                                                                                    ¤0
           Ψ = µc , µπ , µu , µq , δ, ρcc , ρuc , ρcu , ρuu , ρππ , ρqq , σ cc , σuc , σ uu , σ ππ , σqq , λ, β, γ      (37)




                                                              17
Throughout the estimation, we require that Ψ satisfies the conditions of Equations (15). There are
a total of 19 parameters.
   If we restrict ourselves to the term structure, the fact that the relation between endogenous
variables and state variables is aﬃne greatly simplifies the estimation of the parameters. As is
apparent from Equations (22) and (24), the relationship between the dividend yield and excess
equity returns and the state variables is non-linear. In the Computational Appendix, we linearize
this relationship and show that the approximation is very accurate.          Note that this approach is
very diﬀerent from the popular Campbell-Shiller (1988) and Campbell (1990) linearization method,
which linearizes the return expression itself before taking the linearized return equation through a
present value model. We first find the correct solution for the price-dividend ratio and linearize
the resulting expression. The appendix demonstrates that the diﬀerences between the analytic and
approximate moments do not aﬀect our results.
   Conditional on the linearization, the following property of Zt obtains,


                               Zt = µz + Γz Yt−1 + (ΣzF Ft−1 + ΣzH ) εt                             (38)


where the coeﬃcients superscripted with ‘z’ are nonlinear functions of the model parameters, Ψ.
We estimate the model in a two-step GMM procedure utilizing selected conditional moments and
extracting the latent state vector using the linear Kalman filter.        We first describe the filtering
process and then calculation of the conditional GMM residuals and objective function. The next
subsection describes the specific moments and GMM weighting matrix employed.
   To filter the state vector, we represent the model in state-space form using Equation (14) as the
state equation and appending Equation (38) with measurement error for the observation equation,


                            Zt = µz + Γz Yt−1 + (ΣzF Ft−1 + ΣzH ) εt + Dvt                          (39)


where vt is an independent standard normal measurement error innovation, and D is a diagonal
matrix with the standard deviation of the measurement errors along the diagonal. It is necessary to
introduce measurement error because the dimensionality of the observation equation is greater than
that of the state equation (that is, the model has a stochastic singularity).       To avoid estimating
the measurement error variances and to keep them small, we simply fix the diagonal elements of D



                                                 18
such that the variance of the measurement error is equal to one percent of the unconditional sample
variance for each variable. Together, the state and measurement equations may be used to extract
the state vector in the usual fashion using the standard linear Kalman filter (see Harvey 1989).
   Given conditional (filtered) estimates for Yt , denoted, Ybt , it is straightforward to calculate con-
ditional moments of Zt+1 using Equation (39),


                             Et [Zt+1 ] = µz + Γz Ybt
                                          ³             ´³            ´0
                          V ARt [Zt+1 ] =  ΣzF Fbt + ΣzH ΣzF Fbt + ΣzH + DD0                           (40)


where Fbt is defined analogously to Equation (14). Residuals are defined for each variable as vtz =
Zt − Et−1 [Zt ].


4.2    Moment Conditions, Starting Values and Weighting Matrix

We use a total of 30 moment conditions to estimate the model parameters. They can be ordered
into several groups.

                                           h                                                 i
                      vtz × [1] forZt    =  ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , dpt , spdt , rtex , rtbx (8)
                                           h                          i
                    vtz × Zt−1 forZt     = ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , ut (5)
                                           h                                                    i
                   (vtz )2 × [1] forZt   = ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , dpt , spdt , rtex , rtbx , ut (9)
                                                                    £          ¤
                   vtz1 ⊗ vtz2 for Zt1   = [∆dt , ∆ct ] , Zt2 = rtex , rtbx (4)
                                           ¡ ∆c ∆d ¢ ¡ ∆c u ¢ ¡ ∆c                   ¢
                                            vt vt , vt vt , vt ut−1 , (vtu ∆ct−1 ) (4)                 (41)


   The first line of (41) essentially captures the unconditional mean of the endogenous variables.
In this group only the mean of the spread and the excess bond return are moments that could not
be investigated in the original Campbell—Cochrane framework. We also explicitly require the model
to match the mean equity premium.
   The second group uses lags of the endogenous variables as instruments to capture conditional
mean dynamics for the ‘fundamental’ series and the short rate. This explicitly requires the model
to address predictability (of lack thereof) of consumption and dividend growth. The third set of
moments is included so that the model matches the volatility of the endogenous variables.              This



                                                          19
includes the volatility of both the dividend yield and excess equity returns, so that the estimation
incorporates the excess volatility puzzle and adds to that the volatility of the term spread and bond
returns. Intuitively, this may be a hard trade-oﬀ (see, for instance Bekaert (1996)).        To match
the volatility of equity returns and price dividend ratios, volatile intertemporal marginal rates of
substitution are necessary, but interest rates are relatively smooth and bond returns are much less
variable than equity returns in the data. Interest rates are functions of expected marginal rates of
substitution and their variability must not be excessively high to yield realistic predictions.
   The fourth group captures the covariance between fundamentals and returns. These moments
confront the model directly with the Cochrane-Hansen (1990) puzzle.
   Finally, the fifth set is included so that the model may match the conditional dynamics between
consumption and dividends. Because in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) consumption and dividends
coincide, matching the conditional dynamics of these two variables is an important departure and
extension.
   This set of GMM residuals forms the basis of our model estimation. To optimally weight these
orthogonality conditions and provide the minimization routine with good starting values, we employ
a preliminary estimation which yields a consistent estimate of Ψ, denoted Ψ1 .        The preliminary
estimation uses only uncentered, unconditional moments of Zt and does not require filtering of
the latent state variables or a parameter dependent weighting matrix.        Details of the first stage
estimation are relegated to the appendix. Given Ψ1 , the residuals in (41) are calculated, and their
joint spectral density at frequency zero is calculated using the Newey-West (1987) procedure. The
inverse of this matrix used as the optimal GMM weighting matrix in the main estimation stage.
Note that there are 13 over-identifying restrictions and that we can use the standard J-test to assess
the fit of the model.


4.3    Tests of Additional Moments

If the model can fit the base moments, it would be a rather successful stock and bond pricing
model. Nevertheless, we want to use our framework to fully explore the implications of a model
with stochastic risk aversion for the joint dynamics of bond and stock returns, partially also to guide
future research. In section 6, we consider a set of additional moment restrictions that we would like
to test. In particular, we are interested in how well the model fits the bond-stock return correlation
and return predictability. To test conformity of the estimated model with moments not explicitly


                                                  20
fit in the estimation stage, we construct a GMM-based test statistic that takes into account the
sampling error in estimating the parameters, Ψ. The appendix describes the exact computation.



5     Estimation Results

This section examines results from model estimation and implications for observable variables under
the model.


5.1    Parameters

Table 2 reports the parameter estimates for the model. The first column reports mean parameters.
The negative estimate for δ ensures that average consumption growth is lower than average dividend
growth, as is true in the data.     Importantly, neither µq nor µu are estimated, but fixed at unity
and zero respectively. This is necessary for identification of the model and reduces the number of
estimated parameters to 17.       Because risk aversion under this model is proportional to exp (qt ),
the unconditional mean and volatility of qt are diﬃcult to jointly identify under the lognormal
specification of the model. Restricting µq to be unity does not significantly reduce the flexibility of
the model.
    The second column reports feedback coeﬃcients. Consumption growth shows modest serial per-
sistence as is true in the data. The consumption-dividend ratio is quite persistent, and there is some
evidence of significant feedback between (past) consumption growth and the future consumption-
dividend ratio. Both inflation and stochastic risk aversion, qt , are very persistent processes.
    The volatility parameters are reported in the third column. Consumption growth is negatively
correlated with the consumption-dividend ratio, but the coeﬃcient is only significantly diﬀerent from
zero at about the 10 percent level. The conditional correlation between consumption growth and
qt is −0.19, and this value is statistically diﬀerent from zero at about the 10 percent level. Finally,
we report the discount factor β and the curvature parameter of the utility function, γ. Because risk
aversion is equal to γQt , and the economy is growing, these coeﬃcients are diﬃcult to interpret by
themselves.
    We also report the test of the over-identifying restrictions.     There are 17 parameters and 30
moment conditions, making the J-test a χ2 (13) under the null. The test fails to reject at the 1
percent level of significance, but rejects at the 5 percent level. The fact that all t-statistics are over


                                                   21
1.00 suggests that the data contain enough information to identify the parameters.


5.2      Implied Moments

Here, we assess which moments the model fits well and which moments it fails to fit perfectly.
Table 3 shows a large array of first and second moments regarding fundamentals (dividend growth,
consumption growth and inflation), and endogenous variables (the risk free rate, the dividend yield,
the term spread, excess equity returns and excess bond returns). We show the means, volatilities,
first-order autocorrelation and the full correlation matrix. Numbers in parentheses are GMM based
standard errors for the sample moments. Numbers in brackets are population moments for the model
(using the log-linear approximation for the price dividend ratio described above for dpt and rtex ).
In our discussion, we informally compare sample with population moments using the data standard
errors as a guide to assess goodness of fit. This of course ignores the sampling uncertainty in the
parameter estimates.


5.2.1    The equity premium and risk free rate puzzles

Table 3 indicates that our model implies an excess return premium of 5.2 percent on equity, which
matches the data moment of 5.9 percent quite well. Standard power utility models typically do so
at the cost of exorbitantly high-risk free rates, a phenomenon called the risk free rate puzzle (Weil,
1989).    Our interest rate process does have a mean that is too high by 1.6 percent, but we also
generate an average excess bond return of 1.1%, which is very close to the 1.0 percent data mean.


5.2.2    Excess volatility

Stock returns are not excessively volatile from the perspective of our model. While the standard
deviation of excess returns in the data is 19.7 percent, we generate excess return volatility of 17.2
percent. What makes this especially surprising is that the model slightly undershoots the volatility
of the fundamentals. That is, although they are within the two standard error bound around the
sample estimate, the volatilities of dividend growth and consumption growth are both lower than
they are in the data. To nevertheless generate substantial equity return volatility, the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution must be rather volatile in our model, and that often has the implication
of making bond returns excessively volatile (see, for example, Bekaert (1996)). This also does not



                                                 22
happen in the model, which generates an excess bond return volatility of 9.6 percent versus 8.1
percent in the data. Short rate volatility is actually within 10 basis points of the sample volatility.
   Table 4 helps interpret these results. It provides variance decompositions for a number of en-
dogenous variables in terms of current and lagged realizations of the four state variables. The state
variables are elements of Yt , defined above.
   About 5.5 percent of the variation in excess stock returns is explained by consumption growth
and the consumption dividend ratio.           The bulk of the variance of returns (over 90 percent) is
explained by stochastic risk aversion. In Campbell and Cochrane (1999), this proportion is 100%
because consumption and dividend growth are modeled as i.i.d. processes. Whereas the Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) model featured a non-stochastic term structure10 , we are able to generate much
variability in bond returns simply using a stochastic inflation process, which accounts for 80 percent
of the variation.    The remainder is primarily due to stochastic risk aversion, and only about 10
percent is due to consumption growth or the consumption dividend ratio. This is consistent with
the lack of a strong relationship between bond returns and these variables in the data.11
   The excess volatility puzzle often refers to the inability of present value models to generate vari-
able price-dividend ratios or dividend yields (see Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1992)).
In models with constant excess discount rates, price-dividend ratios must either predict future divi-
dend growth or future interest rates and it is unlikely that predictable dividend growth or interest
rates can fully account for the variation of dividend yields (see Ang and Bekaert (2003a) and Lettau
and Ludvigson (2003) for recent articles on this topic). Table 3 shows that our model matches the
variance of dividend yields to within 20 basis points. Table 4 shows that the bulk of this variation
comes from stochastic risk aversion and not from cash flows.


5.2.3     Term structure dynamics

One of the main goals of this article is to develop an economy that matches salient features of equity
returns as in Campbell and Cochrane, while introducing a stochastic but tractable term structure
model. Table 3 reports how well the model performs with respect to the short rate and the term
spread. The volatilities of both are matched near perfectly. The model also reproduces a persistent
 1 0 An earlier unpublished version of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) relaxes this condition.
 1 1 Inthis data sample, a regression of excess bond returns on contemporaneous and lagged consumption growth and
the consumption-dividend ratio yields an r-squared statistic of 0.09. A regression run on simulated data under the
model reported in Table 2 yields an r-squared of 0.01.




                                                       23
short rate process, with an autocorrelation coeﬃcient of 0.87 (versus 0.90 in the data). Additionally,
the model implied term spread is a bit more persistent, at 0.83, than the data value of 0.73.
    The term structure model in this economy is aﬃne and variation in yields is driven by four
factors: consumption growth, the consumption-dividend ratio, inflation and stochastic risk aversion.
Table 4 shows how much of the variation of the short rate and the term spread each of these factors
explains. Interestingly, inflation shocks drive about 92 percent of the total variation of the short
rate, but only 83 percent of the variation in the term spread. This is of course not surprising since
the first-order eﬀect of expected inflation shocks is to increase interest rates along the entire yield
curve. Because there is no inflation risk premium in this model, the spread actually reacts negatively
to a positive inflation shock, as inflation is a mean reverting process.
    Whereas consumption growth explains 3 percent of the variation in short rates, it drives 13
percent of the variation in the term spread. This is natural as consumption growth is less persistent
than the main driver of the short rate, inflation, making its relative weight for term spreads (which
depend on expected changes in interest rates) larger (see Equation 25).
    Table 3 shows that in our economy negative consumption or dividend growth shocks (recessions)
are associated with lower nominal short rates and higher spreads. Such pro-cyclical interest rates
and counter-cyclical spreads are consistent with conventional wisdom about interest rates, but the
eﬀects as measured relative to annual dividend and consumption growth are not very strong in
the current data sample12 . For example, the unconditional correlation between dividend growth and
interest rates is only slightly negative (-0.01) and indistinguishable from zero in the sample data, and
the correlation between aggregate consumption growth and interest rates is slightly positive (0.01).
In the model, both of these correlations are positive. The model generated correlation between the
short rate and dividend growth is 0.10, well within one standard deviation of the sample statistic,
and the model generated correlation between the short rate and consumption growth is 0.17, just
more than one standard deviation above the sample estimate. The correlation between the term
spread and both consumption and dividend growth is negative as in the data, but the magnitudes
are a bit too large.
    Where the model has some trouble is in fitting the correlation between inflation and the term
structure.     Nevertheless, the variation of the term spread accounted for by inflation is almost
 1 2 And and Bekaert (2003) find that these notions better apply to real rates and find evidence that real-rates are
indeed pro-cyclical.




                                                        24
identical to variation estimated by Ang and Bekaert (2003), whereas the contribution of inflation to
the short rate variance seems slightly too large.
   To help us interpret these findings, we determine the coeﬃcients in the aﬃne relation of the
(nominal) short rate with the factors. We find that the short rate reacts positively to increases in
risk aversion indicating that with respect to the q-shock the consumption smoothing eﬀect dominates
(see Equation (30)). Additionally, the short rate reacts positively to consumption growth.        The
term spread reacts less strongly to preference shocks and also reacts negatively to an increase in
consumption growth.


5.2.4   Link between fundamentals and asset returns

Equilibrium models typically imply that consumption growth and stock returns are highly corre-
lated. In our model, several channels break the tight link between stock returns and consumption
growth present in standard models. First, we model equity correctly as a claim to dividends, not
to consumption. This helps reduce the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth,
but it generates another puzzle. For equity to earn a risk premium, its returns must be correlated
with the pricing kernel, and dividend growth and consumption growth are reportedly not highly
correlated (see Campbell and Cochrane (1999)). Our second mechanism to break the tight link
between consumption growth and stock returns comes in play here as well: stochastic risk aversion
is the main driver of the variability of the pricing kernel.
   Table 3 shows that the fit of our model with respect to the links between fundamentals and asset
returns is phenomenal. First, aggregate consumption growth and dividend growth have a realistic
0.5 correlation in our model. Second, we generate a correlation between dividend and consumption
growth and excess equity returns of 0.19 and 0.30 respectively, which is not significantly above the
correlation in the data (which is respectively 0.09 for dividend growth and 0.19 for consumption
growth). Third, in the data, bond returns and dividend and consumption growth are negatively
correlated but the correlation is small. We generate small correlations in the model, matching the
sign in both cases and closely approximately the magnitudes.


5.2.5   Time-varying Risk Appetites

Stochastic risk aversion in our model equals γQt .       Because it is unobserved, we characterize its
properties through simulation in Table 5.      Median risk aversion equals 2.10 and its interquartile


                                                    25
range is [1.39, 4.11].   Risk aversion is positively skewed and the 90 percentile observation equals
9.66. It has less than a 1% chance of reaching 100. Mean risk aversion is 11.07.
    The bottom panel of Table 5 reports the correlation of qt with all of our endogenous and exoge-
nous variables. As expected, the variable is countercyclical, showing a negative correlation with both
dividend and consumption growth, but somewhat weakly so. When risk aversion is high, dividend
yields increase (that is, price dividend ratios decrease) making the dividend yield-risk aversion cor-
relation positive. From Table 4, we already know that qt is the sole driver of time-variation in risk
and expected return in this model, driving up expected returns on both stocks and bonds in times
of high-risk aversion. Therefore, periods of high risk aversion are characterized by negative realiza-
tions of unexpected returns as well as increased positive expected returns. The net unconditional
correlation between risk aversion and returns is indeterminate and tends to be small.
    The top two panels of Figure 1 plot the conditionally filtered values for the latent variable, qbt ,
                         dt = γ
and local risk aversion, RA   b exp (b
                                     qt ). The model identifies the highest risk aversion following
the Great Depression in the 1930’s, with values briefly exceeding 50. While risk aversion generally
decreased afterwards, it remained relatively high through the 1950’s. Risk aversion was low during
most of the 1960’s and 1970’s, but ramped up in the early 1980’s. The stock market boom of the
1980’s and 1990’s was accompanied by a significant decline in risk aversion.



6     The Joint Dynamics of Bond and Stock Returns

The economy we have created so far manages to match more salient features of the data than the
original Campbell-Cochrane (1999) article in an essentially linear framework. Nevertheless, the main
goal of this article is to ascertain how many of the salient features of the joint dynamics of bond
and stock returns it can capture.    In this section, we first analyze the comovements of bond and
stock returns and then look at the predictability of bond and stock returns.       Before we do, note
that Table 3 reveals that the fit of the model with respect to bond and stock market returns (last
two columns and last two rows) is impressive. Of 19 moments, only two model-implied moments
are outside of a two-standard error range around the sample moment.




                                                   26
6.1        The bond-stock returns correlation

Shiller and Beltratti (1992) show that in a present value framework with constant risk premiums,
the correlation between bond and stock returns is too low relative to the correlation in the data.
Nevertheless, Table 3 shows that the correlation between bond and stock returns during the sample
is only 0.15 with a relatively large standard error. In our model, expected excess bond and stock
returns both depend negatively on stochastic risk aversion and this common source of variation
induces additional correlation between bond and stock returns. We generate a correlation of 0.28,
which is less than two standard errors above the sample moment. Table 6, Panel A, presents
a formal test to see how well the model fits the conditional covariance between stock and bond
returns, incorporating both sampling error and parameter uncertainty (see appendix).         The test
fails to reject. A conditional test using the short rate, dividend yield and spread as instruments,
also does not reject the model’s predictions.
   The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots the model implied conditional correlation between stock and
bond returns over the sample period (solid blue) along with sample values of the correlation over a
backward-looking rolling window of width 15 years. The low-frequency dynamics of the two series
are quite similar, falling simultaneously in the late 1960s and again in the late 1990s.
   The reason we overshoot the correlation on average has to do with the eﬀect of qt on asset prices.
While equity prices decrease when qt increases, the eﬀect on bond returns is ambiguous because the
eﬀect of qt on interest rates is ambiguous.     Empirically, we have shown that qt increases interest
rates and hence lowers bond returns. Therefore, qt provides a channel for higher correlation, both
between expected and unexpected bond and stock returns.
   Clearly, this is one dimension that could be a useful yardstick for future models.      Dai (2003)
argues that the bond market requires a separate factor that does not aﬀect stock prices. We believe
that it might be more fruitful to think about potential stochastic components in cash flows that
are not relevant for bond pricing and that our simple dividend growth model may have missed.
Another fruitful avenue for extending the model is to investigate the dynamics of inflation more
closely.    Campbell and Ammer (1993) empirically decompose bond and stock return movements
into various components and find inflation shocks to be an important source of negative correlation
between bond and stock returns.




                                                   27
6.2    Bond and Stock Return Predictability

Table 6, Panels B and C report on the consistency of the model with the predictability of returns
in the data. We run univariate regressions of excess bond and stock returns using four instruments:
the risk free rate, the dividend yield, the yield spread, and the excess dividend yield (the dividend
yield minus the interest rate). A long list of articles has demonstrated the predictive power of
these instruments for excess equity returns. However, a more recent literature casts doubt on the
predictive power of the dividend yield, while confirming strong predictability for equity returns using
the interest rate or term spread as a predictor, at least in post-1954 data, see for example Ang and
Bekaert (2005) and Campbell and Yogo (2002).
   Panel B demonstrates that in our annual data set, the only significant predictor of equity returns
is the yield spread. The t-statistics in the short rate and excess dividend yield regression are above
1.00 but do not yield a 5% rejection. When we investigate bond returns, we also find the yield spread
to be the only significant predictor. This predictability reflects the well-known deviations from
the Expectations Hypothesis (see Campbell and Shiller (1991) and Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall
(2001)). A higher yield spread predicts high expected excess returns on both stocks and bonds.
   The predictability coeﬃcients implied by our model are reported in square brackets. Of course,
except for the yield spread regression, these tests have little power and are not useful to investigate.
What is interesting is to check whether the model gets the signs right. The one miss here is the
negative sign of the short rate coeﬃcient in the return regressions. This puzzle, more prevalent with
post-Treasury accord data and known since Fama and Schwert (1979), can potentially be resolved
in our model, because the equity premium increases when risk aversion (qt ) increases, whereas the
short rate can increase or decrease with higher risk aversion depending on whether the consumption
smoothing or precautionary savings eﬀect dominates. Wachter (2005) investigates a two-factor
extension of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) with exactly this purpose. Because at our estimated
values, an increase in qt increases the short rate, we generate a positive correlation between current
interest rates and the equity premium. A full investigation of this puzzle requires a more serious
investigation of inflation dynamics, because the empirical relationship may be due to the expected
inflation component in nominal interest rates, rather than the real short rate component.
   With respect to the predictive power of the yield spread, the model does reasonably well. It
generates substantial positive predictability coeﬃcients for both stock and bond returns and also



                                                  28
matches the fact that the coeﬃcient is larger for the equity than for the bond return regression. In a
recent paper, Buraschi and Jiltsov (2005) also find that an external habit model helps fit deviations
of the Expectations Hypothesis.
    In Panel C, we present alternative tests computing the model implied innovations to the return
series and testing whether they are orthogonal to observable instruments. The p-values for these
tests show a failure to reject in each and every case. These tests present further evidence that our
model is consistent with the dynamics of expected returns.
    One strong implication of the model is that the predictable components in the excess returns
of stocks and bonds are perfectly correlated because of the dependence on qt .       In the data, this
would be the case if the yield spread was really the only true predictor. To investigate investigate
how realistic this implication of the model is, we project the excess returns in the data onto the
interest rate, the yield spread and the dividend yield and compute the correlation of the two fitted
values. We find this correlation to be 0.81 with a standard error of 0.29. This suggests that the
assumption of perfect correlation between expected excess returns on bonds and stocks is a rather
accurate approximation of the truth.



7     Conclusion

In this article, we have presented a pricing model for stocks and bonds where potentially counter-
cyclical preference shocks generate time-variation in risk premiums. The model can be interpreted
as a tractable version of the external habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) accommodating
a fully stochastic term structure. Our fundamentals include both consumption (which enters the
utility function) and dividends (which is the relevant cash flow process), which are assumed to be
cointegrated processes.
    A GMM estimation reveals that the model is rejected at the 5 percent level, but still fits a large
number of salient features of the data, including the level and variability of interest rates, bond and
stock returns, term spreads and dividend yields. The model also matches the correlation between
fundamentals (consumption and dividend growth) and asset returns. We further examine the fit of
the model with respect to bond and stock return dynamics, finding that it produces a somewhat too
high correlation between stock and bond returns but matches the fact that the term spread signals
high risk premiums on both. The model also does not generate a negative relation between the


                                                  29
equity premium and short rates, although it could theoretically do so. This relationship deserves
further scrutiny in a model where the inflation process gets more attention.
   Our article is part of a growing literature that explores the eﬀects of stochastic risk aversion on
asset price dynamics. A number of articles have stayed fairly close to the Campbell and Cochrane
framework and empirically focused mainly on the term structure and deviations of the Expectations
Hypothesis. These articles include Wachter (2005), Brandt and Wang (2003), who model risk aver-
sion as a function of unexpected inflation, and Dai (2003), who constructs a model nesting internal
and external habit. Other authors have explored alternative preference specifications where risk
aversion varies through time. These include the state dependent preferences in Melino and Yang
(2003), focusing on the equity premium; the regime —switching risk aversion model of Gordon and
St-Amour (2000, 2004) and the preference shock model of Lettau and Wachter (2005) (who focus
on explaining the value premium). Lettau and Wachter stress that it is important that there is no
correlation between preference shocks in their model and fundamentals, and that an external habit
model imposing a perfectly negative correlation would not work. The strength of our framework is
that we remain tied to fundamentals but relax the perfect negative correlation assumption.
   Our research reveals that future modeling eﬀorts must search for factors that drive a stronger
wedge between bond and stock pricing.       Possible candidates are more intricate modeling of the
inflation process and a cash flow component uncorrelated with the discount rate.




                                                 30
References

 [1] Abel, A., 1990, Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses, American
    Economic Review 80, 38-42.

 [2] Abel, A., 1999, Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium, Journal of Monetary
    Economics 43, 3-33.

 [3] Ait-Sahalia, Y., Parker, A. and M. Yogo, 2003, Luxury Goods and the Equity Premium, Journal
    of Finance. 59, 2959-3004.

 [4] Ang, A. and G. Bekaert, 2005, Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?, working paper,
    Columbia University.

 [5] Ang, A. and G. Bekaert, 2003, The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected Inflation,
    working paper, Columbia University.

 [6] Ameriks, J. and S. Zeldes, 2001, Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?, working paper,
    Columbia University.

 [7] Bakshi, G. and Z. Chen, 1997, An Alternative Valuation Model for Contingent Claims, Journal
    of Financial Economics, 44, 123-165.

 [8] Bansal, R., and C. Lundblad, 2002, Marker Eﬃciency, Asset Returns, and the Size of the Risk
    Premium in Global Equity Markets, Journal of Econometrics, 109, 195-237.

 [9] Bansal, R. C. Lundblad and R. Dittmar, 2004, Consumption, Dividends and the Cross Section
    of Equity Returns, Journal of Finance, 60, 1639-1672.

[10] Bansal, R. and M. Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing
    Puzzles, Journal of Finance, 59, 1481-1509.

[11] Bekaert, G., 1996, The time-variation of risk and return in foreign exchange markets: A general
    equilibrium perspective, Review of Financial Studies 9, 427-470.

[12] Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick and D. A. Marshall, 1997, The implications of first order risk aversion
    for asset market risk premiums, Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 3-39.




                                                  31
[13] Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick and D. A. Marshall, 2001, Peso problem explanations for term
    structure anomalies, Journal of Monetary Economics 48, 241-270.

[14] Brandt, M. and K. Q. Wang, 2003, Time-Varying Risk Aversion and Unexpected Inflation,
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 1457-1498.

[15] Brock, W., 1982, Asset Prices in a Production Economy, Scientific Essays of William Allen
    Brock, Elgar.

[16] Buraschi, A. and A. Jiltsov, 2004, Habit Persistence and the Nominal Term Structure of Interest
    Rates, working paper, London Business School.

[17] Campbell, J. Y., 1990, Measuring the Persistence of Expected Returns, American Economic
    Review 80, 43-47.

[18] Campbell, J. Y., 1993, Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data, American
    Economic Review 83, 487-512.

[19] Campbell, J. Y., and J. Ammer, 1993, What moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance
    Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns, Journal of Finance, 48, 3-37.

[20] Campbell, J. Y., and Cochrane, J. H., 1995, By force of habit: A consumption based explanation
    of aggregate stock market behavior, working paper, NBER.

[21] Campbell, J. Y., and Cochrane, J. H., 1999, By force of habit: A consumption based explanation
    of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

[22] Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend price ratio and expectations of future
    dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.

[23] Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements: A bird’s
    eye view, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.

[24] Campbell, J. Y. and M. Yogo, 2003, Eﬃcient Tests of Stock Return Predictability, working
    paper, Harvard University.

[25] Cochrane, J. H., 1992, Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, The Review of Financial
    Studies 5, 243-280.


                                                 32
[26] Cochrane, J. H., and Hansen, L. P., 1992, Asset Pricing Explorations for Macroeconomics,
    NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1992, 115-165

[27] Constantinides, G. M., 1992, A theory of the nominal term structure of interest rates, Review
    of Financial Studies 5, 531-552.

[28] Cox, J. C., J. E. Ingersoll and S. A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term structure of interest rates,
    Econometrica 53, 385-408.

[29] Dai, Q., 2003, Term Structure Dynamics in a Model with Stochastic Internal Habit, working
    paper.

[30] Dai, Q. and K. Singleton, 2000, Specification Analysis of Aﬃne Term Structure Models, Journal
    of Finance, 55, 1943-1978.

[31] Dickey, D., and A. Fuller, 1984, Testing for Unit Roots: 2, Econometrica, 52, 1241-1269.

[32] Fama, E., and K. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds,
    Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.

[33] Fama, E., and Schwert, 1977, Asset Returns and Inflation, Journal of Financial Economics,
    5,115-146.

[34] Gordon, S. and P. St. Amour, 2004, Asset Returns with State-Dependent Risk Preferences,
    Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 22, 241-252.

[35] Gordon, S. and P. St. Amour, 2000, A Preference Regime Model of Bear and Bull Markets,
    American Economic Review, 90, 1019-1033.

[36] Hamilton, J. D., 1994, Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press.

[37] Hansen, L. P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators,
    Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.

[38] Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market data for models of
    dynamic economies, Journal of Political Economy 99, 225-262.

[39] Harrison, J. M., and D. Kreps, 1979, Martingales and arbitrage in multi-period securities mar-
    kets, Journal of Economic Theory 20, 381-408.


                                                  33
[40] Heaton, J., 1995, An empirical investigation of asset pricing with temporally dependent prefer-
    ence specifications, Econometrica 63, 681-717.

[41] Keim, D. B., and R. F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in bond and stock markets, Journal
    of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.

[42] Kumar, S., and A. Persaud, 2002, Pure Contagion and Investors’ Shifting Risk Appetite, Inter-
    national Finance, 5, 401-436.

[43] Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, 2004, Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth, working
    paper, New York University.

[44] Lettau, M. and J. Wachter, Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A Duration-Based Ex-
    planation of the Value Premium, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[45] Lucas, R. E., Jr., 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1426-1446.

[46] Lustig, H. and S.Van Nieuwerburgh, 2003, Housing Collateral, Consumption Insurance and
    Risk Premia: an Empirical Perspective, working paper, University of Chicago.

[47] Mamaysky, H., 2002, Market Prices of Risk and Return Predictability in a Joint Stock-Bond
    Pricing model, Working Paper, Yale.

[48] Mankiw, G. and S. Zeldes, 1991, The Consumption of Stockholders and Nonstockholders, Jour-
    nal of Financial Economics, 29, 97-112.

[49] Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott, 1985, The equity premium: A puzzle, Journal of Monetary
    Economics 15, 145-161.

[50] Meloni. A., and A. X. Yang, State Dependent Preferences and Explain the Equity Premium
    Puzzle, working paper, 2003.

[51] Menzly, L., Santos, T., and P. Veronesi, 2004, Understanding Predictability, Journal of Political
    Economy, 112, 1-47.

[52] Newey, W., and K. West, 1987, A Simple Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Auto-
    correlation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 55, 703-708.




                                                 34
[53] Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., and S. Tuzel, 2003, Housing, Consumption and Asset Pricing,
    working paper, University of Chicago.

[54] Santos, T., and P. Veronesi, 2004, Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns, Review of
    Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[55] Sharpe, W. F., 1990, Investor wealth measures and expected return, in Quantifying the market
    risk premium phenomenon for investment decision making, The Institute of Chartered Financial
    Analysts, 29-37.

[56] Shiller, R.J., and A. Beltratti, 1992, Stock Prices and Bond Yields: Can Their Movements Be
    Explained in Terms of Present Value models?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 30, 25-46.

[57] Sun, T., 1992, Real and Nominal Interest Rates: A Discrete-Time Model and Its Continuous
    Time Limit, Review of Financial Studies, 5, 581-611.

[58] Wachter, J., 2005, A Consumption-Based Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates, Journal
    of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

[59] Wei, M., 2003, Human Capital, Business Cycles, and Asset Pricing, working paper, Columbia
    University.

[60] Weil, P., 1989, The equity premium puzzle and the risk free rate puzzle, Journal of Monetary
    Economics 24, 401-421.




                                               35
   Table 1: Consumption - Dividend Ratio Characteristics


            Univariate Statistics                                ADF Test

      Mean      Std. Dev       Autocorr.               α            δ           ζ           ρ

       3.437        0.206           0.859         0.7529    −0.0009       0.1974      0.7905
     (0.033)      (0.024)         (0.077)       (0.3168)    (0.0009)    (0.1587)    (0.0856)

    Sample univariate statistics and univariate augmented Dickey-Fuller unit root tests for the log consumption-
dividend ratio series. GMM standard errors are in parentheses (1 Newey West lag). For the ADF tests,
we estimate the following specification by OLS

                                  cdt = α + δt + ζ∆cdt−1 + ρcdt−1 + ut                                   (42)

The F-statistic for the joint Wald test, δ = 0, ρ = 1, is 6.16, which is lower than the 5% critical level of
6.25 provided by Dickey and Fuller (1981). The t-statistic for the Wald test, ρ = 1, is 6.00 which is higher
than the 1% critical value under the null that δ = 0 of 3.96.
    All series excluding consumption were obtained from Ibbotson Associates, for 1927-2000, (74 years).
Consumption data were obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA tables. Consumption data
for the first three years of the sample (1927-1929) are unavailable from the BEA. Aggregate consumption
growth was obtained from the website of Robert Shiller, www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller, and used for both
nondurables and services consumption series for this period. One observation is lost due to the estimation
of models requiring lags. See text and appendix for additional data construction issues.




                                                     36
   Table 2: Estimation of the Moody Investor Model

                         Means                Feedback                Volatilities        Preferences

         E [∆c]       0.0317            ρcc     0.3713         σ cc       0.0147     ln (β)   −0.0887
                    (0.0017)                  (0.0926)                  (0.0018)              (0.0119)
          E [π]       0.0394            ρcu   −0.0085          σ uc     −0.0215          γ      1.0249
                    (0.0076)                  (0.0052)                  (0.0136)              (0.4093)
              δ     −0.0052             ρuc   −2.6579          σuu        0.0602
                    (0.0046)                  (0.9969)                  (0.0122)
                                        ρuu     0.7950         σ ππ       0.0172
                                              (0.0653)                  (0.0026)
                                        ρππ     0.8793         σqq        0.4405
                                              (0.0235)                  (0.1525)
                                        ρqq     0.8916           λ      −0.1892
                                              (0.0290)                  (0.1182)
     J-Stat(13)      24.2266
         (pval)     (0.0291)

   The estimated model is defined by
                                                               √
                          ∆ct+1 = µc + ρcc ∆ct + ρcu ut + σ cc qt εct+1
                                                                √
                           ut+1 = µu + ρuc ∆ct + ρuu ut + σ uc qt εct+1 + σ uu εut+1
                           πt+1 = µπ + ρππ π t + σ ππ επt+1
                                                   σ qq √ ¡ q                ¢
                          qt+1 = µq + ρqq qt + √            qt sεt+1 − εct+1
                                                  1 + s2
                         ∆dt+1 = ∆ct+1 − ∆ut+1 − δ
                          mrt+1 = ln (β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1
                                     1¡        ¢−1/2
                              s = − 1 − λ2
                                    λ
The moments fit are (30 total)

                                  vtz    ≡ (Zt − Et−1 [Zt ])
                                           h                                                 i
                   vtz   × [1] forZt     = ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , dpt , spdt , rtex , rtbx (8)
                                           h                         i
                  vtz × Zt−1 forZt       = ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , ut (5)
                                           h                                                    i
                     2
               (vtz ) × [1] forZt        = ∆dt , ∆ct , π t , rtf , dpt , spdt , rtex , rtbx , ut (9)
                                                                   £         ¤
                  vtz1 ⊗ vtz2 for Zt1    = [∆dt , ∆ct ] , Zt2 = rtex , rtbx (4)
                                           ¡ ∆c ∆d ¢ ¡ ∆c u ¢ ¡ ∆c                  ¢
                                            vt vt , vt vt , vt ut−1 , (vtu , ∆ct−1 ) (4)

GMM standard errors are in parentheses. See test for a discussion of the estimation procedure. Note
that the unconditional means of ut and qt are fixed at zero and one respectively. There are a total of 17
estimated parameters. Data are annual from 1927-2000 (74 years). See the data appendix for additional
data construction notes.




                                                          37
   Table 3: Implied Moments for Moody Investor Model
                ∆dt          ∆ct            πt             rtf       dpt        spdt         rtex        rtbx

    Mean      [0.037]     [0.032]      [0.039]     [0.057]∗      [0.033]∗     [0.004]     [0.052]     [0.011]
                0.035       0.032        0.032        0.041         0.039       0.009       0.059       0.010
             (0.016)     (0.003)      (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.024)     (0.009)

    Std.      [0.084]     [0.016]      [0.036]      [0.033]       [0.012]     [0.014]     [0.172]     [0.096]
    Dev.        0.124       0.022        0.042        0.032         0.014       0.013       0.197       0.081
             (0.022)     (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.004)       (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.022)     (0.007)

    Auto.     [0.196]     [0.413]      [0.881]      [0.868]       [0.879]     [0.826]   [−0.057]    [−0.001]
    Corr.       0.159       0.414        0.646        0.895         0.800       0.734      0.081     −0.080
             (0.164)     (0.185)      (0.160)      (0.105)       (0.286)     (0.106)     (0.162)     (0.164)

                                                  Correlations
                ∆dt          ∆ct            πt          rtf          dpt        spdt         rtex        rtbx

    ∆ct        [0.53]
                 0.59
              (0.14)
                                ∗
    πt         [0.00]     [0.00]
                 0.08         0.43
              (0.21)       (0.19)
                                             ∗
    rtf        [0.10]       [0.17]     [0.96]
              −0.01           0.01         0.42
              (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.15)
    dpt        [0.03]   [−0.02]∗         [0.00]     [0.22]∗
              −0.07        −0.34        −0.10        −0.26
              (0.14)       (0.15)       (0.23)       (0.11)
    spdt     [−0.20]     [−0.37]     [−0.91]∗     [−0.90]∗         [0.16]
              −0.16        −0.17        −0.33        −0.65           0.11
              (0.14)       (0.13)       (0.14)       (0.10)       (0.11)
    rtex       [0.19]       [0.30]       [0.04]       [0.05]     [−0.21]    [−0.18]∗
                 0.09         0.19         0.01      −0.13        −0.43          0.13
              (0.13)       (0.17)       (0.22)       (0.10)       (0.14)       (0.09)
    rtbx     [−0.06]     [−0.07]      [−0.43]      [−0.44]       [−0.04]      [0.41]∗      [0.28]
              −0.05        −0.06        −0.28        −0.34        −0.09          0.57        0.15
              (0.08)       (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.10)       (0.07)     (0.09)

    The numbers in square brackets are simulated moments of the Moody Investor Model. Using the point
estimates from Table 2, the system was simulated for 100,000 periods. Dividend yield and excess equity
return simulated moments are based upon the log-linear approximation described in the text. The second
number in each entry is the sample moment based on the annual dataset (1927-2000) and the third number
in parentheses is a GMM standard error for the sample moment (one Newey West lag). Asterisks denote
sample moments more than two standard errors away from the model implied value. See data appendix for
additional data construction notes.




                                                      38
   Table 4: Variance Decomposition Under the Moody Investor Model

               ∆ct         ut        πt        qt      ∆ct−1         ut−1     πt−1      qt−1

     rtf    0.0321    0.0040    0.9188    0.0451      0.0000       0.0000   0.0000    0.0000
     dpt    0.0003    0.0902    0.0000    0.9095      0.0000       0.0000   0.0000    0.0000
     spdt   0.1273    0.0050    0.8300    0.0377      0.0000       0.0000   0.0000    0.0000
     rtex   0.0502    0.0049    0.0099    0.4264      0.0042       0.0069   0.0000    0.4976
     rtbx   0.0100    0.0902    0.8083    0.0280     −0.0017      −0.0023   0.0000    0.1527

    Under the Moody Investor model, the variable in each row can be expressed as a linear combination of
the current and lagged state vector. Generally, for the row variables,

                                              xt = µ + Γ0 Ytc

where Ytc is the companion form of Yt (that is Ytc stacks Yt , Yt−1 ). Based on µ and Γ, the proportion of
the variation of each row variable attributed to the k th element of the state vector is calculated as

                                               Γ0 v (Ytc ) Γ(k)
                                                Γ0 v (Ytc ) Γ

where Γ(k) is a column vector with the k th element equal to those of Γ and zero elsewhere. Essentially, the
numerator computes the covariance of Yt with the state variable.




                                                     39
   Table 5: Properties of qt and Risk Aversion Under the Moody Investor Model

     RAt Percentile       1%       5%    10%    25%     50%    75%      90%      95%    99%    mean
                         0.90     1.05   1.13   1.39    2.10   4.11     9.66     18.4   82.0   11.07

     qt Correlation     ∆dt      ∆ct       πt     rtf    dpt   spdt     rtex     rtbx
                       −0.06    −0.15    0.00   0.21    0.93   0.20   −0.21    −0.04

   This table presents simulated risk aversion moments under the Moody Investor Model and correlations
with qt and observable variables. The system was simulated for 100,000 periods using the data generating
process and point estimates from Table 2. Risk aversion is calculated as

                                           RAt = γ exp (qt )




                                                  40
   Table 6: Tests of Additional Moments
   Panel A: Stock-Bond Covariance Orthogonality Tests

        Moment(s)                                      p − val

          rex bex
                           £ ex bx ¤
        ¡ut rexut bex− Ct−1 r£t ex, rt bx ¤¢ −          (0.34)
          ut ut − Ct−1 rt , rt              ⊗→
                                             z t−1      (0.77)



   Panel B: Return Conditional Mean Orthogonality Tests
    Moment(s)     p − val     Moment(s)    p − val      joint p − val

          f                                       f
     urex
      t rt−1            (0.36)               urbx
                                              t rt−1     (0.71)          (0.65)

     urex
      t dpt−1           (0.56)          urbx
                                         t dpt−1         (0.25)          (0.47)

     urex
      t spdt−1          (0.59)         urbx
                                        t spdt−1         (0.36)          (0.65)

     urex
      t   ⊗−
           →
           z t−1        (0.67)       urbx
                                      t   ⊗−
                                           →
                                           z t−1         (0.48)          (0.77)


   Panel C: Return Predictability Univariate Slope Coeﬃcients
                                                     ³             ´
                  f                                            f
                 rt−1        dpt−1        spdt−1      dpt−1 − rt−1

     rtex        [0.2365]         [3.2598]        [0.7057]           [0.1889]
                −0.7999             1.6748          3.5705             0.8184
                (0.5992)         (1.4016)        (1.4603)           (0.4587)

      bx
     rt−1        [0.0927]         [1.1975]        [0.2332]           [0.0634]
                −0.0781             0.2121          2.1029             0.0834
                (0.2496)         (0.5828)        (0.5846)           (0.2107)

   This table reports the covariance and predictability performance of the Moody Investor model. In both
panels, ux
         t denotes (xt − Et−1 [xht ]) where xt is an observable
                                                       i        variable. The conditional expectation is that
implied by the model. −
                      →        f
                      z t−1 = rt−1 , dpt−1 , spdt−1
    In Panel A, we test moments £ corresponding
                                        ¤         to the unconditional and conditional covariance between
stock and bond returns. Ct−1 rtex , rtbx denotes the conditional covariance implied by the model.
    In panel B, we test moments capturing the conditional mean of stock and bond excess returns: the
conditional risk premiums. The columns labeled ‘p-val’ report GMM based orthogonality tests of the
corresponding moment(s) condition. The final column reports a joint test for the moments across the rows.
Data are annual from 1927-2000, (74 years). See the data appendix for additional data construction notes.
    In Panel C, we present slope coeﬃcients from simulated univariate return predictability regressions using
various instruments under the model (top number in cell with square brackets) and the sample coeﬃcients
in the data (second and third numbers are data slope coeﬃcients with standard errors in parentheses)




                                                         41
   Figure 1: Filtered Conditional Moments


                            5


                            4


                            3
                        q




                            2


                            1


                            0
                            1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970      1980       1990      2000




                          60

                          50

                          40
                    RA




                          30

                          20

                          10

                            0
                            1920   1930   1940   1950   1960   1970      1980       1990      2000




                            1


                         0.5
        Corr[rex,rbx]




                            0


                        -0.5


                         -1
                          1920     1930   1940   1950   1960   1970      1980       1990      2000




     This figure plots various filtered series under the Moody Investor model and the point estimates from
Table2. Each of the plotted series is a function of qt alone, conditional on the model parameters.
    The first two frames plot the filtered values for the latent state variable qt and risk aversion, RAt =
γ exp (qt ). The remaining frame plots the model implied conditional correlation of excess stock and bonds
returns (blue) and 15-year-rolling-window realized correlations between stock and bond returns (red, circles).




                                                        42
A     Data Appendix

In this appendix, we list all the variables used in the article and describe how they were computed
from original data sources.

  1. rtex . To calculate excess equity returns, we start with the CRSP disaggregated monthly stock
     file, and define monthly US aggregate equity returns as:

                                              N
                                              X                (prci,t−1 · shrouti,t−1 )
                               RETtm     =          reti,t ·                  m
                                              n=1
                                                                      M CAPt−1
                                              N
                                              X
                              M CAPtm    =          prci,t · shrouti,t                          (43)
                                              n=1


     where the universe of stocks includes those listed on the AMEX, NASDAQ or NYSE, reti,t is
     the monthly total return to equity for a firm, prci,t is the closing monthly price of the stock,
     and shrouti,t are the number of shares outstanding at the end of the month for stock i. We
     create annual end-of-year observations by summing ln (1 + RETtm ) over the course of each
     year. Excess returns are then defined as:


                                                                 f
                                        rtex ≡ ln (1 + RETt ) − rt−1                            (44)


     where the risk free rate, rtf , is defined below. Note that the lagged risk free rate is applied
     to match the period over which the two returns are earned (rtf is dated when it enters the
     information set).

  2. rtbx . Excess long bond returns are defined as,


                                                                   f
                                        rtbx ≡ ln (1 + LT BRt ) − rt−1                          (45)


     where LT BRt is the annually measured ‘long term government bond holding period return’
     from the Ibbottson Associates SBBI yearbook.




                                                     43
3. ∆dt . Log real dividend growth is defined as:


                   ∆dt     ≡ ln (DIVt ) − ln (DIVt−1 ) − π t
                                 12
                                     ÃN                                                  !
                                X       X
                  DIVt     =                (reti,t − retxi,t ) (prci,t−1 · shrouti,t−1 )        (46)
                               month=1    n=1


   where reti,t , retxi,t , prci,t and shrouti,t are total return, total return excluding dividends,
   price per share and number of common shares outstanding for all issues traded on the AMEX,
   NASDAQ and AMEX as reported in the CRSP monthly stock files. πt , inflation, is defined
   below.

4. spdt . The yield spread is defined as:


                                        spdt ≡ ln (1 + LT BYt ) − rtf                            (47)


   where LT BYt is the annually measured ‘long term government bond yield’ as reported by
   Ibbottson Associates in the SBBI yearbook.

5. π t . Log inflation is defined as:
                                           π t ≡ ln (1 + IN F Lt )                               (48)

   where IN F Lt is the annually measured gross rate of change in the consumer price index as
   reported by Ibbottson Associates in the SBBI yearbook.

6. Consumption.     Ct .   Total real aggregate consumption is calculated as total constant dollar
   non-durable plus services consumption as reported in the NIPA tables available from the
   website of the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. As described in Section 2, we checked the
   robustness of our results to the use of alternative consumption measures that more closely
   approximate the consumption of stockholders. CtLX denotes real luxury consumption, defined
   as the sum of three disaggregated constant-dollar NIPA consumption series: boats and aircraft,
   (CtBA ), jewelry and watches, (CtJW ) and foreign travel, (CtF T ). CtW T , ‘participation weighted
   consumption,’ is defined as follows

                                                  ¡            ¢
                                CtW T = P ARTt . · CtAG − CtF T + CtLX                           (49)




                                                  44
  The series should more accurately reflect the consumption basket of stock market participants.
  The higher the stock market participation rate, P ARTt , the more relevant is aggregate (non-
  luxury) consumption.     CtF T is subtracted from CtAG to avoid double-counting (the other
  elements of luxury consumption are classified as durables, and thus not included in total
  nondurable and service consumptions, which comprise CtAG ). P ARTt is the US stock market
  participation rate taken from data provided by Steve Zeldes (see Ameriks and Zeldes (2002)):
  the percent of US households with direct or indirect ownership of stocks:


                                            Year   Rate

                                            1962   0.296
                                            1983   0.437
                                                                                             (50)
                                            1989   0.475
                                            1992   0.496
                                            1998   0.570


  From these data, an interpolated participation rate, P ARTt was calculated by the authors as
  (1 + exp [− (−62.0531 + 0.03118 · Y EARt )])−1 , the result of estimating a deterministic trend
  line through the numbers in the table above.       To fill in consumption data prior to NIPA
  coverage, 1926-1928 (inclusive), we applied (in real terms) the growth rate of real consumption
  reported at the website of Robert Shiller for those years.      The real log growth rates of all
  consumption series are calculated as:


                                  ∆ct = ln (Ct ) − ln (Ct−1 ) − π t                          (51)


  Note that the same inflation series, defined above, is applied to deflate all three consumption
  measures.

7. dpt . The dividend yield measure used in this paper is:

                                                µ           ¶
                                                      DIVt
                                      dpt   ≡ ln 1 +
                                                     M CAPt
                                                   m
                                 M CAPt     = M CAPt,DEC                                     (52)




                                              45
                                        m
   where DIVt is defined above and M CAPt,DEC corresponds to the December value of M CAPtm
   for each year.

8. rtf . The short term risk free rate is defined as:


                                         rtf ≡ ln (1 + ST BYt )                               (53)


   where ST BYt is the ‘short term government bond yield’ reported by the St. Louis federal
   reserve statistical release website (FRED). From this monthly series, we took December values
   to create annual end of year observations. Note that rtf is dated when it enters the information
   set, the end of the period prior to that over which the return is earned. For instance, the risk
   free rate earned from January 1979 through December 1979 is dated as (end-of-year) 1978.




                                                46
B     The General Pricing Model

Here we collect proofs of all the pricing propositions.      For completeness, we report the general
pricing model equations. We begin by defining the Hadamard Product, denoted by ¯. The use of
this operator is solely for ease of notational complexity.

Definition: Suppose A = (aij ) and B = (bij ) are each N × N matrices. Then A ¯ B = C, where
C = (cij ) = (aij bij ) is an N × N matrix. Similarly, suppose a = (ai ) is an N -dimensional column
vector and B = (bij ) is an N × N matrix. Then a ¯ B = C, where C = (cij ) = (ai bij ) is an N × N
matrix. Again, suppose a = (aj ) is an N -dimensional row vector and B = (bij ) is an N × N matrix.
Then a ¯ B = C, where C = (cij ) = (aj bij ) is an N × N matrix. Finally, suppose a = (ai ), and
b = (bi ) are N × 1 vectors. Then a ¯ b = C, where C = (ci ) = (ai bi ) is an N × 1 vector.



B.1     Definition of the System

The state vector is described by,


                               Yt   = µ + AYt−1 + (ΣF Ft−1 + ΣH ) εt

                               Ft   = (q φ + ΦYt q)0 ¯ I,                                       (54)


where Yt is the state vector of length k, µ and φ are parameter vectors also of length k and A, ΣF ,
ΣH and Φ are parameter matrices of size (k × k). εt is a k-vector of zero mean i.i.n. innovations.
The log of the real stochastic discount factor is modeled as,


                             mrt+1 = µm + Γ0m Yt + (Σ0mF Ft + Σ0mH ) εt+1




                                                  47
where µm , is scalar and Γm , ΣmF , and ΣmH are k-vectors of parameters. The following restrictions
are required:


                                            ΣF Ft Σ0H    = 0

                                         Σ0mF Ft ΣmH     = 0

                                           ΣH Ft ΣmF     = 0

                                           ΣF Ft ΣmH     = 0

                                             φ + ΦYt     ≥ 0                                      (55)


These restrictions are convenient for the calculation of conditional expectations of functions of Yt .


B.2     Some Useful Lemmas

Lemma 1. The conditional expectation of an exponential aﬃne function of the state variables and
the pricing kernel is given by:

                         £   ¡                            ¢¤
                       Et exp a + c01 Yt+1 + d0 Yt + mrt+1 = exp (g0 + g 0 Yt )                   (56)


Proof. By lognormality,
                                   ⎛                                                        ⎞
                                                                           £      ¤
    £   ¡                   ¢¤     ⎜                 a + c0 Et [Yt+1 ] + Et mrt+1           ⎟
  Et exp a + c0 Yt+1 + mrt+1 = exp ⎝          ¡                 £ r ¤        £ 0         ¤¢ ⎠ (57)
                                            1      0                                 r
                                          + 2 Vt [c Yt+1 ] + Vt mt+1 + 2Ct c Yt+1 , mt+1


We will take each of the five conditional expectations above separately. Below, ¯ (the Hadamard
product) denotes element-by-element multiplication.

  1.
                                         c0 Et [Yt+1 ] = c0 (µ + AYt )                            (58)


  2.
                                           £     ¤
                                         Et mrt+1 = µm + Γ0m Yt                                   (59)




                                                  48
3.


                      V ARt [c0 Yt+1 ] = c0 (ΣF Ft + ΣH ) (ΣF Ft + ΣH )0 c

                                      = c0 ΣF Ft Ft0 Σ0F c + c0 ΣH Σ0H c
                                                             0
                                      = ((Σ0F c) ¯ (Σ0F c)) (φ + ΦYt ) + c0 ΣH Σ0H c          (60)


     where the second line uses restrictions in Equation (55) and the third line follows from prop-
     erties of the ¯ operator.

4.

                            £     ¤                                     0
                       V ARt mrt+1 = (Σ0mF Ft + Σ0mH ) (Σ0mF Ft + Σ0mH )

                                      = Σ0mF Ft Ft0 ΣmF + Σ0mH ΣmH

                                      = (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 (φ + ΦYt ) + Σ0mH ΣmH                   (61)


     where the second line uses restrictions in Equation (55) and the third line follows from prop-
     erties of the ¯ operator.

5.

                       £               ¤    h                                    i
                                                                               0
                   COVt c0 Yt+1 , mrt+1 = c0 (ΣF Ft−1 + ΣH ) (Σ0mF Ft + Σ0mH )

                                          = c0 [ΣF Ft Ft0 ΣmF + ΣH ΣmH ]

                                          = c0 [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) (φ + ΦYt ) + ΣH Σ0mH ]           (62)


     where the second line uses restrictions in Equation (55) and the third line follows from prop-
     erties of the ¯ operator.




                                                49
      Substituting,

                           £   ¡                      ¢¤
                        Et exp a + c0 Yt+1 + mrt+1
                             ⎛                                                           ⎞
                                           a + c0 (µ + AYt ) + µm + Γ0m Yt
                             ⎜                                                           ⎟
                             ⎜                                                           ⎟
                             ⎜                            0
                                  + 12 ((Σ0F c) ¯ (Σ0F c)) (φ + ΦYt ) + 12 c0 ΣH Σ0H c   ⎟
                             ⎜                                                           ⎟
                      = exp ⎜                                                            ⎟      (63)
                             ⎜ + 1 (Σ               0                                    ⎟
                             ⎜ 2 mF ¯ ΣmF ) (φ + ΦYt ) + 12 ΣmH Σ0mH + 12 σ 2m           ⎟
                             ⎝                                                           ⎠
                                      +c0 [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) (φ + ΦYt ) + ΣH Σ0mH ]


Evidently,

                           1                    0
 g0     = a + c0 µ + µm +    ((Σ0F c) ¯ (Σ0F c)) φ
                           2
             1             1                 0      1      1
          + c0 ΣH Σ0H c + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF ) φ + Σ0mH ΣmH + σ 2m + c0 [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) φ + ΣH ΣmH ]
             2             2                        2      2
                            1                     0   1
 g0     = d0 + c0 A + Γ0m + ((Σ0F c) ¯ (Σ0F c)) Φ + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 Φ + c0 [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) Φ] (64)
                            2                         2


B.3       Representation of the Nominal Risk Free Rate

It is well known that the gross risk free rate is given by the inverse of the conditional expectation
of the nominal pricing kernel. Let eπ denote the k-vector which selects log inflation from the state
vector. Then,
                                   ³ ´ ¡ £      ¡                 ¢¤¢−1
                                exp rtf = Et exp mrt+1 − e0π Yt+1                               (65)

Applying Lemma 1 with a = 0 and c = −eπ and d = 0, it is immediate that


                                             rtf = −a01 − a01 Yt                                (66)


where a0 and a01 are given by the Lemma 1.




                                                     50
B.4     Representation of the Entire Term Structure

The proof to demonstrate the aﬃne form for the term structure is accomplished by induction.
Recall that the nominal one period risk free rate is given by,


                                          rtf   = −a01 − a01 Yt

                                         p1,t   = a01 + a01 Yt                                   (67)


where a01 and a01 are given in the previous subsection. Recall also the recursive relation of discount
bond prices in the stochastic discount factor representation,

                                              £ N           ¤
                                     Pn,t = Et Mt+1 Pn−1,t+1 .                                   (68)


Suppose, for the purposes of induction, that Pn−1,t can be expressed as,

                                               ¡                ¢
                                   Pn−1,t = exp a0n−1 + a0n−1 Yt .                               (69)


Then, leading this expression by one period and substituting it into the recursive relation, (68), we
have,

                                 £   ¡                  ¢¤
                      Pn,t   = Et exp mNt+1 + pn−1,t+1
                                 £   ¡                                      ¢¤
                             = Et exp mrt+1 − e0π Yt+1 + a0n−1 + a0n−1 Yt+1

                             = exp(a0n + a0n Yt )                                                (70)


where the coeﬃcients are given (recursively) by Lemma 1. Upon substitution, the following recursion
is revealed


                                     0        1                                          0
        a0n   = a0n−1 + (an−1 − eπ ) µ + µm +   ((Σ0F (an−1 − eπ )) ¯ (Σ0F (an−1 − eπ ))) φ
                                              2
                  1             0                      1               0
                + (an−1 − eπ ) ΣH Σ0H (an−1 − eπ ) + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF ) φ
                  2                                    2
                  1               1
                + Σ0mH ΣmH + σ 2m + (an−1 − eπ )0 [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) φ + ΣH ΣmH ]
                  2               2
                                      1                                         0
        a0n   = (an−1 − eπ ) A + Γ0m + ((Σ0F (an−1 − eπ )) ¯ (Σ0F (an−1 − eπ ))) Φ
                                      2
                  1
                + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 Φ + (an−1 − eπ ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) Φ]                                (71)
                  2

                                                    51
B.5    Representation of the Equity Prices

To demonstrate the dependence of the price-dividend ratio on Yt , we use a proof by induction. Let
ed1 and ee2 be the two selection vectors such that ∆dt = e0d1 Yt + e0d2 Yt−1 . The price dividend ratio
is given by
                                             ⎛                 ⎞
                                   ∞
                                   X          Xn
                      Pt
                            = Et         exp ⎝   mrt+j + ∆dt+j ⎠
                      Dt           n=1            j=1
                                       ⎛                                   ⎞
                                 ∞
                                 X      Xn
                            = Et   exp ⎝   mrt+j + e0d1 Yt+j + e0d2 Yt+j−1 ⎠
                                   n=1            j=1
                                ∞
                                X
                                       0
                            =         qn,t                                                        (72)
                                n=1

                        ³P                                     ´
           0                n     r       0          0                                            0
   where qn,t  ≡ Et exp     j=1 m t+j + e d1 Yt+j + ed2 Yt+j−1   are scalars. We will prove that qn,t =
   ¡ 0         ¢
exp bn + b0n Yt where b0n (scalar) and b0n (k-vectors) are defined below. The proof is accomplished
                        0
by induction. Consider q1,t :


                             0
                                     ¡   ¡                                ¢¢
                            q1,t = Et exp mrt+j + e0d1 Yt+j + e0d2 Yt+j−1                         (73)


   By Lemma 1,
                                              0
                                                       ¡             ¢
                                             q1,t = exp b01 + b01 Yt                              (74)

                                                                       ¡                ¢
where b01 and b01 are given by Lemma 1. Next, suppose that qn−1,t
                                                            0
                                                                  = exp b0n−1 + b0n−1 Yt . Then




                                                        52
           0
rearrange qn,t as follows.

                  ⎛                                   ⎞
                   Xn
   0
  qn,t   = Et exp ⎝   mrt+j + e0d1 Yt+j + e0d2 Yt+j−1 ⎠
                        j=1
                       ⎧                                    ⎛                                        ⎞⎫
                       ⎨      ¡ r                     ¢       n−1
                                                              X                                       ⎬
         =     Et Et+1 exp mt+1 + e0d1 Yt+1 + e0d2 Yt exp ⎝        mrt+j+1 + e0d1 Yt+j+1 + e0d2 Yt+j ⎠
                       ⎩                                                                              ⎭
                                                              j=1
                  ⎧                                          ⎛                                       ⎞⎫
                  ⎨     ¡                         ¢           n−1
                                                               X                                       ⎬
         =     Et exp mrt+1 + e0d1 Yt+1 + e0d2 Yt Et+1 exp ⎝       mrt+j+1 + e0d1 Yt+j+1 + e0d2 Yt+j ⎠
                  ⎩                                                                                    ⎭
                                                               j=1
                  ©    ¡                         ¢ 0       ª
         =     Et exp mrt+1 + e0d1 Yt+1 + e0d2 Yt qn−1,t+1
                  ©    ¡                         ¢   ¡                   ¢ª
         =     Et exp mrt+1 + e0d1 Yt+1 + e0d2 Yt exp b0n−1 + b0n−1 Yt+1
                  ©    ¡                                           ¢ª
         =     Et exp b0n−1 + mrt+1 + (ed + bn−1 )0 Yt+1 + e0d2 Yt
                   ¡            ¢
         =     exp b0n + b0n Yt                                                                        (75)


where b0n and b0n are easily calculated using Lemma 1. Upon substitution, the recursions are revealed
to be given by,

                                                1                                             0
         b0n   = b0n−1 + (bn−1 + ed1 )0 µ + µm +  ((Σ0F (bn−1 + ed1 )) ¯ (Σ0F (bn−1 + ed1 ))) φ
                                                2
                    1                                     1
                 + (bn−1 + ed1 )0 ΣH Σ0H (bn−1 + ed1 ) + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 φ
                    2                                     2
                    1 0          1 2                  0
                 + ΣmH ΣmH + σ m + (bn−1 + ed1 ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) φ + ΣH ΣmH ]
                    2            2
                                               1                                            0
         b0n   = ed2 + (bn−1 + ed1 )0 A + Γ0m + ((Σ0F (bn−1 + ed1 )) ¯ (Σ0F (bn−1 + ed1 ))) Φ
                  0
                                               2
                    1
                 + (ΣmF ¯ ΣmF )0 Φ + (bn−1 + ed1 ) [(Σ0mF ¯ ΣF ) Φ]                                   (76)
                    2

For the purposes of estimation the coeﬃcient sequences are calculated out 200 years. If the resulting
calculated value for P Dt has not converged, then the sequences are extended another 100 years until
either the P Dt value converges, or becomes greater than 1000 in magnitude.




                                                     53
C     The Estimated Model

The state variables and dynamics for the estimated model are given by

                                                    √ ³¡       ¢1/2 q            ´
                         qt+1    = µq + ρqq qt + σqq qt 1 − λ2     εt+1 + λεct+1
                                                               √
                       ∆ct+1     = µc + ρcc ∆ct + ρcu ut + σ cc qt εct+1
                                                              √
                         ut+1    = µu + ρuu ut + ρuc ∆ct + σuc qt εct+1 + σ uu εut+1

                       ∆dt+1     = ∆ct+1 − δ − ∆ut+1

                         π t+1   = µπ + ρπ πt + σπ επt+1                                          (77)


                                   mt+1 = ln(β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ (qt+1 − qt )                         (78)

This model is clearly a special case of the model above. The implied system matrices are,

                      ⎤ ⎡     ⎡                              ⎤             ⎡              ⎤
                ⎢ µ q ⎥       ⎢ ρqq   0               0   0 ⎥           ⎢ 0 0 0         0 ⎥
                ⎢     ⎥       ⎢                              ⎥          ⎢                 ⎥
                ⎢ µ ⎥         ⎢ 0 ρ                  ρcu 0 ⎥            ⎢ 0 0 0         0 ⎥
                ⎢ c ⎥         ⎢       cc                     ⎥          ⎢                 ⎥
            µ = ⎢     ⎥,A = ⎢                                ⎥ , ΣH   =⎢                  ⎥
                ⎢ µ ⎥         ⎢ 0 ρ                  ρuu 0 ⎥            ⎢ 0 0 σ         0 ⎥
                ⎢ u ⎥         ⎢       uc                     ⎥          ⎢       u         ⎥
                ⎣     ⎦       ⎣                              ⎦          ⎣                 ⎦
                  µπ             0    0               0 ρπ                0 0 0        σπ
                ⎡ ¡      ¢                              ⎤      ⎡      ⎤     ⎡                 ⎤
                        2 1/2
                ⎢ 1−λ         σ q λσ q 0              0 ⎥      ⎢ 0    ⎥     ⎢ 1 0      0 0 ⎥
                ⎢                                       ⎥      ⎢      ⎥     ⎢              ⎥
                ⎢       0          σcc 0              0 ⎥      ⎢ 0    ⎥     ⎢ 1 0      0 0 ⎥
                ⎢                                       ⎥      ⎢      ⎥     ⎢              ⎥
           ΣF = ⎢                                       ⎥,φ = .⎢      ⎥,Φ = ⎢              ⎥      (79)
                ⎢                                       ⎥      ⎢      ⎥     ⎢              ⎥
                ⎢       0           0   0             0 ⎥      ⎢ 0    ⎥     ⎢ 1 0      0 0 ⎥
                ⎣                                       ⎦      ⎣      ⎦     ⎣              ⎦
                        0           0   0             0           0           1 0      0 0

                    q ¡         ¢
               1
where σ qq ≡   fq    µq 1 − ρ2qq . Note that in this formulation, fq is the ratio of the unconditional


mean to the unconditional variance of qt . It is estimated directly.
    The pricing kernel for the model can be written as:


         mt+1       = ln (β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ (qt+1 − qt )
                                 ⎛                                                         ⎞
                                           ¡                          √ c ¢
                                 ⎜      − µc + ρcc ∆ct + ρcu ut + σ cc qt εt+1 + ...       ⎟
                    = ln (β) − γ ⎝      ¡       ¢       √ ³¡           ¢
                                                                      2 1/2 q        c
                                                                                         ´ ⎠      (80)
                                   µq + ρqq − 1 qt + σqq qt 1 − λ           εt+1 + λεt+1




                                                      54
We can now read oﬀ the pricing kernel matrices:

                                                                  ⎡          ⎤
                                                                 ⎢ ρqq − 1   ⎥
                                                                 ⎢           ⎥
                             ¡                   ¢               ⎢ −ρ        ⎥
                                                                 ⎢      cc   ⎥
                  µm    =     ln (β) − γµc + γµq          Γm   =γ⎢           ⎥      ΣmH = 0
                                                                 ⎢ −ρ        ⎥
                                                                 ⎢     cu    ⎥
                                                                 ⎣           ⎦
                                                                      0
                           ⎡ ¡      ¢              ⎤
                                   2 1/2
                           ⎢  1 − λ      σ qq      ⎥
                           ⎢                       ⎥
                           ⎢ −σcc + λσ qq          ⎥
                           ⎢                       ⎥
                ΣmF     = γ⎢                       ⎥.                                          (81)
                           ⎢        0              ⎥
                           ⎢                       ⎥
                           ⎣                       ⎦
                                    0


C.1    Alternate models

Several other models were explored during this study. First, the alternate consumption measures
∆clx      wt
  t and ∆ct were tried in place of aggregate consumption. The results for weighted consumption

were nearly identical to those reported above. For luxury consumption, the model failed to converge.
This may be due to a lack of cointegration between aggregate dividends and the small component
of consumption represented by the few luxury series we identified.
   Secondly, models wherein consumption growth and dividend growth are not cointegrated were
considered. Specifically, attempts were made to estimate models of the form

                                                                  √
                 ∆dt+1      = µd + ρd ∆dt + ρdq qt + σd εdt+1 + κ1 qt εqt+1
                                                                               √
                  ∆ct+1     = µc + ρc ∆ct + ρcq qt + σcd εdt+1 + σ c εct+1 + κ2 qt εqt+1

                    π t+1   = µπ + ρπ π t + σ π επt+1
                                             q ¡           ¢√
                                           1
                    qt+1    = µq + ρq qt +       µq 1 − ρ2q qt εqt+1
                                           f
                    mrt+1   = ln (β) − γ∆ct+1 + γ∆qt+1                                         (82)


   Estimation was attempted for each of the three consumption measures. However, none of these
models converged.      This is almost certainly due to the very diﬀerent pricing implications of a
non-stationary consumption-dividend ratio.




                                                     55
C.2    Log Linear Approximation of Equity Prices

In the estimation, we use a linear approximation to the price-dividend ratio. From Equation (72),
we see that the price dividend ratio is given by

                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                        Pt                       0
                                                     =          qn,t
                                        Dt                n=1
                                                          X∞
                                                                   ¡             ¢
                                                     =          exp b0n + b0n Yt                                       (83)
                                                          n=1

                            © ª∞               ∞
and the coeﬃcient sequences, b0n n=1 and {b0n }n=1 , are given above. We seek to approximate the
log price-dividend ratio using a first order Taylor approximation of Yt about Y , the unconditional
mean of Yt . Let
                                                         ¡            ¢
                                               q 0n = exp b0n + b0n Y                                                  (84)

and note that                       Ã                !
                                        ∞
                                        X                    X∞             X∞
                               ∂             0                    ∂ 0            0
                                            qn,t         =           qn,t =     qn,t · b0n                             (85)
                              ∂Yt   n=1                      n=1
                                                                 ∂Yt        n=1

Approximating,
                                    Ã   ∞
                                                     !                   Ã   ∞
                                                                                                  !
                                        X                       1            X                        ¡            ¢
                     pdt   ' ln               q 0n       + P∞        0           q 0n   ·   b0n           Yt − Y
                                        n=1                    n=1 q n   n=1
                           = d0 + d0 Yt                                                                                (86)


where d0 and d0 are implicitly defined. Similarly,

                    µ       ¶     Ã     ∞
                                              !            Ã∞            !
                         Pt            X            1       X              ¡    ¢
                                            0                     0    0
        gpdt    ≡ ln 1 +      ' ln 1 +     qn +    P∞ 0         q n · bn Yt − Y
                         Dt            n=1
                                                1 + n=1 q n n=1
                = h0 + h0 Yt                                                                                           (87)


where h0 and h0 are implicitly defined. Note also that the dividend yield measure used in this study
can be expressed as follows
                                            µ       ¶
                                                 Dt
                                    dpt ≡ ln 1 +      = gpdt − pdt                                                     (88)
                                                 Pt




                                                                56
so that it is also linear in the state vector under these approximations.       Also, log excess equity
returns can be represented follows. Using the definition of excess equity returns,


                      x
                     rt+1   = −rtf − pdt + gdt+1 + π t+1 + gpdt+1
                                                                   ¡           ¢
                            ∼ (h0 − d0 ) + (e0d + e0π + h0 ) Yt+1 + −e0rf + −d0 Yt

                            = r0 + r10 Yt+1 + r20 Yt                                              (89)


where r0 , r10 and r20 are implicitly defined.


C.3        Accuracy of the Price Dividend Ratio Approximation

To assess the accuracy of the log linear approximation of the price dividend ratio, the following
experiment was conducted. For the model and point estimates reported in Table 2, a simulation
was run for 10,000 periods. In each period, the ‘exact’ price dividend ratio and log dividend yield
are calculated in addition to their approximate counterparts derived in the previous subsection.
The resulting series for exact and approximate dividend yields and excess stock returns compare as
follows:
                                      appx dpt   exact dpt     appx rtx   exact rtx

                     mean             0.0363     0.0368        0.0543     0.0548
                     std. dev.        0.0121     0.0124        0.1704     0.1603
                     correlation      0.9948                   0.9665


C.4        Analytic Moments of Yt and Zt

Recall that the data generating process for Yt is given by,


                                 Yt   = µ + AYt−1 + (ΣF Ft−1 + ΣH ) εt

                                 Ft   = sqrt(diag(φ + ΦYt ))                                      (90)




                                                       57
It is straightforward to show that the uncentered first, second, and first autocovariance moments of
Yt are given by,


                                 −1
               Yt = (Ik − A) µ
         ³       ´                        ³         0
                                                                                       ´
      vec Yt Yt0   = (Ik2 − A ⊗ A)−1 · vec µµ0 + µYt A0 + AYt µ0 + ΣF Ft2 Σ0F + ΣH Σ0H
       ³         ´                        ³         0
                                                                    ³                    ´´
             0
    vec Yt Yt−1    = (Ik2 − A ⊗ A)−1 · vec µµ0 + µYt A0 + AYt µ0 + A ΣF Ft2 Σ0F + ΣH Σ0H (91)

                                                        ¡       ¢
where overbars denote unconditional means and Ft2 = diag φ + ΦYt .
   Now consider the unconditional moments of a n-vector of observable variables Zt which obey the
condition
                                Zt = µw + Γw Yt−1 + (Σw         w
                                                      F Ft−1 + ΣH ) εt                             (92)

where µw is an n-vector and Σw    w      w
                             F , ΣH and Γ are (n × k) matrices.           It is straightforward to show
that the uncentered first, second, and first autocovariance moments of Zt are given by,


            Zt   = µw + Γw Yt
                                  0
       Zt Zt     = µw µw0 + µw Yt Γw0 + Γw Yt µw0 + Γw Yt Yt0 Γw0 + Σw  2 w0    w w0
                                                                     F Ft ΣF + ΣH ΣH

                                 0
                                                                         ³               ´
       Zt Zt     = µw µw0 + µw Yt Γw0 + Γw Yt µw0 + Γw Yt Yt−1
                                                            0 Γw0 + Γw Σ F 2 Σw0 + Σ Σw0
                                                                            F t F    H H           (93)


It remains to demonstrate that the observable series used in estimation obey Equation (92). This is
trivially true for elements of Zt which are also elements of Yt such as ∆dt , ∆ct , πt . Using Equations
(66), (89) and (86), it is apparent that rtf , dpt and rtx satisfy Equation (92) as well.


C.5     Test of Additional Moments

To test conformity of the estimated model with moments not explicitly fit in the estimation stage,
the a GMM based statistic is constructed that takes into account the sampling error in estimating
the parameters, Ψ. Let g2T (Ψ0 , Xt ) be the sample mean of the restrictions we wish to test. By
the Mean Value Theorem,

                                   ³ ´                    ³        ´
                                    b a.s.
                                g2T Ψ  = g2T (Ψ0 ) + D2T · Ψb − Ψ0                                 (94)




                                                   58
where D2T =      ∂g2T (Ψ)
                          .         b is estimated from the first set of orthogonality conditions,
                              Since Ψ
                   ∂Ψ


                                      ³       ´
                                       Ψb − Ψ0 a.s.
                                                = − (A11 D1T )−1 A11 g1T (Ψ0 )                                             (95)


with

                                                                  ∂g1T (Ψ0 )
                                                   D1T      =                                                              (96)
                                                                     ∂Ψ
                                                               0   −1
                                                    A11     = D1T S11                                                      (97)


Substituting,
                                                      ³ ´
                                                       b a.s.
                                                   g2T Ψ  = LgT (Ψ0 )                                                      (98)

where

                                                       h                                     i
                                            L =  −D2T · (A11 D1T )−1 A011 , I                                              (99)
                                               £                            ¤0
                                    gT (Ψ0 ) = g1T (Ψ0 )0 , g2T (Zt ; Ψ0 )0                                               (100)

        √
Since    T gT (Ψ0 ) → N (0, S) where S is the spectral density at frequency zero of all the orthogonality
conditions, and S11 is the top left quadrant of S, the statistic,

                                                   ³ ´             ³ ´
                                                    b [LSL0 ]−1 g2T Ψ
                                              T g2T Ψ               b                                                     (101)

                                                                                            ³ ´
                                                                                             b .
has a χ2 (k) distribution under the null, where k is the number of moments considered in g2T Ψ



D       Unconditional Parameter Estimation (First Stage)

Collect all the measurable variables of interest, the three observable state variables and the five
endogenous variables in the vector Zt .                 Also, we let Ψ denote the structural parameters of the
model:

                £                                                                                                    ¤0
             Ψ = µc , µπ , µu , µq , δ, ρcc , ρuc , ρcu , ρuu , ρππ , ρqq , σ cc , σuc , σ uu , σ ππ , σqq , λ, β, γ      (102)




                                                                59
   Applying the log-linear approximation of Appendix C.2, the following property of Zt obtains,


                                Zt = µz + Γz Yt−1 + (ΣzF Ft−1 + ΣzH ) εt                             (103)


where the coeﬃcients superscripted with ‘z’ are nonlinear functions of the model parameters, Ψ.
Because Yt follows a linear process with square-root volatility dynamics, unconditional moments of
Yt are available analytically as functions of the underlying parameter vector, Ψ. Let X (Zt ) be a
vector valued function of Zt . For the current purpose, X (·) will be comprised of first and second
order monomials, unconditional expectations of which are uncentered first and second moments of
Zt . Using Equation (38), we can also derive the analytic solutions for uncentered moments of Zt
as functions of Ψ. Specifically,
                                           E [X (Zt )] = f (Ψ)                                       (104)

where f (·) is also a vector valued function (appendices provide the exact formulae).
   This immediately suggests a simple GMM based estimation strategy. The GMM moment con-
ditions are,
                                                       T
                                                    1X
                                 g1T (Zt ; Ψ0 ) =         X (Zt ) − f (Ψ0 ) .                        (105)
                                                    T t=1

Moreover, the additive separability of data and parameters in Equation (105) suggests a ‘fixed’
optimal GMM weighting matrix free from any particular parameter vector and based on the data
alone. We denote the data used as X    eT = {X1 , X2 ..., XT }. The optimal GMM weighting matrix is
                                                              ³        ´                        ³ ´
the inverse of the spectral density at frequency zero of g1T X  eT ; Ψ0 , which we denote as S11 X
                                                                                                 eT ,

because only the first term on the right hand side of Equation (105) contains any random variables
(data).
   Further, to reduce the number of parameters implicitly estimated in calculating the optimal
GMM weighting matrix while still accommodating high persistence in the orthogonality conditions,
we exploit the structure implied by the model.      In particular, we compute the spectral density
                                                                   £      P 0
                                                                             ¤
in two steps.    First, we consider the spectral density of Ytc = YtP , Yt−1   , where YtP is an ob-
servable proxy for the state vector (which includes a latent variable, qt ).         In practice, we use
                       0
YtP = [∆ct , ut , π t , rft ] with rft proxying for qt . Because YtP is quite persistent, we use a standard
VAR(1) pre-whitening technique. Denote the spectral density at frequency zero estimate of Ytc as
d
S     c                       e         c      b
 11 (YT ). Second, we project XT onto Yt . Let B denote the least squares projection coeﬃcients




                                                      60
    b the (diagonal) variance-covariance matrix of the residuals of this projection.
and D                                                                                     Then, our
             d
estimate for S11 (ZT ) is
                                     ³ ´
                                  d
                                  S   e    b d c b0 b
                                   11 XT = B S11 (YT ) B + D                                   (106)
                  ³ ´
               d
The inverse of S   e
                11 XT is the optimal weighting matrix. To estimate the system, we minimize the

standard GMM objective function,

                             ³       ´    ³ ´    ³ ´−1      ³ ´0
                                   b = g1T Ψ
                            J WT ; Ψ       b ·S
                                              d   e
                                               11 XT
                                                             b
                                                       · g1T Ψ                                 (107)


in a one step optimal GMM procedure.
   Because this system is extremely non-linear in the parameters, we took precautionary measures
to assure that a global minimum has indeed been found.       First, over 100 starting values for the
parameter vector are chosen at random from within the parameter space. From each of these starting
values, we conduct preliminary minimizations. We discard the runs for which estimation fails to
converge, for instance, because the maximum number of iterations is exceeded, but retain converged
parameter values as ‘candidate’ estimates.    Next, each of these candidate parameter estimates is
taken as a new starting point and minimization is repeated. This process is repeated for several
rounds until a global minimizer has been identified as the parameter vector yielding the lowest value
of the objective function. In this process, the use of a fixed weighting matrix is critical. Indeed,
in the presence of a parameter-dependent weighting matrix, this search process would not be well
defined. Finally, the parameter estimates producing the global minimum are confirmed by starting
the minimization routine at small perturbations around the parameter estimate, and verifying that
the routine returns to the global minimum.
   The parameters from this stage are then used as starting values for the conditional estimation
described in the main text.




                                                 61
