                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      DIVISION OF LABOR AND THE RISE OF CITIES:
                   EVIDENCE FROM U.S. INDUSTRIALIZATION, 1850-1880

                                               Sukkoo Kim

                                          Working Paper 12246
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12246


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




I would like to thank Mike Haines for generously providing the data used in this paper. Diego Puga and two
referees provided extremely useful comments which greatly improved the paper. I also would like to thank
Jerry Carlino and the participants at the 2005 Regional Science Association meetings in Las Vegas and the
2005 Western Economics Association meetings in San Francisco for their comments. Research assistance
from Shilpi Kapur and financial support from Washington University through a faculty research grant are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Sukkoo Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Division of Labor and the Rise of Cities: Evidence from U.S. Industrialization, 1850-1880
Sukkoo Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 12246
May 2006
JEL No. N6, N9, R3

                                           ABSTRACT

Industrial revolution in the United States first took hold in rural New England as factories arose and
grew in a handful of industries such as textiles and shoes. However, as factory scale economies rose
and factory production techniques were adopted by an ever growing number of industries,
industrialization became concentrated in cities throughout the Northeastern region which came to
be known as the manufacturing belt. While it is extremely difficult to rule out other types of
agglomeration economies such as spillovers, this paper suggests that these geographic developments
associated with industrial revolution in the U.S. are most consistent with explanations based on
division of labor, job search and matching costs.

Sukkoo Kim
Washington University in St. Louis
Department of Economics
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63130-4899
and NBER
soks@artsci.wustl.edu
I. Introduction

        Economic historians and economists generally believe that modern economic growth was

triggered by the process of industrial revolution. In the United States, industrial revolution

occurred in two distinct phases between the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries. Between

1820 and 1840, early industrialization began in New England as manufacturing re-organized

from artisanal shops to non-mechanized factories in a relatively small number of industries such

as textiles, leather and shoes. In the second phase of industrialization, which occurred between

1850 and 1920, factory production rose in scale, became more mechanized, and spread to

numerous industries and to the Northeastern region known as the manufacturing belt.

        One of the more distinctive differences between the two phases of industrialization was

location. Whereas early industrialization began in rural locations, late industrialization was

predominantly urban. While the number of urban places between 1820 and 1840 grew from 61 to

131, and the share of urban population grew from 7.2% to 10.8%, the dominant economic

activities of the largest cities were mercantile and artisanal manufacturing rather than factory

industrial production. Between 1860 and 1920, as agriculture declined and manufacturing

became the dominant economic activity, the number of cities rose from 392 to 2,722 and the

share of urban population rose from 25.8% to 51.2%.1 Thus, by the end of the industrial

revolution, a majority of Americans lived in urban areas.

        Why early factories arose in rural New England and then moved to cities throughout the

Northeastern region as industrialization matured is still open to some debate. One of the more

popular explanations is based on the shift in primary power sources for manufacturing. For


1 The U.S. census defines a city as an area having a population greater than 2,500. See Kim and Margo (2005).

                                                        3
Hunter (1985) and Rosenberg and Tratjtenberg (2004), early factories arose in rural New England

because it possessed abundant water-power, but as the steam-engine released firms from the

locational constraints of topography and climate, factories relocated to cities. For Goldin and

Sokoloff (1984) and Kim (2005), however, the more likely explanation is based on the re-

organization of production from artisans to factories. Goldin and Sokoloff argue that

industrialization began in New England because early factories used the labor of women and

children intensely and that the wages of women and children relative to men were lower in that

region compared to those in other regions. Kim finds that factory organization, regardless of the

type of primary power sources, rather than the adoption of steam power, was the most important

reason why firms chose urban locations.2

         Pred (1966) presents an alternative but influential explanation for the rise of industrial

cities in the United States. According to Pred, early industrialization began in rural places

between 1800 and 1840 because most of the population was simply rural.3 Moreover, Pred argues

that manufacturing did not locate in large commercial cities like New York, Baltimore,



2 Kim (2005) finds that while steam-powered firms were five to six times more likely to locate in cities than water-
powered firms, they were 0.55 times less likely to locate in cities as compared to hand-powered firms. Calculations
suggest that the shift in primary power sources from water to steam may have contributed at most 8-10% of the
increase in the rate of urbanization between 1850 and 1880. Rather than the adoption of steam-power, the shift from
artisanal to factory organization of production seems to have been more important for urbanization. Factory workers
who did not use inanimate power, as well as steam-powered and water-powered workers, were on average 2-3 times
more likely to locate in cities than artisans. At any given point in time, factory production may have contributed to a
27% increase in the rate of urbanization. A decomposition of industry fixed-effects show that resource-intensive
industries were more likely to locate in rural areas whereas labor-intensive industries were more likely to locate in
urban areas.
3 Pred (1966, 143): “During the initial decades of the last century, American manufacturing was characterized
predominantly by an emphasis on consumer rather than capital goods, by handicraft rather than machine techniques,
by household rather than factory organization, and by rural dispersion rather than concentration in major urban
centers. Even in the textile industries, where factories were the most important production units by the 1830’s,
activity was largely confined to rural waterfall sites and mill towns recently superimposed upon the rural landscape.
The factory and industrial capitalism had not as yet become the cornerstones of metropolitan growth. In other words,
at a time when the economy of the United States was agricultural, the industrial as well as the agrarian population

                                                           4
Philadelphia and Boston during this period because of shortages of capital and labor as well as

restricted access to markets.4 However, between 1860 and 1914, changes in technology and the

rapid decline in transportation costs with the introduction of the railroads, unleashed Marshallian

agglomeration economies which led industries to locate in cities.5

         Although it is extremely difficult to disentangle the causal linkages between

industrialization and urbanization, this paper suggests that the most consistent explanation for

why industrialization arose in rural areas and then shifted to urban areas is likely to be based on

division of labor and labor matching costs. Early industrialization began in rural New England

because early factories made extensive use of women and child labor from rural farms. Because

division of labor, though important, was relatively limited, the early industrial labor force was

relatively homogenous. In addition, because early industrialization was confined to a handful of

industries, labor heterogeneity across industries was also limited. Due to limited division of labor

in society, labor matching costs remained low even in rural locations.

         As industrial revolution deepened, however, division of labor and labor matching costs

rose significantly and manufacturing became concentrated in urban areas. The rise in scale

economies at the firm level correlated with a growing division of labor between skilled,

managerial workers who supervised an increasingly mechanized factory based on increasing sub-

division of tasks that utilized relatively unskilled labor. Moreover, as the industrial method of


was predominantly rural.”
4 Pred (1966, 152): “What factors militated against the location of additional manufacturing activities in the larger
commercial cities? It is reasonable to contend that the limited dimensions of manufacturing in the American
mercantile city were attributable to shortages of capital and labor, the state of technology, an expensive and
inadequate transport network, and the restricted size of the accessible market.”
5 Glaeser (2005) suggests that other factors such as economies in transportation hubs may also explain why
industries became concentrated in cities. Glaeser argues that the rise of industrial Boston was aided by its
comparative advantage in seafaring human capital as well as its position as a railroad hub of New England. Also see
Kim (2000).
                                                          5
production spread to hundreds of industries, the heterogeneity of the manufacturing labor force

rose significantly. As labor matching costs rose over the second half of the industrial revolution,

workers and firms found it more advantageous to locate in cities.

        To establish the existence of urban agglomeration economies during the second phase of

the industrial revolution, this paper uses firm level data constructed from the decadal manuscript

censuses of manufactures between 1850 and 1880 to estimate whether there were urban wage and

productivity premiums. Because a firm’s decision to locate in an urban area is endogenous, the

paper uses several instruments to correct for this potential endogeneity bias. The instruments

used were lagged urban variable, access to water transportation, date of incorporation, and the

distance from the eastern seaboard. In addition, the regressions include various firm level

characteristics such as capital-intensity, 3-digit industry fixed-effects, and location fixed effects

at the county or the state level.

        The regression estimates for each of the four decades between 1850 and 1880 indicate

that workers in urban firms were paid significantly higher wages relative to those in rural firms in

every decade during period. Moreover, the data show that the urban wage premium applied

across the board for different skilled categories. Evidence suggests that the wages of urban

workers were higher because urban firms were more productive. The data indicate that labor

productivity of urban workers and total factor productivity of urban firms were both significantly

higher than those of rural firms. Pooled regression involving all the years of the data indicate that

the urban wage premium rose over time.

        Despite the fact that there is a wealth of anecdotal evidence on the rise of division of

labor and labor matching costs during the second half of the industrial revolution, it is extremely


                                                   6
difficult to systematically measure division of labor in firms and society. To the extent that

worker skills and requirements might differ across industries, however, division of labor is likely

to be correlated with industrial diversity. This paper examines whether larger urban areas were

associated with a greater diversity in manufacturing industries. Data on industrial diversity for

large cities in 1860 and 1880 for which detailed industrial data are available suggest that larger

cities were considerably more diverse that smaller cities. Thus, evidence suggests that larger

cities fostered division of labor and lowered the search and matching costs of firms and workers.

II. Empirical Framework

        Why did industrialization cause urbanization in the second half of the nineteenth century?

Duranton and Puga (2004) provide a useful summary of the literature on the models of micro-

foundations of urban agglomeration economies. These authors categorize the models of city

formation into three essential categories: sharing, matching and learning. Sharing economies

come from indivisibilities in the provision of goods or facilities such as local public goods,

marketplaces, intermediate input, and labor tasks.6 Matching economies exist when search costs

of firms and workers decline with agglomeration.7 Finally, learning economies occur when

geographic proximity of agents facilitate learning.8

        In order to determine whether there were benefits to locating in cities for workers and

firms, this paper examines whether workers in cities earned higher wages and whether firms in

cities were characterized by high labor and total factor productivities. If cities fostered sharing,

matching or learning, then workers in cities should be more productive and earn higher wages. In


6 See Buchanan (1965) for models based on indivisibilities of facilities, Berliant and Wang (1993) for those based
on marketplaces, and Abdel-Rahman and Fujita (1990) for those based on intermediate inputs.
7 See Kim (1989, 1990) and Helsley and Strange (1990).
8 See Duranton and Puga (2001), Jovanovic and Rob (1989), Glaeser (1999), Palivos and Wang (1996).
                                                         7
recent years, a number of studies such as Glaeser and Mare (2001), Wheeler (2001, 2004) and

Wheaton and Lewis (2002) have found evidence for an urban wage-premium for the twentieth

century whereas Ciccone and Hall (1996) find that employment density is positively correlated

with average labor productivity.

         Unlike most of these previous studies which estimate wage regressions using individual

level data from the Census of Population, this paper uses firm-level data from the Census of

Manufactures.9 This paper estimates the following wage, labor and total factor productivity

equations:

(1)      ln (wic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

(2)      ln (LPic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

(3)      ln (TFPic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

where wic is wages, LPic and TFPic are labor and total factor productivity of firm i in county c,

respectively; Urbanic is a dummy variable for whether firm i was located in an urban location, Fic

is firm-level characteristics, dl is location (county or state) fixed-effect, and dj is industry fixed-

effect.10

         The regressions estimate whether firms in urban locations are characterized by higher

wages, labor and total factor productivity than those in rural locations. The regressions control for

firm level characteristics, such as capital intensity, sex composition (skill composition) of

workers, power type, firm size and industrial category, which may influence worker productivity


9 Most studies estimate a version of the following equation: log (wict) = a 0 + Xict a 1 + Zct a 2 + dc +dt + uict where
wict is wage of individual i living in city c in period t, Xit is a vector of individual characteristics, Zct is a vector of
city characteristics; dc is city fixed effect; dt is year effect. Typical proxies for spillovers are average human capital
level of a city or whether the location is urban or metropolitan. See Moretti (2004) for a useful review of the
literature.
10 Atack, Bateman and Margo (2004) estimate a version of equation (1). However, their interest is in examining

                                                              8
and wages. Workers in capital intensive firms may earn higher wages if there are capital-skill

complementarities or if workers in capital intensive firms have greater bargaining power. Male

workers also generally earned higher wages as compared to women and children. Since the

regression estimates may be subject to omitted variable bias, the regressions include appropriate

location (county or state) fixed-effects and industry fixed-effects at the 3-digit industry level.

These fixed-effects are likely to control for unobserved locational and industry characteristics

that might influence productivity and wages.

        The paper uses a combination of several instruments to correct for the potential

endogeneity of the urban variable (see Ciccone and Hall (1996)). One instrument used is whether

a county was urban in previous decades. For the 1850 regressions, the lagged urban variable was

the share of the county population that was urban in 1840; for the 1860-1880 regressions, it was

the share of the county population that was urban in 1850. In both cases, the urban threshold was

population exceeding 2,500. The lagged urban variable is most likely to be exogenous for the

1880 regressions since the variable is lagged three decades.

        In addition, the paper utilizes three additional instruments which are likely to be

correlated with the urban variable but much less so with the structural error term. Two

instruments, access to water transportation and distance to the eastern seaboard are functions of

physical geography. The final instrument, county date of incorporation, is likely to be correlated

with urbanization since counties that were founded earlier were likely to have some

advantageous characteristics for settlement. However, since most counties at their time of

incorporation were likely to have been rural, the date of incorporation is likely to be exogenous.



whether wages are decreasing with establishment size.
                                                        9
         This paper also examines the impact of urbanization on the distribution of wages since

job matching efficiencies or spillovers may affect skilled and unskilled workers differently. Thus,

we estimate the following equations:

(4)      ln (wsic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

(5)      ln (wuic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

(6)      ln (wsic) - log (wuic) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanic + a 2 Fic + dl +dj + uic

where wsic is wage paid by a firm i to skilled labor in county c and wuic is wage paid by a firm i to

unskilled labor in county c, and the remaining variables defined as above.

         In order to examine whether urban agglomeration economies gained force over time, the

paper estimates the following pooled difference-in-difference regression of the form:

(7)      ln (wict) = a 0 + a 1 Urbanict + a 2 Fict + a 3 dt Urbanct + dt + dl +dj + uict

where the parameter of interest is a 3. If a 3 is positive, then agglomeration economies are likely to

have increased over time. The regression includes year fixed-effects since wage data might not be

comparable over different years because of changes in census methodology or price levels.

III. Data and Empirical Evidence

         This paper uses the Atack-Bateman-Weiss (ABW) sample of manufacturing firms drawn

from the manuscripts of the decennial censuses for 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880 (see Atack and

Bateman (1999)).11 The data contain the typical information reported in the census of


11 Because the 1850-1870 data were collected under constraints of punch cards and mainframe computers, the data
were drawn at random from firms in each state with the goal of reaching a sample size of 200-300 firms in each state.
Thus, the 1850-1870 data required a post-sample weighting procedure to construct a nationally representative
sample. The 1880 data, however, drawn more recently using personal computers, were constructed to reflect both the
state and national samples that would not require post-sample weighting. The data used in this paper were not
weighted to reflect a nationally representative sample. However, the descriptive statistics of this data set match
closely those of Atack, Bateman and Margo (2004). The sample sizes of the data used in this paper were 7.1%,
6.3%, 4.0% and 5.6% of total establishments in 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880, respectively. See Atack, Bateman and
Margo (2004) and Kim (2005) for a fuller discussion of the data.
                                                         10
manufactures such as output, capital, labor, raw materials, wages, primary power source among

others. The establishments are categorized by the standard industrial code (sic) at the 3-digit

industry level. The firm-level information contained in the ABW data was supplemented with

county-level information from the published decennial censuses. Consequently, the data set

contains a rich array of county-level information such as population, land area, and various

economic and demographic characteristics.

         The dependent variables are defined as the logarithms of the average annual wage, labor

and total factor productivities of a given establishment or firm.12 In this period, employees

consisted of men, women and children. For 1850 and 1860, the average annual wage for each

establishment was constructed from the reported average monthly wages by assuming that

workers worked through the entire year; for 1870 and 1880, the constructed average annual wage

was based on reported annual wage costs. Since not all firms operated throughout the year, the

estimates of average wages for non-fulltime establishments may be biased downwards in 1870

and 1880. The potential bias caused by part-time operation can be investigated for 1880 since

that census reported information on the actual months of operation.

         The urban variable used for the regression is a dummy variable that indicates whether an

establishment was located in an urban or rural location. The census officials for the period 1850

to 1880 defined an urban area based on whether it was an incorporated town or city which

contained a population of at least 2,500. Unlike modern definitions which use the county as the



12 The estimates on total factor productivity are based on a neoclassical production function: Qi = F(Ki, Li, Mi)
where Qi is the output in value added of establishment i and Ki, Li and Mi are capital, labor and raw materials,
respectively. Total factor productivity in logarithmic values can be expressed as: lnTFPi = lnQi - a KlnKi - a LlnLi -
a MlnMi where a K, a L, a M, are income shares from the respective factors of production. The income shares are
estimated using ordinary least squares and the standard Cobb-Douglass production function specification for each
year.
                                                           11
smallest unit of analysis to determine whether a place is urban or rural, the typical geographic

unit of observation was the minor civil divisions. Since cities during this period were

geographically compact, often no larger than 3 square miles, it made little sense to use the entire

county as the unit of analysis to determine whether a location was urban or rural. This paper also

examines whether the urban wage relationship is robust to other indicators of labor market

density such as total county population, population density, shares of county population in cities

of 2,500 or higher, and shares of county population in cities of 25,000 and higher.

       To eliminate potential outliers in the data, the samples were restricted to establishments

with positive values of output, employment and capital. In addition, following Atack, Bateman

and Margo (2004), the sample was further restricted to establishments with gross output of

greater than $500 and those with extremely low and high average wages were also excluded. The

number of establishments that remained in the sample were 4,333, 3,550, 2,289 and 8,658 for

1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880, respectively and they represent 3.5%, 2.5%, 0.9% and 3.4% of total

establishments for their respective years. It is also important to point out that the data for 1850-

1870, unlike the 1880 data, do not represent a nationally representative sample; data for these

years were collected with the goal of having at least 200 establishments per state.

       Table 1 reports the regression sample means. The data show that urbanization increased

significantly for manufacturing firms. Over the period between 1850 to 1880, the share of

establishments in urban locations almost doubled from 25% to 46%. The logarithm of average

annual wages of all firms ranged from 5.2 to 5.5 over this period. The logarithm of capital-labor

ratios remained relatively constant between 5.6 and 6.2, as did the share of male labor force at

around 68%. The share of factory establishments, defined as those who employed more than 15


                                                  12
workers, rose from 10% to 16% over this period. The percentage of steam-powered

establishments rose from 9% to 25% whereas the share of water-powered firms fell from 30% to

16%. The share of steam-powered factories rose from 3% to 9% whereas that of water-powered

factories fell from 2% to 1%. Wages of urban establishments were 30% higher than rural wages

between 1850 and 1860 and about 50% to 60% higher in 1870 and 1880; labor productivities of

urban firms were also 33% to 47% higher than rural firms.

         The OLS regression estimates on wages reported in Table 2 indicate that workers in urban

firms consistently earned higher wages on average than those of rural firms. In 1850 and 1860,

urban wages were 10.5% and 7.3% higher than rural wages; in 1870 and 1880, they were 22.1%

and 46.2% higher.13 Because the regressions include county fixed-effects, the variations in the

data come from establishments within counties that are in rural and urban locations. Since many

firms did not operate throughout the year, the wage estimates of non-fulltime establishments may

be biased downwards. For 1880, it is possible to adjust wages for months of operation. The OLS

regression estimate of the urban wage premium declined from 46.2% to 31% when wages are

adjusted for months of operation. The decline in this estimate suggests that rural firms were more

likely to operate less than fulltime than urban firms. An alternative interpretation of this result

may be that urban firms and workers were more likely to be employed on a full-time basis which

may be worth as much as 33% of one's wages.

         Table 3 reports the first-stage regressions of whether a firm resided in an urban or a rural

location on the instruments lagged urban variable, a dummy variable for access to water


13 The data censoring restrictions had the largest impact for the data sample in 1880. In that year, a large number of
small firms located in rural areas were excluded from the sample. When the regressions were run without any
censoring restrictions, the urban wage premium was higher than that reported for 1880. Note that since the regression
is in semilogarithmic form, the percentage effect of the dummy variable is equal to 100(exp(a 1) - 1).
                                                         13
transportation, logarithm of distance from the eastern seaboard and logarithm of dates of

incorporation.14 All of these variables are significantly correlated with the urban variable in the

expected manner. The lagged urban variable and access to water transportation were both

positively correlated with whether a firm was likely to locate in cities; firms in younger counties

and counties further from the eastern seaboard were less likely to locate in cities.

         The IV regression estimates reported in Table 4 indicate that the OLS estimates of the

urban wage premium are likely to be biased downwards. The IV regression estimates show that

workers of urban firms earned 60%, 25%, 129%, and 118% higher wages than those of rural

firms for 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880 respectively.15 In general, the IV estimates were

significantly higher than those of the OLS estimates. Since there is more than one instrument, it

is possible to test the overidentifying restrictions. In general, different combinations of any two

of the instruments, such as lagged urban and access to water or distance and date of

incorporation, exhibited the highest Sargan p-value indicating that the instruments were

uncorrelated with the structural error term. The IV regressions were least successful from the

perspective of the overidentifying restriction test when all four instruments were used. The IV

regression estimates reported were chosen for their highest Sargan p-values but the coefficients

were generally robust to different sets of instruments.

         The data show that capital intensity was positively correlated with wages as expected. For


14 Distance from the eastern seaboard measures distance in square miles from Kings County, New York; the
measure is constructed using data on county longitude and latitude from http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/gazetteer.
The distance between two points, A and B, is calculated using the following approximate formula:
[(69.1*(longitudeA-longitudeB))2 + (53.0*(latitudeA-latitudeB))2]1/2. County dates of incorporation are obtained
from Kane (1972).
15 The IV regressions use state rather than county fixed-effects. When county fixed-effects were used, the IV
regressions were not identified. When the OLS regressions were run separately for county and state fixed-effects, the
urban premium with county fixed-effects were generally smaller. Thus, IV estimates of the urban wage premium are
likely to decline somewhat if finer geographic controls are used.
                                                         14
the capital intensity variable, the OLS and IV regression estimates are very similar. In 1850 and

1860, a percentage increase in capital intensity increased wages by 6%, but the figures rose to

18% and 19% in 1870 and 1880. However, the estimates for 1880 decline markedly when wages

are adjusted for months of operation. Thus, capital-intensive firms were more likely to operate

fulltime than labor intensive firms. The regressions also indicate that firms with a higher share of

male workers paid higher average wages.

         The IV regressions indicate that firms which utilized male workers more intensely were

likely to exhibit higher average wages. Workers in water-powered artisanal firms earned less

wages than the omitted category of hand-powered, artisanal firms. On the other hand, water-

powered factory workers earned between 7% to 23% higher wages than workers in the omitted

category. The human-powered factory variable was positively significant only for 1870; the

steam and steam-powered factory variable exhibited little systematic patterns over time.

         The IV regression estimates on labor productivity reported in Table 5 show that urban

workers were significantly more productive than rural workers. The labor productivity of urban

firms were 48% to 134% higher than those of rural firms between 1850 and 1880. As with

wages, labor productivity was also positively correlated with capital and male labor intensities.

The remaining variables did not exhibit systematic patterns over time. The IV regression

estimates on total factor productivity reported in Table 6 show that urban firms were 32% to

180% more productive that rural firms.16 Like the wage and labor productivity regressions, total



16 Total factor productivity estimates must be interpreted with caution. There are two potential reasons for why total
factor productivity estimates may be unreliable. One major reason is that the neoclassical assumptions used to
estimate total factor productivity is unlikely to hold if spatial externalities are important. In the neoclassical model,
labor productivity in a simple two factor Cobb-Douglas production function (Y=AKa L1-a ) can be expressed as
follows: Y/L = A (K/L) a . Thus, labor productivity is equal to total factor productivity (A) times some proportion of
capital intensity. However, if there are spatial external economies, then the relationship between labor and total
                                                           15
factor productivity was positively correlated with capital and male intensities. However, unlike

labor productivity, total factor productivity was also consistently positively correlated with

human-powered factory and steam variables.

         Regression estimates on the urban wage premia of skilled and unskilled workers reported

in Table 7 show that the urban wage premium appears to apply across the board for different

skilled categories. Skilled and unskilled wages, for the years 1850 and 1860, are proxied by male

and female annual wages respectively; for 1880, the skilled and unskilled wages are daily wages

for a skilled mechanic and common laborer respectively. Sample sizes of these regressions are

smaller because not all firms reported data on these variables. Table 7 shows that urban male

wages were 46% and 35% higher than rural male wages in 1850 and 1860 respectively; in 1880,

the estimated urban wage premium for a skilled mechanic was 23%. Table 8 shows that urban

female wages were 80% and 32% higher than rural female wages respectively; in 1880, urban

common laborers earned 27% higher wages than rural common laborers.

         Table 7 also reports regression results on the male-female wage gap for 1850 and 1860

and the skilled-unskilled wage gap for 1880. Because the samples for these regressions were

restricted to firms which reported both skilled and unskilled wages, the regressions control for

firm specific effects which might influence the skilled-unskilled wage gap. Urbanization

generally seems to have reduced the skilled-unskilled wage gap in 1850 and 1860, but the

coefficient was only weakly significant for 1860. In 1860, the female-male wage gap in urban


factor productivity is more complex. As shown in Ciccone (2002), average labor productivity of a given region can
be expressed as total factor productivity multiplied by some proportion of capital intensity and the factor responsible
for spatial externalities. The second important reason may be that the OLS estimates of the neoclassical production
function used to calculate total factor productivity are biased since firms with higher productivity shocks may use
more inputs (see Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)). To the extent that firms in urban areas
are more likely to experience productivity shocks, the estimates of total factor productivity of urban firms may be

                                                          16
areas were 36% lower than in rural places. However, the skilled-unskilled wage gap seems to

have widened in urban areas in 1880. In that year, urban location increased the wage gap of

skilled mechanics and unskilled common laborers by 17%. Other factors that seems to have

reduced the wage gap was the intensive use of male workers and the use of water-power in

factories.

        Table 8 reports urban wage, labor and total factor productivities premiums for four

alternative measures of urban agglomeration: (1) the share of population in cities with

populations of 2,500 or more, (2) the share of population in cities with populations of 8,500 or

more, (3) the total county population, and (4) the county population density. The IV regression

estimates indicate that there was a significant correlation between wages and productivity for all

these different measures of urban agglomeration. While not reported, the regressions all contain

the same set of independent variables and instruments.

        The pooled difference-in-difference regression estimates reported in Table 9, based on

pooled data for all years between 1850 and 1880, indicate that urban wage and labor productivity

premiums increased significantly over this period. According to the IV estimates, the urban wage

premium remained constant between 1850 and 1860, but rose significantly in the two succeeding

decades. Relative to 1850, the omitted year, wages of workers in urban firms rose 28 to 35% and

labor productivity urban firms rose between 6 to 11% in 1870 and 1880. For the wage regression,

year dummies were positively significant for 1860 and 1870, but negatively so for 1880. For the

labor productivity, year dummies were positively significant for all years. For the pooled

regression, capital and male intensities, steam and water-powered factory variables were



biased upwards.
                                                17
positively correlated with wages and labor productivity; steam and water-powered non-factory

variables were negatively correlated.

IV. Division of Labor and Matching Economies

         The analysis of the firm-level data from the manuscript censuses for the period between

1850 and 1880 demonstrates that urban firms enjoyed significant urban agglomeration economies

and that these economies are likely to have increased over time. Evidence indicates that urban

firms were significantly more productive than rural firms and, as a result, compensated their

workers accordingly. However, the fact that wages, labor and total factor productivities were

higher for urban firms provides little guidance as to which types of urban agglomeration

economies, sharing, matching or learning economies, caused firms and workers to choose urban

locations during this phase of the industrial revolution. This section provides a discussion of the

potential causal linkages of industrialization and urbanization.

         The fact that early industrialization began in rural areas of New England casts some doubt

on the importance of certain types of agglomeration economies such as sharing or learning. If

these economies were at work during early industrialization, then the early factories should have

located in major cities like New York and Boston rather than in rural townships of Dudley and

Oxford, Massachusetts.17 In particular, explanations based on variety and market sizes,

indivisibility of facilities, and access to intermediate inputs seem inconsistent with the rural

beginnings of industrialization. Moreover, geographic evidence on patents for the early and late

industrial period suggests that technological learning or spillovers may have caused patent


17 Since supplies of capital and labor are both likely to be more favorable in cities rather than in the rural
countryside, Pred’s (1966) thesis that early industrialization did not start in large mercantile cities because these
places lacked capital and labor seems rather suspect. Prude (1983), Hirsch (1978), Faler (1981) and Ware (1931)
provide useful historical accounts of early industrialization in rural New England.
                                                           18
activity to concentrate in cities, but may not have had a similar impact on production. In general,

there seems to be little evidence that inventive and production activities were spatially correlated

during this period.18

         While it is extremely difficult to empirically distinguish between the various causes of

urban agglomeration during late industrialization, a variety of evidence points toward the

importance of division of labor and matching economies.19 Indeed, the two salient features of

industrialization are the rise of the division of labor and the rise of a labor market. Prior to

industrialization, self-employed master craftsmen or artisans made the entire product using their

hand tools and learned all production techniques in apprenticeship. With industrialization,

factory owners recruited workers for a wage in the labor market and reduced their jobs into a

myriad of tasks that needed modest training to master. Because most jobs were obtained through

a network of family, friends, and people of similar ethnicity, job search costs were likely to be

significantly lower with the urban concentration of workers and firms.

         The fact that industrialization first began in rural locations and then moved to cities

seems more consistent with explanations based on division of labor and matching. In early

industrialization, firms located in rural New England because early factories made extensive use




18 Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (2000) find that inventive and production activities in the glass industry were
geographically concentrated in different areas. Sutthiphisal (2005) finds similar geographic patterns for a number of
low- and high-tech industries between 1870 and 1910.
19 Duranton (1988) demonstrates that the agglomeration of the labor force in cities deepens division of labor
between workers and raises their productivity. However, the rise of division of labor within and across firms and
industries is likely to significantly increase the heterogeneity of the labor market. When specialized firms and
workers must search and match for production, Kim (1989, 1990) and Helseley and Strange (1990) show that urban
agglomeration raises productivity by improving the average quality of matches of firms and workers. Thus, division
of labor is likely to be limited by the extent of labor market matching economies. The importance of the division of
labor for growth and development has also been explored by Baumgardner (1988), Becker and Murphy (1992), and
Acemoglu (1996) among others.
                                                         19
of rural native women and children.20 Because early industrialization was concentrated in only a

handful of industries, and because the division of labor was only modest, labor market

transactions costs were also likely to have been modest.21 Anecdotal evidence suggests that labor

market information was easily communicated throughout rural New England because factory

towns and cities were very specialized. For example, according to Ware (1931), the well known

Slater Mill or mills in Lowell rarely needed to advertise for help since sufficient numbers of

families and single women came to their factories seeking employment.22

         In the second half of the nineteenth century, as division of labor within firms and across

industries became more extensive, and as factory production spread to numerous industries,

industrialization became a distinctly urban phenomenon. With industrialization, the occupational

categories of workers as well as the number of industries in manufacturing rose dramatically. In

1820, U.S. census officials only reported occupations by broad sectoral categories such as

agriculture, manufacturing, trade, etc. However, as occupations proliferated with

industrialization, the censuses began reporting these categories in great detail. In 1850 and 1860,

the censuses reported occupation data for 323 and 584 categories, respectively (Edwards (1943)).


20 See Goldin and Sokoloff (1984).
21 Sokoloff (1984) finds that the shift in production from artisans to non-mechanized factories, with only a modest
increase in the size of the work force, was associated with significant gains in productivity. Sokoloff attributes these
gains to the division of labor, especially among the relatively unskilled workers composed of women and children.
22 Ware (1931, p.212): “The use of advertising to secure help does not appear to have been wholly successful or
necessary, to judge from the experience of the only mill whose advertisements could be compared with additions to
the labor force. Between 1818 and 1825 only one of the Slater’s six advertisements appears to have brought desired
response while another secured a quarter of the help which it called for. Twenty-three of the twenty-six families who
entered his employ during this period seem to have come unsolicited. When he opened a new thread mill in 1828,
however, he was successful in using this means for additional hands. Except when a sudden increase in labor force
was needed, most workers probably drifted in with the growth of towns around the mills or came through chance
knowledge that there might be employment available.... The boarding house mills, on the other hand, did not have to
let people know that work was available. If we are to believe the tales in the Lowell Offerings, there never was any
lack of employment at Lowell. Girls came from long distances unheralded, selected a boarding house, perhaps where
a friend from the same village lived, and the next morning found work in the mill, usually in the same room with her
friend.”
                                                          20
In addition, the census of manufactures indicate that the number of manufacturing industries rose

markedly. Although it is difficult to compare industries over time since the level of industry

aggregation differed over time, there may have been as many as 40-50 very finely defined

industries in 1820 whereas the number of industries rose to 261 and 631 in 1850 and 1860,

respectively.

       There are many reasons to believe that labor market transactions costs rose significantly in

the second half of the nineteenth century. As the scale of factories rose with greater utilization of

the division of labor, and as firm and labor specialization increased, it became increasingly more

difficult to recruit and efficiently match workers and firms in rural locations. As immigration

increased significantly over the second half of the twentieth century, manufacturers shifted their

labor force from native women and children to immigrant workers who favored urban locations.

Since the most important source of labor market information came from a close network of

family and friends, firms and workers found it more effective to locate in cities where such

networks could be extended.23 Because there were considerable turnover and instability in the job

market during the period of the second industrial revolution, cities lowered the search costs of

workers in a variety of ways.24

        There seems to be substantial anecdotal evidence that division of labor and labor

matching costs rose as factories increased in scale and became more mechanized. One such

example comes from the meat packing industry. While meat packing factory workers generally

possessed less skill than a traditional artisan butcher, division of labor based on skill, ability, and


23 See Nelson (1995) and Rosenbloom (2002).
24 Prude (1983) finds that the mean turnover rate at the Slater textile mill between 1813 to the mid-1830s was about
163%. He also finds that over half of the workers chose to depart voluntarily. Slichter (1919) provides additional
evidence for the extremely high turnover rate of industrial workers.
                                                        21
physical attributes led to significant improvements in productivity (Barrett (1987)). The factory

disassembly was organized into cattle-killing gangs of 230 men composed of 139 common

laborers, 98 skilled and 11 highly skilled workers.25 Division of labor and supervision increased

productivity by increasing the speed and intensity of work. Barrett (1987) writes that the great

advantage of cities like Chicago over country towns was the availability of labor. Because few

workers were hired on a permanent basis, workers generally made their rounds to various firms

early in the morning where the foreman hired the required workers for the day. Since most

workers walked to work, they lived in close proximity to the packing houses to make their

morning rounds. Workers obtained job market information from friends, neighbors and the

gatherings at neighborhood saloons.

         While there may be considerable anecdotal evidence that division of labor arose with

factory production and increased with mechanization, it is extremely difficult to measure it

directly. However, to the extent that skill levels and occupational requirements are likely to differ

across industries, one potential measure of division of labor at the economy-wide level may be

the level of industrial diversification. Since firms and workers are likely to be more

heterogeneous across industries, matching firms and workers of appropriate skills across

industries are likely to be more costly. If cities foster division of labor and lower matching costs,

then cities should also foster industrial diversity.


25 Barrett (1987, 26): “The packers achieved three important and interrelated accomplishments through this
subdivision of labor. First, by grossly reducing the quantity and quality of skill required to do the job, they destroyed
the control which the all-around butcher had exercised over the slaughtering and cutting processes. A few highly
skilled positions remained, but these were very specialized. In fact, mass production created a new, more narrowly
defined notion of skill. Splitting the backbone of a steer, for example, required great dexterity as well as strength,
and only a few men could do the job. Thus, the splitter and a few other trades earned high wages under the new
system.” See Hirsch (1978) for evidence of the rise of task differentiation in shoe and hatting factories. Thomson
(1989) provides a complex analysis of the changes in the technology of shoe production and how these changes
altered the division of labor between women, children and skilled workers.
                                                           22
         Following Duranton and Jayet (2005), industrial diversity is measured using the following

index: DI=1/Si (Eij/Ej)2 where Eij is employment in industry i in city j, Ej is total employment in

city j.26 Since data at the industry level are available only for the largest cities, the diversity

measure is constructed for 40 and 99 cities in 1860 and 1880, respectively. Because the standard

industrial codes were not devised until the mid-twentieth century, the data reported by the census

officials were at the level of product categories that perhaps resemble the current three- or four-

digit categories. In both of these years, the census officials reported information for close to 400

industries. Table 10 reports the descriptive information on these cities.

         Tables 11 and 12 report regressions of the log of urban industrial diversity on the log of

total urban population and manufacturing employment; the regressions also include regional

dummy variables where the omitted region is the Middle Atlantic. The regressions show that

industrial diversity was positively and significantly correlated with urban population for both

1860 and 1880. According the specification (4), which also includes total manufacturing

employment, a percentage increase in population increased industrial diversity by 46% and 72%

in 1860 and 1880, respectively.

         The regressions show that manufacturing employment was negatively correlated with

industrial diversification, especially when the regressions control for population. One

interpretation is that manufacturing employment and population are collinear. However, it is

instructive to note that large manufacturing cities which were highly specialized were

concentrated in New England. It appears that early factory towns in New England which grew

into large cities over time remained very specialized in those early industries. Since a labor force


26 Duranton and Jayet (2005) examine whether division of labor is related to city size for French cities in 1990.
They find that scarce occupations, as predicted by their model, were over-represented in larger cities suggesting that
                                                          23
specialized in few industries is unlikely to possess diverse occupational skills, it is not surprising

that large industrial cities in New England were incapable of fostering industrial diversity.

V. Conclusion

         Industrial revolution in the United States, as in England and other parts of Europe,

occurred in two stages. Industrialization first began in rural New England between 1820 and

1840 as the artisanal method gave way to factory organization of production in a handful

industries. However, between 1850 and 1920, as industrial revolution deepened, scale economies

rose, factory organization spread to numerous industries and regions, and industrialization

became significantly concentrated in urban areas throughout the northern region of the U.S. This

paper examines the potential causal linkages in U.S. industrialization and urbanization.

         This paper finds that, at least for the period between 1850 and 1880 for which firm level

data from the manuscript censuses of manufactures are available, industrialization caused

urbanization because there were significant urban agglomeration economies. The data show that

urban firms were more productive, paid higher wages to their workers, and that urban premiums

in wages and productivity increased over time. The urban wage premium accrued to both skilled

(male) and unskilled (female) workers throughout the entire period. The urban skilled-unskilled

wage gap seems to have narrowed in 1850 and 1860, but may have widened in 1880. As

expected, other firm-level characteristics such as capital-intensity and skill-intensity (male labor

intensity) were also associated with higher wages and productivity. When the data were pooled

over the entire period, those workers who worked in water and steam-powered factories also

tended to earn higher wages when controlling for all other factors.



division of labor increased with the extent of the market.
                                                             24
        While it is difficult to rule out the importance of other types of agglomeration economies

such as spillovers, this paper suggests that the geographic patterns of the two phases of

industrialization are most consistent with explanations based on division of labor and labor

market transactions cost. Because division of labor and labor matching costs were relatively

limited in early industrialization, early factories who located near rural townships in New

England did not face high costs of recruiting labor. However, in the second phase of

industrialization, as scale economies rose and as factory organization of production spread to

hundreds of industries, division of labor and matching costs rose and firms and workers became

concentrated in cities. Evidence suggests that cities with higher population levels fostered greater

industrial diversity.

        Whereas workers of early factories in rural New England were composed of native

women and children, the industrial workforce of the second industrial revolution was composed

of immigrant workers. Over the century of the industrial revolution, immigrants and “birds of

passage” came to the United States in extraordinary numbers from varying European nations and

became the dominant industrial labor force. Because the extent of division of labor of the native

labor force was likely to have been limited during this period, immigrants from numerous

different nations with varying skills and physical attributes are likely to have significantly

increased the extent of division of labor available in society. Thus, immigrants who came during

the industrial period are likely to have contributed significantly to sustaining the industrial

revolution. Moreover, because division of labor is likely to have operated along ethnic lines, it is

not surprising that ethnic communities formed in cities to lower labor market transactions costs.




                                                  25
                                    Table 1

                      Summary Statistics: Manuscript Censuses, 1850-1880
                                 (mean values)
__________________________________________________________________
All Firms                  1850            1860          1870          1880
__________________________________________________________________
Annual Wage (Log)          5.15            5.27          5.52          5.23
       Rural               5.07            5.19          5.35          4.94
       Urban               5.40            5.48          5.89          5.57
Labor Productivity (Log)   5.76            6.00          6.38          6.11
       Rural               5.67            5.91          6.25          5.89
       Urban               6.04            6.24          6.65          6.36

Urban                        0.25           0.28          0.31           0.46
Log K/L ratio                5.62           5.97          6.20           5.99
Share of Male Labor          0.67           0.68          0.68           0.69
Factory                      0.10           0.10          0.15           0.16
Steam Power                  0.09           0.20          0.29           0.25
Water Power                  0.30           0.18          0.15           0.16
Steam*Factory                0.03           0.03          0.09           0.09
Water*Factory                0.02           0.01          0.01           0.01

Number of Firms                4,333          3,550        2,289          8,658
__________________________________________________________________
Note: Urban =1 if establishment was located in an incorporated town or city of population of
2,500 or more. Factory=1 if an establishment employed more than 15 employees. Sample
selection criteria was same as that of Atack, Bateman and Margo (2004): Gross output greater
than $500; for 1850 and 1860, average monthly wage greater than $4.76 but less than $190.5;
and, for 1870 and 1880, average monthly wage greater than $5.20 but less than $208.
Source: See Atack and Bateman (1999).




                                              26
                                Table 2

                         OLS Wage Equations, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
OLS               1850        1860           1870      1880       1880+
                  (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban             0.10*       0.07*         0.20*      0.38*      0.27*
                  (6.2)       (3.2)         (5.1)      (24.9)     (19.4)
Ln(K/L)           0.06*       0.06*         0.20*      0.19*      0.12*
                  (10.2)      (8.7)         (15.4)     (29.3)     (20.1)
Men/L             0.91*       1.1*          0.78*      0.95*      0.92*
                  (25.9)      (26.9)        (10.6)     (25.2)     (26.4)
Factory           -0.00       0.05          0.17*      0.05       0.10*
                  (0.2)       (1.7)         (3.1)      (1.7)      (3.9)
Steam             0.04        -0.02         -0.00      -0.08*     0.06*
                  (1.5)       (-0.8)        (-0.0)     (-3.3)     (2.7)
Water             -0.05*      -0.05*        -0.19*     -0.18*     -0.07*
                  (-2.4)      (-2.0)        (-3.3)     (-6.4)     (-2.6)
Steam*Factory     0.10*       0.07          -0.04      0.18*      0.01
                  (2.1)       (1.5)         (0.5)      (4.8)      (0.2)
Water*Factory     0.12*       0.11          0.16       0.22*      0.03
                  (2.6)       (1.5)         (1.2)      (3.0)      (0.5)
Constant          3.6*        3.7*          3.2*       2.8*       3.4*
                  (8.2)       (8.0)         (3.8)      (5.0)      (6.6)

R-squared                0.63           0.65            0.60      0.45  0.33
Observations             4,285          3,536           2,280     8,658 8,658
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include county and 3-digit industry fixed effects.
+ Wages for equation (5) were adjusted for months of operation.




                                          27
                                     Table 3

                         First Stage Regressions
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                   1850           1860      1870       1880
                        (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Lagged Urban            0.60*          0.94*     0.54*      0.68*
                        (29.0)         (36.0)    (18.6)     (39.4)
Water Transportation    0.08*          0.05*     0.11*      0.08*
                        (5.0)          (3.2)     (5.3)      (6.5)

R-squared                     0.44           0.49           0.45           0.49
F-Statistics                  30.3           34.4           19.2           50.1

Observations            3,991       3,249       2,162       6,870
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                   1850        1860        1870        1880
                        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
________________________________________________________________________
Ln(Distance)            -0.02*      -0.06*      -0.02*      -0.02*
                        (-3.3)      (-2.5)      (-2.4)      (-5.1)
Ln(Incorporation Date)  -3.4*       -5.5*       -3.4*       -3.4*
                        (-13.8)     (-17.2)     (-7.6)      (-15.0)

R-squared                     0.31           0.34           0.36           0.38
F-Statistic                   19.3           18.8           13.9           37.8

Observations                    4,240           3,433          2,288        8,445
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include state and 3-digit industry fixed effects.
For 1850, the lagged urban variable is the share of county population that was urban in 1840; for
1860, 1870 and 1880, the lagged urban variable is the share of county population that was urban
in 1850. Distance measures square miles from Kings County, New York and is constructed using
data on county longitude and latitude from http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/gazetteer. Distance
between two points, A and B, is calculated using the following approximate formula:
[(69.1*(longitudeA-longitudeB))2 + (53.0*(latitudeA-latitudeB))2]1/2. County dates of
incorporation are obtained from Kane (1972).




                                               28
                                Table 4

                         IV Wage Equations, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
IV                1850         1860           1870    1880        1880+
                  (1)          (2)           (3)      (4)         (5)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban             0.47*        0.22*         0.83*    0.78*       0.52*
                  (5.0)        (4.7)         (10.0)   (19.8)      (14.6)
Ln(K/L)           0.06*        0.06*         0.19*    0.18*       0.11*
                  (9.0)        (8.6)         (14.5)   (24.0)      (16.7)
Men/L             0.83*        1. 2*         0.82*    0.85*       0.82*
                  (17.4)       (27.7)        (11.0)   (19.1)      (20.6)
Factory           -0.04        0.03          0.15*    0.04        0.10*
                  (1.1)        (1.0)         (2.5)    (1.1)       (3.5)
Steam             0.10*        -0.00         -0.01    -0.05       0.08*
                  (3.5)        (-0.4)        (-0.2)   (-1.7)      (3.3)
Water             0.0          -0.05*        -0.18*   -0.12*      -0.03
                  (0.03)       (-2.2)        (-3.2)   (-3.8)      (-1.1)
Steam*Factory     -0.02        0.06          -0.07    0.13*       -0.04
                  (-0.4)       (1.3)         (-0.9)   (2.9)       (-0.9)
Water*Factory     0.07         0.09          0.19     0.21*       0.02
                  (1.4)        (1.2)         (1.5)    (2.7)       (0.3)
Constant          4. 1*        4.8*          2.9*     3.5*        4.1*
                  (11.8)       (14.6)        (5.0)    (5.6)       (7.2)
Overid test
Sargan p-value    0.61         0.32          0.77     0.39        0.27

R-squared                0.42           0.51            0.37      0.40  0.30
Observations             3,850          3,419           2,153     6,873 6,873
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include state and 3-digit industry fixed effects.
+ Wages for equation (5) were adjusted for months of operation.




                                          29
                              Table 5

                  IV Labor Productivity Equations, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
IV                1850         1860             1870         1880
                  (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban             0.77*        0.39*           0.74*         0.85*
                  (9.8)        (6.1)           (6.5)         (18.0)
Ln(K/L)           0.21*        0.27*           0.26*         0.26*
                  (16.1)       (17.8)          (14.6)        (28.9)
Men/L             0.57*        1.1*            0.42*         0.27*
                  (7.0)        (11.2)          (4.1)         (5.1)
Factory           -0.14*       -0.07           -0.00         -0.11*
                  (-2.5)       (-1.1)          (-0.2)        (-2.8)
Steam             0.23*        0.08            0.13*         -0.05
                  (4.1)        (1.6)           (2.0)         (-1.5)
Water             -0.01        0.02            -0.13         -0.11*
                  (-0.2)       (0.4)           (-1.6)        (-2.9)
Steam*Factory     -0.06        0.03            -0.04         0.15*
                  (-0.6)       (0.3)           (0.4)         (2.8)
Water*Factory     -0.02        0.19            0.16          0.34*
                  (-0.2)       (1.2)           (0.9)         (3.5)
Constant          4.2*         3.1*            4.4*          3.8*
                  (6.0)        (4.3)           (5.5)         (5.1)
Overid test
Sargan p-value    082          0.81            0.38          0.16

R-squared                0.24           0.29            0.24      0.28
Observations             3,765          3,190           2,113     6,848
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include state and 3-digit industry fixed effects.




                                        30
                              Table 6

                  IV Total Factor Productivity Equations, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
IV                1850          1860             1870         1880
                  (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban             0.59*         0.28*           0.69*         0.60*
                  (8.0)         (4.8)           (6.4)         (14.3)
Ln(K/L)           0.02          0.04*           0.08*         0.04*
                  (1.8)         (2.6)           (4.5)         (4.4)
Men/L             0.31*         0.47*           0.35*         0.10*
                  (4.0)         (5.4)           (3.6)         (2.2)
Factory           -0.32*        -0.39*          -0.04         -0.19*
                  (-6.3)        (-6.5)          (-0.6)        (-5.5)
Steam             0.11*         -0.02           0.10          -0.06*
                  (2.1)         (0.3)           (1.8)         (-2.0)
Water             -0.05         -0.01           -0.15*        -0.09*
                  (-1.2)        (-0.3)          (-2.0)        (-2.8)
Steam*Factory     -0.01         0.09            -0.03         0.13*
                  (-0.1)        (0.9)           (-0.3)        (2.7)
Water*Factory     0.01          0.07            0.19          0.29*
                  (0.1)         (0.5)           (1.1)         (3.4)
Constant          3.5*          2.7*            4.0*          2.8*
                  (5.2)         (4.0)           (5.3)         (4.5)
Overid test
Sargan p-value    0.69          0.66            0.42          0.09

R-squared                0.12           0.15            0.13      0.18
Observations             3,765          3,190           2,113     6,848
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include state and 3-digit industry fixed effects.




                                        31
                                        Table 7
                 IV Wage Equations for Skilled and Unskilled Workers, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
                                  Skilled Workers
________________________________________________________________________
IV                       1850           1860             1870       1880
                         (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                    0.38*          0.30*           -           0.21*
                         (8.1)          (9.0)                       (9.7)
Overid test
Sargan p-value           0.67           0.51            -           0.53
R-squared                0.28           0.27            -           0.27
Observations             3,920          3,210           -           6,296
________________________________________________________________________
                                 Unskilled Workers
________________________________________________________________________
IV                       1850           1860             1870       1880
                         (5)            (6)             (7)         (8)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                    0.59*          0.28            -           0.24*
                         (3.9)          (1.3)                       (9.9)
Overid test
Sargan p-value           0.37           0.81            -           0.41
R-squared                0.20           0.40            -           0.36
Observations             513            353             -           5,406
________________________________________________________________________
                             Skilled-Unskilled Wage Gap
________________________________________________________________________
IV                       1850           1860             1870       1880
                         (9)            (10)            (11)        (12)
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                    -0.31          -0.09           -           0.16*
                         (-1.8)         (-0.9)                      (2.6)
Overid test
Sargan p-value           0.97           0.97            -           0.24
R-squared                0.25           0.31            -           0.12
Observations             513            333             -           6,006
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include the same set of independent variables as well as state and 3-digit industry
fixed effects as in previous tables. For 1850 and 1860, unskilled and unskilled wages are proxied
by male and female wages respectively; for 1880, skilled and unskilled wages are daily wages for
skilled mechanics and common laborers respectively.

                                               32
                                      Table 8

      IV Wage, Labor Productivity and Total Factor Productivity Regressions
                   by Different Urban Definitions, 1850-1880
________________________________________________________________________
Wages-IV           1850           1860            1870          1880
________________________________________________________________________
% urban >= 2,500   0.23*          0.25*          0.51*          0.28*

% urban >= 25,000      0.23*          0.26*          0.45*           0.37*

ln(population)         0.03*          0.06*          0.11*           0.14*

ln(density)       0.03*       0.05*       0.06*       0.09*
________________________________________________________________________
LP-IV             1850        1860         1870       1880
________________________________________________________________________
% urban >= 2,500  0.45*       0.35*       0.47*       0.31*

% urban >=25,000       0.45*          0.36*          0.42*           0.38*

ln(population)         0.10*          0.09*          0.13*           0.15*

ln(density)       0.06*       0.07*       0.07*       0.09*
________________________________________________________________________
TFP-IV            1850        1860         1870       1880
________________________________________________________________________
% urban >= 2,500  0.35*       0.25*       0.44*       0.23*

% urban >=25,000       0.35*          0.26*          0.38*           0.33*

ln(population)         0.07*          0.06*          0.12*           0.10*

ln(density)             0.05*          0.05*            0.07*           0.07*
________________________________________________________________________
Note: * Significant at the 5% level. Regressions include the same set of independent variables as
well as state and 3-digit industry fixed effects as in previous tables. These coefficients were not
reported due to space limitations.




                                                33
                                Table 9

       Pooled Difference-in-Difference Wage and Labor Productivity Regressions,
                               1860 and 1880
________________________________________________________________________
                     Ln(Wage)              Ln(LP)
                     OLS                  OLS
________________________________________________________________________
Urban                0.11*                0.26*
                     (6.2)                (9.8)
D1860                0.10*                0.11*
                     (7.3)                (5.8)
D1870                0.12*                0.34*
                     (7.5)                (14.9)
D1880                -0.20*               0.06*
                     (-15.2)              (3.1)
D1860*Urban          -0.03                -0.01
                     (-1.0)               (-0.2)
D1870*Urban          0.25*                0.06
                     (8.8)                (1.6)
D1880*Urban          0.30*                0.10*
                     (15.0)               (3.4)
Ln(K/L)              0.15*                0.27*
                     (38.8)               (48.3)
Men/L                0.94*                0.53*
                     (41.2)               (16.1)
Factory              0.08*                -0.04
                     (4.8)                (-1.8)
Steam                -0.04*               0.02
                     (-2.9)               (0.6)
Water                -0.12*               -0.09*
                     (-7.9)               (-4.4)
Steam*Factory        0.11*                0.10*
                     (4.6)                (3.0)
Water*Factory        0.09*                0.08
                     (2.3)                (1.3)

R-squared                0.44                   0.32
Observations             18,759                 18,509
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Regressions include state and 3-digit industry fixed effects.



                                          34
                                       Table 10

                      Industrial Diversity of Cities, 1860-1880
                                Summary Statistics
__________________________________________________________________
                      1860                            1880
__________________________________________________________________
                      Mean SD                         Mean       SD
__________________________________________________________________
Industrial Diversity 15.08      (8.52)                9.84       (6.82)
Population            96,382 (153,272)                91,717 (167,595)
Manufacturing         14,945 (20,890)                 12,972 (30,409)
 Employment
Number of Cities      40                              99
__________________________________________________________________
Sources: Census of Manufactures, 1860, 1880; Census of Population, 1860, 1880.
Urban industrial diversity is measured using the following index: DI=1/Si (Eij/Ej)2 where Eij is
employment in industry i in city j, Ej is total employment in city j. The industry is defined at the
product level and contains about 390 manufacturing industries.




                                                  35
                                         Table 11

                   Estimates of Urban Industrial Diversity, 1860
________________________________________________________________________
Log(Diversity)          (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Ln(Population)          0.14           -               0.52*     0.46*
                        (1.42)                         (4.34)    (3.66)
Ln(Mfg Emp.)            -              -0.13           -0.47*    -0.40*
                                       (-1.41)         (-4.33)   (-3.45)

Regional Dummies
New England                    -0.42           -0.51*         -0.03           0.02
                               (-1.70)         (-2.16)        (0.12)          (0.08)
South                          -0.57*          -0.81*         -1.16*          -0.97*
                               (-2.33)         (-2.91)        (-4.81)         (-3.58)
Midwest                        0.11            -0.02          -0.26           -0.10
                               (0.45)          (-0.09)        (-1.18)         (-0.42)
NY Metro                       -               -              -               0.46
                                                                              (1.41)
Constant                       1.17            4.00*          1.34            1.29
                               (1.02)          (4.58)         (1.43)          (1.40)

R-squared                       0.29            0.29           0.54           0.57
Observations                    40              40             40             40
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Urban industrial diversity is measured using the following index: DI=1/Si (Eij/Ej)2 where Eij is
employment in industry i in city j, Ej is total employment in city j. The industry is defined at the
product level and contains about 390 manufacturing industries.




                                                    36
                                         Table 12

                   Estimates of Urban Industrial Diversity, 1880
________________________________________________________________________
Log(Diversity)          (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)
________________________________________________________________________
Ln(Population)          0.44*          -               0.77*     0.72*
                        (6.88)                         (6.31)    (5.76)
Ln(Mfg Emp.)            -              0.19*           -0.26*    -0.24*
                                       (3.90)          (-3.10)   (-2.86)

Regional Dummies
New England                    -0.28           -0.44*         -0.16           -0.12
                               (-1.64)         (-2.28)        (-0.96)         (-0.72)
South                          0.05            0.08           -0.06           -0.01
                               (0.31)          (0.39)         (-0.39)         (-0.04)
Midwest                        0.47*           0.45*          0.46*           0.51*
                               (3.05)          (2.55)         (3.05)          (3.36)
West                           0.52            0.60           0.32            0.38
                               (1.87)          (1.86)         (1.16)          (1.39)
NY Metro                       -               -              -               0.56
                                                                              (1.61)
Constant                       -2.85*          0.34           -4.19*          -3.86*
                               (-3.85)         (0.75)         (-5.17)         (-4.67)

R-squared                       0.44            0.27           0.49           0.51
Observations                    99              99             99             99
________________________________________________________________________
Note: t-statistics in parentheses. * Significant at the 5% level.
Urban industrial diversity is measured using the following index: DI=1/Si (Eij/Ej)2 where Eij is
employment in industry i in city j, Ej is total employment in city j. The industry is defined at the
product level and contains about 390 manufacturing industries.




                                                    37
                                   References

Abdel-Rahman, H. and M. Fujita. 1990. “Product Variety, Marshallian Externalities, and City
        Sizes,” Journal of Regional Science 30 (2): 165-183.
Acemoglu, Daron. 1996. “A Microfoundation for Social Increasing Returns in Human Capital
        Accumulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 779-804.
Atack, Jeremy and Fred Bateman. 1999. "U.S. Historical Statistics: Nineteenth-Century U.S.
        Industrial Development through the Eyes of the Census of Manufactures," Historical
        Methods 32 (4): 177-188.
Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman and Robert Margo. 2004. “Skill Intensity and Rising Wage
        Dispersion in Nineteenth-Century American Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic
        History 64 (1): 172-192.
Barrett, James R. 1987. Work and Community in the Jungle: Chicago’s Packinghouse Workers
        1894-1922. University of Illinois Press.
Baumgardner, J.R. 1988. “The Division of Labor, Local Markets and Worker Organization,”
        Journal of Political Economy 96 (3): 509-527.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. “Division of Labor, Coordination Costs, and
        Knowledge,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (4): 1137-1160.
Berliant, Marcus and Ping Wang. 1993. “Endogenous Formation of a City Without
        Agglomerative Externalities or Market Imperfections: Marketplaces in a Regional
        Economy,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 23 (1): 121-144.
Buchanan, J.M. 1965. “An Economic Theory of Clubs,” Economica 32 (125):1-14.
Ciccone, Antonio. 2002. “Agglomeration-Effects in Europe,” European Economic Review 46
        (2): 213-227.
Ciccone, Antonio and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the Density of Economic
        Activity,” American Economic Review 86 (1): 54-70.
Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri. 2004. “Identifying Human Capital Externalities: Theory
        with Applications,” mimeo.
Duranton, Gilles. 1998. “Labor Specialization, Transport Costs and City Size,” Journal of
        Regional Science 38: 553-573.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2001. “Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation,
        and the Life Cycle of Products,” American Economic Review 91 (5): 1454-1477.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2004. “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration
        Economies,” in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4, J.V. Henderson
        and J. Thisse, eds., Elsevier.
Duranton, Gilles and Jubert Jayet. 2005. “Is Division of Labour Limited by the Extent of the
        Market? Evidence from French Cities,” mimeo.
Edwards, Alba M. 1943. Comparative Occupation Statistics for the United States, 1870 to 1940.
        U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Faler, Paul G. 1981. Mechanics and Manufacturers in the Early Industrial Revolution: Lynn,
        Massachusetts, 1780-1860. SUNY Press.
Glaeser, Edward L. 1999. “Learning in Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics 46 (2): 254-277.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2005. “Reinventing Boston: 1630-2003,” Journal of Economic Geography 5:
        119-153.

                                             38
Glaeser, Edward L. and David C. Mare. 2001. “Cities and Skills,” Journal of Labor Economics
       19 (2): 316-342.
Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1984. “The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of
       Industrialization: The American Case, 1820-1850.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99:
       461-488.
Helsley, Robert W. and William C. Strange. 1990. “Matching and Agglomeration Economies in
       a System of Cities,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 20: 189-212.
Hirsch, Susan E. 1978. Roots of the American Working Class: The Industrialization of Crafts in
       Newark, 1800-1860. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hunter, Louis C. 1985. A History of Industrial Power in the United States: Steam Power, volume
       2. University of Virginia Press.
Jovanovic, B. and R. Rob. 1989. “The Growth and Diffusion of Knowledge,” Review of
       Economic Studies 56 (4): 569-582.
Kane, Joseph Nathan. 1972. The American Counties. Third Edition. Scarecrow Press.
Kim, Sukkoo. 2000. “Urban Development in the United States, 1690-1990,” Southern
       Economic Journal 66 (4): 855-880.
Kim, Sukkoo. 2005. “Industrialization and Urbanization: Did the Steam Engine Contribute to the
       Growth of Cities in the United States?” Explorations in Economic History 42 (4): 586-
       598.
Kim, Sukkoo and Robert Margo. 2004. “Historical Perspectives on U.S. Economic
       Geography,” in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4, Vernon
       Henderson and Jacques-Françoise Thisse, eds., North-Holland/Elsevier.
Kim, Sunwoong. 1989. “Labor Market Specialization and the Extent of the Market,”
       Journal of Political Economy 97 (3): 692-705.
Kim, Sunwoong. 1990. “Labor Heterogeneity, Wage Bargaining, and Agglomeration
       Economies,” Journal of Urban Economics 28: 160-177.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2000. “Location and Technological
       Change in the American Glass Industry During the Late Nineteenth and Early
       Twentieth Centuries,” Journal of Economic History 60: 700-729.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin. 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
       to Control For Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies 70 (2): 317-342.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Human Capital Externalities in Cities,” in J.V. Henderson and J.F.
       Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4. North-Holland.
Nelson, Daniel. 1995. Managers and Workers: Origins of the Twentieth Century Factory System
       in the United States 1880-1920. University of Wisconsin Press.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
       Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica 64 (4): 1263-1297.
Palivos, T. and P. Wang. 1996. “Spatial Agglomeration and Endogenous Growth,”
       Regional Science and Urban Economics 26 (6): 645-669.
Pred, Allan R. 1966. The Spatial Dynamics of U.S. Urban-Industrial Growth, 1800-1914.
       MIT Press.
Prude, Jonathan. 1983. The Coming of Industrial Order: Town and Factory in Rural
       Massachusetts 1810-1860. Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2004. “A General Purpose Technology at Work:

                                             39
        The Corliss Steam Engine in the Late-Nineteenth-Century United States,” Journal of
        Economic History 64 (1): 61-99.
Rosenbloom, Joshua L. 2002. Looking For Work, Searching For Workers. Cambridge
        University Press.
Slichter, Sumner H. 1919. The Turnover of Factory Labor. D. Appleton and Co.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L. 1984. “Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the
        Nonmechanized Factory Associated with Gains in Efficiency?: Evidence from the
        U.S. Manufacturing Censuses of 1820 and 1850,” Explorations in Economic History 21:
        351-382.
Sutthiphisal, Dhanoos. 2005. “The Geography of Invention in High- and Low-Technology
        Industries: Evidence from the Second Industrial Revolution,” mimeo.
Thomson, Ross. 1989. The Path to Mechanized Shoe Production in the United States.
        University of North Carolina Press.
Ware, Caroline F. 1931. The Early New England Cotton Manufacture. Houghton Mifflin
        Company.
Wheaton, William C. and Mark J. Lewis. 2002. “Urban Wages and Labor Market
        Agglomeration,” Journal of Urban Economics 51: 542-562.
Wheeler, Christopher. 2001. “Search, Sorting, and Urban Agglomeration,” Journal of Labor
        Economics 19 (4): 879-899.
Wheeler, Christopher. 2004. “Wage Inequality and Urban Density,” Journal of Economic
        Geography 4: 421-437.




                                             40
