                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TAX LAW CHANGES, INCOME SHIFTING AND MEASURED
                     WAGE INEQUALITY: EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                          Jagadeesh Sivadasan
                                             Joel Slemrod

                                         Working Paper 12240
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12240


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




University of Michigan. email: jagadees@umich.edu, jslemrod@umich.edu. We thank Abhijit Banerjee,
Charles Brown, Francine Lafontaine, Sendhil Mullainathan, Padmakumar Sivadasan, and participants at
seminars at the NBER and University of Michigan for comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jagadeesh Sivadasan and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Tax Law Changes, Income Shifting and Measured Wage Inequality: Evidence from India
Jagadeesh Sivadasan and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 12240
May 2006
JEL No. H32, H25, F14, O24

                                            ABSTRACT

We use a large dataset covering all registered plants in the manufacturing sector in India over the
period 1986 to 1995 to examine the effects of a 1992 income tax law change that eliminated the
double taxation of wages paid to partners in partnership firms. This tax law change provides a unique
opportunity to identify the effects of tax policy changes on firm behavior in a developing country
context. Since the change provided incentives for shifting income from wages to profits, it also has
important implications for certain measures of wage inequality. We find an immediate and pervasive
response by partnership firms to the tax law change, reflected in a significant shifting of income from
profits to managerial wages. Since about 50 percent of registered manufacturing plants are
incorporated in the form of partnerships (including most family-run businesses), income shifting by
these firms could have a significant impact on measured wage inequality. We find a sizeable jump
in the mean and median relative wage of skilled workers (which includes managers and partners)
following the tax law change in 1992. This sudden increase in measured wage inequality follows
major trade liberalization and deregulation reforms announced earlier (in July 1991). We find that
the income shifting induced by the tax law change explains almost all of the observed increase in
measured wage inequality following these reforms. This finding is robust to inclusion of controls for
a number of other potential sources of post-liberalization increases in wage inequality. Our results
show that firms respond strongly to tax incentives for income shifting, and highlight the need to
control for the potential effects of tax incentives in studies of wage inequality.

Jagadeesh Sivadasan
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, Room W7719
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
jagadees@umich.edu

Joel Slemrod
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, Room W7719
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
      1     Introduction
      In this paper, we investigate the effects of changes in Indian tax law regarding partnerships
      on income shifting and measured wage inequality using a survey dataset covering the entire
      Indian manufacturing sector for the nine-year period from 1987 to 1995. The tax law change,
      introduced in 1992, increased incentives for partners to pay themselves wages and salaries, instead
      of taking income mainly as share of profits. This tax law change provides a unique opportunity
      to study two important issues: how firms modify their behavior in response to tax incentives, in
      a developing country context, and how income shifting affects measured wage inequality, which
      could be relevant for a number of studies that study wage inequality using data similar to ours.
          Tax policy is often used to modify firm behavior, especially in developing countries. However,
      conclusions about the effectiveness of tax policy instruments are often confounded by the ef-
      fects of unrelated concurrent macro-economic changes or introduction of other reform measures
      (see Epifani (2003) or Tybout (2001) for a discussion in the context of import tax liberaliza-
      tions). Because the tax law change we study affected only partnership firms, we are able to
      use non-partnership firms as a control group, and identify the effects of the tax law using a
      difference-in-differences strategy. This approach compares the behavior of partnership firms to
      other establishments of similar size belonging to the same industry located in the same state.
      Because macroeconomic shocks and other reforms are very likely to affect all establishments in
      the same size-industry-location group in a similar fashion, we are able to identify the effects of
      the tax law change separate from other confounding changes.
          To document the direct effects on the tax law change, we examine four measures that reflect
      the extent of income shifting: (1) the fraction of non-salaried owners; (2) the profits-to-sales
      ratio; (3) the wages-to-sales ratio; and (4) the white-collar wages-to-profits ratio. As a model
      of the incentives caused by the tax system suggests, we find that the fraction of non-salaried
      owners falls sharply, and the white-collar wages-to- profits ratio rises significantly in 1992-93,
      the first year that the new tax laws took effect. There is also a drop in the profits-to-sales ratio,
      and an increase in wages-to-sales ratio following the tax law change. These are difference-in-
      differences effects on partnership firms, controlling for shocks to specific industries, locations
      and size quartiles using state-industry-size-year effects.
          Because the tax law change caused a shift in income for partners from profits to wages, it
      had an impact on measured wage inequality. Partner wages get added to the observed total
      white-collar wage bill in the data, which leads to an increase in the measured skill premium
      (the ratio of the white-collar wage rate to the blue-collar wage rate1 ) and in the ratio of the
      white-collar wage bill to total wages.
          Coincidentally, the tax law changes were introduced just a few months after a sweeping trade
      (and other market) liberalization announced in July 1991. This timing is critically important be-
      cause the behavioral response to the tax law changes could impact an analysis of the effect of the
      trade liberalization. Indeed, the effect of free-market policies and trade liberalization on inequal-
      ity is a subject of an intense ongoing debate. A number of studies have documented an increase
      in wage inequality (usually measured as skill premium) in developing countries following trade
   1 The white-collar wage rate is obtained by dividing the total wage bill by the number of white-collar employees. The

blue-collar wage rate is obtained similarly.



                                                           2
        expansion. While observed increases in the skill premium are puzzling from the point of view of
        the simplest Heckscher-Ohlin trade model, a number of alternative theoretical explanations have
        been proposed.2 As discussed in the survey by Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004), potential causes for
        increasing wage inequality following trade liberalization include Stolper-Samuelson effects due to
        reduction in tariffs for unskilled-intensive industries, foreign direct investment (FDI) generating
        additional demand for skilled workers, skill-biased technological change, or quality upgrading by
        firms within industries.
           Note that none of these trade-liberalization related explanations for increases in wage inequal-
        ity suggests that the effect would depend on the form of organization of the firm. Thus, since the
        tax law changes were applicable only to partnership firms, we are able to adopt a difference-in-
        differences strategy to distinguish the effect of the tax law change from these alternative causes
        for increases in measured wage inequality.
           Our examination of the trends over the 1987-1995 period reveals a sharp increase in the mean
        and in various percentiles of the distribution of the log skill premium in 1993. We find similar
        effects on the share of white-collar wages in the total wage bill. Examination of these trends
        across different forms of organization shows that the overall effects were largely driven by changes
        within partnership firms, suggesting that the tax law change was responsible for the observed
        spikes in measured inequality. This is confirmed by regression analyses that control specifically
        for tariff changes, export and import orientation, FDI liberalization, distance to the frontier, and
        capital intensity. We find that almost all (6.5 percent of the 7.3 percent mean increase in the log
        skill premium) is driven by changes to partnership firms.3 Similarly, we find that most of the
        increase (3.55 percent out of 4.63 percent) in the overall mean white-collar share of the wage bill
        is driven by changes within partnership firms. Both of these findings are robust to the inclusion
        of various controls and industry-location-size year effects.4 We conclude that the increase in the
        measured skill premium and the white-collar share of the wage bill that occurred beginning in
        1992 were driven primarily by income shifting by owners in partnership firms.
           Our paper contributes to the literature on behavioral responses to tax distortions.5 The
        general topic of income shifting has been studied intensively by public finance scholars, although
        the empirical work relies heavily on United States data, and, to a lesser extent, European data.
        Large literatures have studied the extent to which the use of corporate debt finance (which shifts
        income from the corporate to personal tax base) responds to the tax advantages of doing so,
        and on the shift of firms and taxable income between corporate and non-corporate status. This
        study is, to our knowledge, the first such paper that documents income shifting in a developing
        country context. Our finding of a strong and immediate response to the incentive to shift income
        from profits to wages is consistent with Slemrod’s (1990) classification of income shifting in the
        highest tier of a hierarchy of behavioral responses to tax policy changes. We find that adoption
        of the income shifting response was immediate and pervasive across both rural and urban areas
   2 See Kremer and Maskin (2003) or Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004) for surveys of this literature.
   3A  very small part of the change seems to be caused by changes specific to import-oriented sectors. Also, in the individual
specification, there seems to be a relative decrease in skill premium in industries further away from the frontier (consistent
with theory); however this effect is not present in the full specification.
   4 One other factor that appears important here is capital deepening coupled with an increase in the skill premium for capital

intensive firms in the post-1992 period (accounting for about 0.6 percent of the total change of 4.63 percent in white-collar
share of the wage bill).
   5 Gordon and Slemrod (2000) provides an overview of this literature.




                                                               3
      as well as young and old firms.
          In the public finance literature, the question examined by Gordon and Slemrod (2000) is
      closest to that of this paper. It investigates shifting of income between the corporate and personal
      tax base, and presents evidence that a substantial amount of income shifting occurred in the
      United States between the mid-1960s and the mid-1990s. This evidence is based on time-series
      regression analyses which reveal that an increase in corporate tax rates relative to personal tax
      rates resulted in an increase both in reported personal income and a drop in reported corporate
      income. Gordon and Slemrod (2000) focus on one mechanism for shifting – changing the form of
      compensation for executives and other workers, such as between wage compensation and greater
      use of stock options. They argue that increased income shifting could help explain two well-noted
      phenomena occurring in the United States over this period – increasing concentration of personal
      income and the declining rate of corporate profitability. Because personal income appears fully
      on individual tax returns but corporate income appears only indirectly through dividend receipts
      and realized capital gains, the observed shift of income to the personal base of high-income firm
      owners will increase inequality as measured by income that shows up on individual tax returns.
      In the Indian case we study here, a shift from partnership income to salaries should not affect
      total personal income that shows up on personal tax returns, and so inequality measures based
      on personal income tax returns should be unaffected.
          This paper also contributes to the literature examining changes in the effect of trade liberal-
      ization on wage inequality and highlights the need to check for changes in the tax environment
      when studying changes in skill premia or skill intensity, especially when using manufacturing
      survey data.6 Our results thus provide a cautionary tale for event studies of regulatory changes
      in general, and studies of trade liberalization in particular. To be sure, this potential weakness
      of before-after studies of trade liberalization has been pointed out before; for example, Tybout
      (2001) and Epifani (2003) argued that trade liberalization is often accompanied by a number
      of other macroeconomic and product market reform policies, and discussed the difficulty with
      which such studies can separately identify the effects of different types of reforms.
          Finally, our paper sheds some light on the effect of liberalization on inequality in India. We
      find that, controlling for the spurious increase in measured wage inequality induced by tax law
      changes, there was little increase in wage inequality following the trade liberalization. Thus,
      the 1991 reforms do not appear to have significantly worsened wage inequality in the registered
      manufacturing sector, at least over the four-year period following the reforms covered by our data.
      Because our study addresses measured wage inequality in the registered manufacturing sector
      only, our results must be interpreted with considerable caution with regard to its implications
      for overall inequality (see discussion in Section 7).
          The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section (Section 2), we briefly
      describe the relevant tax law changes introduced in the Finance Act of 1992, and the trade
   6 A number of studies in different countries have used manufacturing survey data to examine wage inequality and the skill

premium. Examples include Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994) for the United States; Feenstra and Hanson (1997), Revenga
(1997), and Hanson and Harrison (1999) for Mexico; and Pavcnik (2003) for Chile. Household-survey-based studies of income
inequality would not be affected by income shifting, unless they are affected by relative misreporting of different kinds of
income. Similarly, income inequality studies based on data on total taxable income (say from income tax sources) would not be
biased; however, such data at the individual level are typically confidential. Income inequality analysis using publicly-available
aggregate tax return data should also not be biased by income shifting, but could be biased by improvements in tax collection
(Banerjee and Piketty 2005).



                                                                4
       and other reforms introduced beginning in July 1991. In Section 3, we present a brief model
       capturing the implications of the tax reform for income shifting and measured wage inequality,
       and then describe different theories relating trade liberalization to increases in wage inequality.
       We describe the data and define the key variables used in our study in Section 4. In Section 5,
       we present empirical evidence on the direct income shifting consequences of the tax law change.
       In Section 6, we present empirical analysis of the trends in wage inequality and the extent to
       which these trends can be explained by alternative trade theories. Section 7 summarizes our
       results, and concludes.


       2       Tax and Trade Reforms in the Early 1990s
       2.1     Alternative Business Forms and the Tax Reforms of 1992
       2.1.1    Alternative Business Forms

       The three major choices for organizing a business in India are:7 (1) individual proprietorships;
       (2) partnerships, and (3) companies (“private or public limited companies”). The individual
       proprietorship form is used by entrepreneurs who have sole ownership of the establishment. For
       establishments with multiple owners/shareholders, the two available alternatives for organization
       were options (2) and (3) above. In the pre-1992 period, the key benefit from choosing the
       “partnership” form versus a “private or public limited company” form was that the entity-level
       tax rates were significantly lower on partnerships (a top rate of 18 percent for partnerships versus
       45 to 50 percent for companies – see Table 3). However, the key non-tax disadvantage of this
       form of organization was that the liability for partners was not limited. After 1992, the difference
       in the tax rate between companies and partnerships narrowed considerably.8
           The distribution of manufacturing sector establishments across different business forms for
       the year 1991 (the midpoint in our data period) is summarized in Table 2. As is evident from
       the table, the predominant form of business organization was the partnership form (50 percent),
       followed by companies (25.8 percent) and individual proprietorships (17.4 percent). Other forms
       include trusts, cooperatives and government departmental enterprises. In terms of total employ-
       ment, companies constituted the biggest share (50.9 percent), followed by others (24.9 percent),9
       partnerships (19.3 percent), and individual proprietorships (4.9 percent).

       2.1.2    Tax Reforms of 1992

       The main statute governing income taxes is the Income Tax Act (1961). Every year, the gov-
       ernment (or specifically, the Minister of Finance), proposes a budget (technically the “Finance
       Act”) in February/March, which announces tax rates applicable for the tax year beginning April
       1 of that year. Thus, the Finance Act of 1992, would announce tax rates applicable for the
       fiscal year 1992-93 (April 1, 1992 to March 31, 1993), defined as 1993 in our dataset and all our
   7 See Chapter 3 of Ramani et al. (2004) for a detailed discussion of alternative business forms; most of the discussion there
is applicable to the period we study. One key change was the tax treatment of partnership profits and salaries to partners.
This is discussed in the section below.
   8 See also the discussion in footnote 15. While there is a small trend towards the “corporate” form, there was no change in

our dataset in this trend around the 1992 tax law change.
   9 Employment within others is dominated by Government Departmental Enterprises.




                                                               5
      analysis.10
          Immediately prior to 1992-93, key provisions of the Indian Income Tax Act (1961), along
      with the rates announced in the Annual Finance Acts (or “Budgets”), implied the following tax
      treatment of remuneration and profits of partners in partnership firms:

          • Profits of the firm were taxed twice. First, the firm had to pay an entity-level tax on profits
             at the rate specified for registered (partnership) firms.11 Additionally, each partner’s share
             of the after-entity-tax profits was to be added to the personal income of the partners and
             subject to tax at the rate specified for individuals of the applicable income level.

          • Any payment of interest, salary, bonus, commission, or remuneration made by the firm to
             any partner of the firm was not deductible from revenues in the determination of the firm’s
             taxable profits.

          One effect of these provisions was that there was a tax disincentive to paying salaries to
      partners of the firms (regardless of whether they worked at the firm). Any salary (or other type
      of remuneration) would be taxed three times – first as profit at the hands of the firm (since
      salaries were not deductible), second as profit from business in the hands of the partner, and
      third as salary income in the hands of the partner.12
          The double taxation of partnership profits was introduced in the Finance Act of 1956, and
      was critiqued as early as 1958 by the Law Commission in their 12th Report.13 However, the
      double taxation provisions were retained in the tax code until 1992.14 As discussed in the tax
      reform committee’s Interim Report (1991), the primary reason for introducing a separate tax
      at the partnership entity level was the concern that partners would be able to manipulate their
      tax liability by “including relatives and friends as partners, some of whom may merely be their
      “benamidars,” or namelenders.15
          In early 1992, reports submitted by a committee set up to review Indian tax laws (called the
      Chelliah Committee, after its chairman Raja J. Chelliah) made a number of recommendations,
  10 Technically, the rates are stated in the Income Tax Department publications as applicable for the next “assessment year,”

to be applied to the “prior year.” Thus, tax rates announced in the Finance Act 1992 would be for the “assessment year”
1993-94, but would be applicable on income earned in 1992-93 (the “prior year” for the “assessment year” 1993-94). The
Finance Act would also often amend parts of the Income Tax Act. Procedures and rules are outlined in the Income Tax Rules,
1962, and are revised through amendments to these rules, and through circulars and notifications.
  11 There are separate provisions relating to unregistered firms. Since our dataset covers only registered establishments, we

will restrict attention to provisions for registered firms.
  12 The tax treatment of remuneration paid to the partners is not specifically referred to in the Income Tax Act prior to

1992. The only reference to remuneration of partners is to specify that these payments are not deductible when calculating a
partnership firm’s taxable income (see section 40, Income Tax, 1991). After 1992, it is specifically stated in the Income Tax
Act that remuneration to a partner would be treated as “Profits and Gains from Business or Profession” and added to the
partner’s total taxable income (to the extent that these were deductible in the calculation of the firm’s taxable income). In the
absence of these specific exceptions, in the pre-1992 period salaries paid to a partner (like any other employee’s salary) would
have to be added to his total income.
  13 The Law Commission was set up by the central government to recommend revision and updating of laws to serve the

changing needs of the country.
  14 The taxation of income at the partnership level is unusual, compared to the practice in the United States, where partnership

income is not taxed at the business entity level, while each partner’s share of the firm’s profits is included in their taxable
income.
  15 This concern was especially significant in India where tracking and collecting taxes at the individual “benamidar” partner

level would have been administratively quite difficult (due to the lack of social security numbers or other tracking information).
Prior to 1992, even with entity level taxation, the partnership firms had incentives to use benamidars to reduce each partner’s
share of profits. Note that the double taxation of profits was not unusual relative to other business forms. Under the alternate
organization as a “company,” profits paid out as dividends to shareholders were also subject to double taxation (first as profits
in the hands of the company, and then as income at the individual level). Since tax rates on profits for partnerships were lower
than for companies (see Table 2), the net tax paid on profits received by the owners was lower for Partnerships. Also, tax paid
by the partnership was deducted from the firm’s profits before allocation in the hands of the partners.



                                                                6
      including the abolition of the partnership double taxation provision. Two key drawbacks of
      the pre-reform tax provisions highlighted by the committee were (1) double taxation, and (2)
      excessive administrative burdens stemming from rectifying partners’ tax assessments due to
      changes in declared income of the firm. Accordingly the reforms were intended to make the tax
      code “more equitable” and to reduce the administrative burden on the system. Following the
      recommendations, a number of amendments to provisions in the Income Tax Act relating to
      registered partnerships were introduced in the Finance Act of 1992. The key changes (applicable
      for income earned in the period April 1, 1992, to March 31, 1993, and subsequently) were the
      following:

          • Partnerships were allowed to deduct remuneration paid to “working” partners, within spec-
             ified limits. As per the Income Tax Act, 1961, a “working partner” was defined as an
             “individual who is actively engaged in conducting the affairs of the business or profession of
             the firm of which he is a partner.” These payments had to be authorized by the partnership
             deeds.16

          • Profits of partnerships would be taxed only once, at the rate specified for the partnership
             firm. These profits would then be exempt from any further tax. In particular, the partners’
             share of post-entity-tax profits would not be included in their taxable income.

          • Remuneration paid to partners were to be added to their personal income but only up to
             the limit that was deductible while calculating the firm’s taxable income (see appendix 1
             for these specified limits). Thus, remuneration in excess of the specified limit, which was
             not allowed to be deducted while calculating taxable profits for the firm, would also only
             be taxed once – in the hands of the partnership firm at the rate applicable to such firms.

      Notably, the Finance Act also substantially raised the entity-level tax rate on partnerships, from
      a range of 10 to 18 percent in 1992 to a flat 40 percent beginning in 1993. The relevant tax rates
      on individuals, partnerships, and other companies are provided in Table 3.
          The net impact of the changes (specifically the provision allowing salaries to “working” part-
      ners to be deducted while calculating taxable profits, and the provision ruling out double taxa-
      tion of non-deductible remuneration) was to remove the disincentives related to paying salaries
      to partners. Starting in 1992-93, the tax rate on income up to INR 100,000 (about USD 3500)
      was less than the tax rate on corporate income (see Table 3), so there was a positive tax incentive
      to pay out some amount of salary to working partners.17 The tax rates on other business forms
      did not change substantially at this time (and during the period of our study); the tax rate
      on various income brackets for individuals, which also affects single proprietorships, did decline
      somewhat in 1992-93.18
  16 From Explanation (4) under sub-clause (v) of clause (b) of section 40 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, and notification S.O.

1986 issued August 26, 1993. An appendix with relevant extracts from the Income Tax Act 1961 is available on request from
the authors.
  17 Also, there was a standard deduction allowed on salary income (but not on income from business profits), which could

have provided further incentives to pay out salaries to working partners.
  18 Note that while the tax reform eliminated double taxation, this was done by retaining taxation on partnerships at the

entity level. Thus, the change did not provide any significant additional incentives to hire “benamidar” partners. Interestingly,
the Interim Report (1991) had recommended that tax at the partnership entity level be eliminated, and each partner’s share of
entity profits be taxed at the individual level. The committee recognized that this could provide incentives to use semi-fictional
(“benamidar”) partners. With taxation only at the individual level, each partner’s share of the income could be reduced
by adding ”benamidar” partners, thus lowering tax liability for the true partners at the individual level. (While this could
potentially be offset by taxes on the income of the “benamidar” partners, in practice it would be administratively complex to



                                                                7
          We model the impact of the tax provisions and the predicted behavioral response in Section
      3.1.

      2.2      Trade Liberalization and Other Economic Reforms of 1991
      Significant reforms were introduced in 1991 that transitioned India from a closed, socialist econ-
      omy to a more open, free-market oriented system. The proximate cause for the reforms was
      a severe balance of payments crisis in 1991. In June 1991 a new government came into power
      following mid-term elections; this government obtained funding from the international finan-
      cial institutions (the IMF, the World Bank, and The Asian Development Bank) and initiated a
      structural adjustment program on the advice of these institutions.
          The three major reforms impacting the manufacturing sector were the liberalization of indus-
      trial, foreign investment, and trade policies regulations.19 The major industrial policy change
      was the extensive liberalization of licensing requirements for establishing and expanding capac-
      ity, a cornerstone of the pre-1991 industrial regulatory regime (which came to be called the
      “licence raj”).20 A modest easing of licensing norms had been undertaken in the late 1980s,
      and the industrial policy announced in 1991 extended de-licensing to almost all industries in the
      manufacturing sector. Another key reform announced in July 1991 was the significant relax-
      ation of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) regulations, especially for investments into designated
      high priority industries (known as “Appendix I industries”). The third major reform was the
      reduction in tariff rates across the board over the early 1990s. The rates dropped from an (un-
      weighted) average of about 85 percent in 1990 to about 60 percent in 1992. There was also a
      devaluation of the rupee by about 41 percent during the calendar year 1991 (from about INR
      18.4/USD to about INR 25.8/USD), which counteracted the effect of the tariff reductions on
      import-competing industries, and gave a boost for exporting firms.
          Other pro-market macroeconomic policies initiated in 1991 included moves to reduce the fiscal
      deficit, liberalization of technology and capital goods imports, devaluation of the local currency,
      transition to a market determined exchange rate and liberalization of capital markets. Since
      these reforms were pervasive and announced simultaneously, their effects are difficult to disen-
      tangle from each other and from other macroeconomic shocks. We discuss different theoretical
      explanations for increases in wage inequality following trade liberalization in Section 3.2.


      3 1992 Tax Law Changes, Trade Liberalization, and Wage
      Inequality
      3.1      A Model of Behavioral Responses to the 1992 Tax Reform
      We consider a simple model that captures the key elements of the 1992 tax law and tax rate
      changes and predicts the behavioral responses of the partnerships affected by the tax law change.
track and collect taxes from such persons.) The Interim Report suggested that this issue be addressed using a separate act that
prohibited the use of “Benamidars” (the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988), instead of distorting the tax structure.
Since the implemented reforms retained entity level taxes, we do not expect to find a big increase in the number of partners in
partnerships. This was confirmed by our analysis of the white-collar share of employment in partnership firms: we found no
significant increase in the white-collar share of employment relative to other firms within the same state-industry cells.
  19 For a more extensive discussion of these and other reforms initiated in 1991 and continued through the 1990s, see Acharya

(2002).
  20 For interesting anecdotal evidence on the significance of these reforms, see DeLong (2001).




                                                              8
       3.1.1    Model Setup

       We begin by taking the choice of business form as exogenous. While this choice could be affected
       by tax regulations (see e.g., MacKie-Mason and Gordon, 1997), our focus here is mainly on
       income shifting within firms.21 Assume that a partnership generates a surplus per partner of
       S. The K identical partners need to choose an amount X to pay themselves as wages, while
       the remaining S − X of the surplus becomes profit that accrue to the partners. The optimal
       value of X, denoted X ∗ , is chosen to maximize the after-tax income of the typical partner. In a
       world without taxes on wages or profits, the X choice would be trivial: the partners would be
       indifferent between paying themselves wages or receiving a share of the firm’s profits.

       3.1.2    Behavior in the Pre-92 and Post-1992 Tax Regimes

       The tax system alters this indifference. To see this, note that the after-tax income per partner
       in the pre-1992 regime was given by:

                              Π = S [1 − tf (P )] [1 − ti (I)] − Xti (I) + G[1 − ti (I)],                               (1)

       where ti (I) is the average tax rate on the partner’s individual taxable income, which is a function
       of the level of the partner’s taxable income I; tf (P ) is the average tax rate on the income of
       partnerships, which is a function of the level of the partnership’s total income P (= KS); and G
       is outside income for the typical partner. Here, the partner’s individual taxable income I equals
       S(1 − tf (P )) + X + G. . Defining S̃ ≡ S(1 − tf (P )), after entity-tax partnership income, we
       have:
                                                 RI                R S̃+X+G
                                                 0
                                                      tm (r)dr         0
                                                                                tm (r)dr
                                      ti (I) ≡                 =                           ,                            (2)
                                                        I                  S̃ + X + G
       where tm (r) is the marginal individual tax rate when the income level is r. Since the marginal
       tax rate increases with income (see Table 3 for details), the average tax rate increases with I
       and X. Also, since the salary paid to each partner (X) is not deductible in the pre-1992 period,
                                                                                            dΠ
       P and tf (P ) are independent of X. Given these facts, we get from Equation 1 that       < 0, so
                                                                                            dX
             ∗          22
       that X is zero. Thus in the pre-1992 regime, no salary should be paid to the partners.
          In the post-1992 regime, wages paid to partners were deductible, as long as they were below a
       specified fraction of total profits (see Appendix 1 for the specified limits). Wages above this cap,
       while not deductible in the calculation of the firm’s taxable income, were exempt from individual
                                                                  X
       income tax in the hands of the partner. Defining µ as         , we simplify the prescribed limits as
                                                                  S
       one cap, specified as a fraction of the surplus(µ̄). Thus, after-tax income received per partner in
  21 Another reason for abstracting from the choice of business organizational form is that we find no significant changes in

the distribution of business forms around the time of the tax law change. (Logit and probit models of the choice of the
partnership form of organization, not reported here but available from the authors, indicate that there was a downward trend
in the propensity to operate as a partnership, but suggest no break in the trend around or after the introduction of the tax law
change in 1992). This is consistent with the fact that the new law did not alter the total tax on partnership income significantly,
just the form of taxation, and by doing so affected the incentives to shift income but not the incentive to operate in one form
versus another.
                                            " RI
  22 From Equations 1 and 2, after some algebra we get:
                    dt (I)                                        #
 dΠ                    i                     − 0 tm (r)dr    tm (I)
     = −ti (I) − I            = −ti (I) − I                +          = −tm (I) < 0.
 dX                   dX                           I2           I




                                                                   9
     the post-1992 regime equals:

                          Π(X)       = S − t′f (P )(S − X) − t′i (I)X + G [1 − t′i (I)]
                                                                         
                                     = S 1 − t′f (P ) + X t′f (P ) − t′i (I) + G [1 − t′i (I)] ,        (3)

     where X ≤ µ̄S, and t′f (P ) and t′i (I) denote post-1992 average partnership and individual tax
     rates at the partnership income level of P and the partner’s individual income level of I, respec-
     tively. Because after 1992 the tax on partnership profits was changed to a flat rate (see Table
     3), we have t′f (P ) = t′f (constant, independent of P). Also, post-1992 partnership profits were
     not taxed again in the hands of the partner, so I = X + G, and accordingly we have:
                                        RI ′          R X+G ′
                                           t (r)dr
                                         0 m
                                                           tm (r)dr
                                ′
                               ti (I) ≡            = 0              ,                                   (4)
                                             I           X +G
     where t′m (r) is the post-1992 marginal tax rate at an income level of r. Therefore, we get:
                                       dΠ(X|X ≤ µ̄S)
                                                           = t′f − t′i (I) − t′m (I) + t′i (I)
                                           dX
                                                           = t′f − t′m (I)                              (5)


                                       dΠ(X|X > µ̄S)
                               and                         =     0.                                     (6)
                                           dX
           Note that t′f is a constant at 0.40 (see Table 2), and that t′m increases in steps as the income
     of the partner increases. Thus, as X goes up, so does the marginal individual income tax rate
     t′m .
           Given these facts, equation 5 implies that so long as the marginal individual tax rate applicable
     for the partner (t′m ) is below the tax rate applicable to the firm’s income (t′f = 0.40), each
     partner’s post-tax income is increasing in X. Equation 6 indicates that once X exceeds the
     prescribed limit µ̄S, the partners would be indifferent about the choice of X. Thus, the optimal
     choice would be to increase X ∗ until the marginal tax rate applicable to the partner’s personal
     income is just equal to the tax rate on the partnership firm.23 Thus the decision rule is:

                                              X ∗ : t′m (X ∗ + G) = t′f .                               (7)

     Based on this, we obtain the following predictions about post-1992 optimal behavior:

          1. If G is small enough so that t′m (G) < 0.40, then X ∗ > 0. From Table 2, this means that for
             1992-93, 1993-94, and 1994-95, all partners whose outside income is less than INR 100,000
             (≃ USD 3500) would choose to pay themselves positive wages. Thus, for years 1992-93 to
             1994-95, at equilibrium we would have X ∗ + G ≥ INR 100,000, because at income levels
             exceeding INR 100,000, the tax rate t′m = 0.40 = t′f .
          2. Assuming at least some partners have G < INR 100,000, the number of salaried partners
             post-1992 should be positive. If the designation of working partners is flexible (not subject
             to scrutiny or challenge by the tax authorities), we expect the number of partners receiving
             wages to equal the number of partners for whom outside income < INR 100,000.
          3. Assuming at least some partners have G < INR 100,000 (≃ USD 3500), declared profit for
             the partnership is less than S.
23 This   reasoning assumes that S > 0.


                                                            10
            These behavioral responses will lead to the following observations for partnerships:

           1. Unpaid (non-salaried) owners (proprietors and family members) as a fraction of total white-
             collar employment should go down. If the tax law change is understood and acted on
             immediately by all firms, we should see a big downward adjustment in 1992-93, and little
             change thereafter.

           2. Declared profits should go down after the tax law change (holding other factors constant),
             as some profits are shifted to wage income for the proprietors. Thus, profits as a proportion
             of sales should go down, and the total wage bill as a proportion of sales should go up after
             the tax law change.
           3. The ratio of white-collar wage bill (which includes wages to all white-collar employees,
             including partners) to profits should go up.

            Because the tax law changes were relevant only for partnership firms, we expect the above
      predictions to hold for this type of firm, and expect no similar changes for firms that have a
      different business form. This allows us to implement a difference-in-differences strategy by using
      the time-series of non-partnership data to serve as a control for the partnership data.24

      3.1.3 Effects on Measured Wage Inequality of Predicted Response to the 1992 Tax
      Law Change

      Tax induced income shifting will affect measured wage inequality. To see this, assume that both
      the white-collar (Ww ) and blue- collar wage (Wb ) rate stays the same (Ww′ = Ww , Wb′ = Wb )
      in the periods before and after the tax law change (i.e., we abstract from any factor that could
      change blue and/or white- collar wage rates). The observed white-collar share of the wage bill
      in the pre-1992 regime is:
                                                                  Ww M
                                                wshpre92 =
                                                               Ww M + W b N
      where M is the number of salaried white-collar (non-production) employees and N is the number
      of blue-collar employees. In the post-1992 tax regime this becomes:
                                                             Ww M + XK
                                           wshpost92 =                     ,
                                                          Ww M + Wb N + XK
      where XK is the total amount of partnership profits shifted to white-collar wage and salary
      income, and K is the number of newly paid partners. Clearly, wshpost92 > wshpre92 .25 Thus, as
      a result of the shifting of income from profits to wages by working partners induced by the 1992
      tax law change, we expect the white-collar share of wages to go up.
  24 One   issue that could impact our analysis is the significant administrative difficulties in taxing income at the individual
level in India. One way to model this would be to assume that the effective marginal tax on individual income is γtm (I), where
γ ∈ [0, 1] captures a range of outcomes between full compliance (γ = 1) and full tax evasion (γ = 0) on salary income. For all
values of γ > 0 our basic results above would hold: there would be no incentive to pay any wage to partners in the pre-1992
period, while there would be an incentive to pay wages in the post-1992 period. In fact with lower effective taxation of salary
income, there would be stronger incentives to pay out wages to partners in the post-92 period because the optimal X ∗ would
increase as γ decreases (since the optimal X ∗ is given by t′f = γt′m (X ∗ + G), and t′m (X ∗ + G) is increasing in X ∗ ). With
complete tax evasion on salary income, γ = 0, in the pre-1992 period, partnerships would be indifferent about X ∗ , while in
the post-1992 period, partnerships would have an incentive to pay out the maximum amount of allowable wage income (i.e.,
X ∗ = µ̄S).
  25 Since wsh                                      Wb N XK
                post92 − wshpre92 =                                          > 0.
                                    (Ww M + Wb N + XK)(Ww M + Wb N )




                                                               11
          Observed wage inequality measured as ratio of white-collar to blue-collar wage rate in the
      pre-1992 regime also changes. Before 1992, it is:
                                                                     Ww
                                                      skprpre92 =       ,
                                                                     Wb
      and in the post-1992 regime it is:
                                                              Ww M + XK
                                               skprpost92   =   M +K    ,
                                                                  Wb
      where J is the number of partners who receive wages in the post-1992 period. In our data,
      partners and family members who begin to receive wages after the 1992 tax law change would get
      reclassified from being “unpaid proprietors or family members” to paid “white-collar workers”.
      Therefore, measured wage inequality goes up if:

                                                   skprpost92       >   skprpre92
                                                 Ww M + XK
                                                                    >   Ww
                                                   M +K
                                                           X        >   Ww .                                          (8)

          Thus, if the amount of diverted profits per paid partner (X) is higher than the mean white-
      collar wage rate paid by the firm, we would expect measured wage inequality to go up for
      partnerships after the 1992 tax law changes.
          To summarize, our model predicts the following for partnerships:

         1. The white collar share of wages should rise following the 1992 tax law change.

         2. Assuming that the diverted profits per paid partner is higher than white-collar wage rate,
            measured wage inequality (i.e., the skill premium) will go up. In our data, median wage per
            white-collar employee was only about INR 15,000 (about INR 32,250 at the 90th percentile),
            much lower than the measured profit before tax per unpaid partner of about INR 37,000
            (about INR 329,150 at the 90th percentile). Thus, the assumption that the amount of
            transferred profits per partner was greater than wage rate for white-collar employees is
            likely to hold for most of the firms, and hence we expect mean wage inequality to increase
            for partnerships.26,    27


          Again, since the tax law changes were relevant only for partnerships, we expect the above
      predictions to hold only for this type of firm, and we expect no such changes to be observed for
      firms that have a different business form.

      3.2      Theories of Trade Liberalization and Inequality
      A number of studies have documented an increase in wage inequality following trade liberalization
      and the expansion of trade in many developing countries (see Kremer and Maskin, 2003, or
   26 Two factors reinforce this possibility. One, the ceiling on the optimal transfer (applicable for working partners with zero

outside income) is INR 100,000, which is much higher than even the 90th percentile of observed mean white-collar wage rates.
Two, profits per “working partner” would be even higher than the profits per partner calculated above, increasing the likelihood
that profits transferred per working partner are greater than the observed white-collar wage rate.
   27 Another implication of the model is that the increase in white collar share of wages would be larger for smaller firms (or

more precisely firms with lower number of white collar employees), since the ratio of diverted profits to white collar wage bill
is likely to be higher for these firms. We tested this implication and found strong support for it in the data.



                                                               12
      Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004, for an overview of this literature). We discuss briefly the main
      theoretical explanations for this link.
          According to the simplest versions of the Heckscher-Ohlin model, developing countries should
      see a decrease in wage inequality following reforms. In this model developing countries do not
      have a comparative advantage in skill-intensive sectors, which would face import competition
      and which are protected prior to liberalization. Post-liberalization, according to the Stolper-
      Samuelson theorem that links product prices to wages, prices relatively decrease in the skill-
      intensive import sector, which in turn reduces the wages of skilled workers. However, evidence
      suggests that unskill-intensive sectors are the ones that in fact receive the most protection.28
      Thus, trade liberalization would lead to price drops in unskill-intensive sectors, leading to in-
      creases in skill premium consistent with the Stolper-Samuelson theorem.
          An alternative argument for increasing wage inequality in developing countries following trade
      liberalization and the relaxation of foreign direct investment (FDI) regulations was proposed by
      Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 2003). They suggest that these reforms shift the production of
      intermediate goods from developed to developing countries. These products are skill-intensive
      from the point of view of developing countries (though relatively unskill-intensive from the point
      of view of developed countries, and hence outsourced to poorer countries). Thus, FDI generates
      demand for skilled workers. Another path through which FDI liberalization (coupled with reduc-
      tion in tariffs and removal of other restrictions on import of capital) could affect skill premium is
      by increasing the use of capital; then if capital and skilled labor are complementary, this would
      lead to increased demand for skilled labor and hence an increase in the skill premium (Cragg
      and Epelbaum, 1996).
          Another source of increases in skill premium could be skill-biased technological change, which
      could be induced by trade liberalization in three possible ways. Wood (1995) and Thoenig and
      Verdier (2003) suggest that intensified import competition leads to greater R&D or adoption of
      technologies that would otherwise not have been adopted. These new technologies are generally
      skill-intensive, so that such skill-biased technological change leads to increases in skill premium.
      Acemoglu (2003) argues that tariff reductions lead to reduction in prices and hence increased
      imports of machinery, office equipment, and other capital goods that are complementary to
      skilled labor. Aghion, Burgess, Redding, and Zilibotti (2003) suggest that firms and sectors
      that are close to the technology frontier survive and thrive post-liberalization, but firms away
      from the technology frontier may be unable to fight external entry. These effects could lead to
      an overall increase in the skill premium, if the surviving domestic sector firms are close to the
      frontier and have higher skill-intensities.
          In Verhoogen (2004), exporting requires high quality, which requires high-skill intensity. Trade
      liberalization offers export opportunities and thus increases demand for skilled workers, which
      leads to an increase in wage inequality.
  28 An earlier study (Sivadasan, 2005) shows that the largest tariff drops in Indian manufacturing were indeed in labor/low-

skill intensive sectors. This somewhat anomalous protection of low-skill intensive sectors in developing countries has been
documented by others (Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2004).




                                                             13
      4      Data and Definition of Key Variables
      The primary data source for this study is the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), undertaken
      by the Central Statistical Organization (CSO), a department in the Ministry of Statistics and
      Programme Implementation, Government of India. The ASI covers all industrial units, called
      “factories”(equivalent to plants) registered under the Factories Act employing more than 10
      persons (if the plant used electricity) or 20 persons (for plants not using electricity).29 The
      ASI frame is classified into two sectors: the “census sector” and the “sample sector.” Factories
      employing more than 100 workers constitute the census sector. Roughly one-third of the units
      in the “sample sector” are enumerated every year (changed from a sampling rate of one-half
      in 1987-88). Since unit-level data on electronic media have only recently become available to
      researchers, the unit-level ASI data is only beginning to be exploited in empirical studies (e.g.,
      Sivadasan, 2005).
          Certain limitations of the ASI data have been highlighted in the literature. Pradhan and
      Saluja (1998) conclude that the ASI provides “fairly reliable data” on organized manufacturing
      activity, but “with a considerable time-lag.” Nagaraj (1999) highlights three other shortcomings
      of the ASI data: (1) incomplete coverage of factories, (2) underreporting of workers in factories
      covered, especially in small factories, and (3) underreporting of value added. He indicates that
      the underreporting may have increased over time. The questions we address are fortunately
      not significantly affected by these shortcomings in the data. The lag in reporting the data does
      not affect us as we are looking at historical data. The underreporting issues highlighted by
      Nagaraj do not bias our difference-in-differences estimates, under the reasonable assumption
      that the pattern of underreporting does not change differently across the liberalized versus the
      non-liberalized groups, or across one type of ownership group versus other types of ownership
      groups.
          In addition to the ASI, we use various other sources of data on the Indian economy. We
      obtain information on tax rates for corporations and individuals from various volumes of the
      Statistical Abstract published annually by the Central Statistical Organization and from the
      website of the Income Tax Department in Delhi.30 Information on the sectors liberalized for
      FDI was obtained from the Handbook of Industrial Policy and Statistics issued by the Office
      of the Economic Advisor, Ministry of Industry, Government of India. Data on tariff rates were
      obtained from the World Bank Trade and Production database. Other data sources used include
      the annual Economic Surveys published by the Ministry of Finance, the Income Tax Act for
      various years from the website of the Central Board of Direct Taxes31 and data from various
      government websites. Information on partnerships and other legal entities were obtained from
      various commentaries on the website www.laws4india.com, including chapter 3 of Ramani et al.
      (2004).
  29 Manufacturing activity undertaken in the informal sector (households (own-account) and unregistered workshops) are not

covered by the ASI. Like other low-income countries, India had a large fraction of employment in the informal sector. According
to estimates in Subrahmanya (2003), the employment share of the formal manufacturing sector was about 21.6 percent in 1989-
90. Figures from the Economic Census of 1991 suggest total employment in the manufacturing sector of about 30 million,
which implies a share of the formal sector of about 27.5% (based on total employment in the ASI sector of about 8.2 million
– see Table 2). Factories are analogous to plants, but are different from firms; multi-establishment firms would have multiple
plants/factories.
  30 http://incometaxdelhi.nic.in/taxsys/old.htm
  31 http://www.taxmann.com/TaxmannDit/DisplayPage/dpage1.aspx




                                                              14
          The ASI dataset and the data collected from other sources were collated and cross-indexed
       using different concordance tables. Indian data authorities use a National Industrial Classifica-
       tion (NIC) scheme that is close to the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC)
       scheme; we created a concordance between the NIC (1987 revision) and the ISIC (1997) by care-
       fully comparing definitions of specific codes. The wholesale price index data is collated using
       another product classification scheme, and this was cross-indexed to the NIC (1987) revision by
       comparing individual categories under both the classification schemes. Many variables in the
       ASI dataset had to be standardized for consistency across the years. A detailed data appendix
       describing the ASI dataset and the various steps undertaken to clean the data is available on
       request from the authors.
          We obtained unit-level ASI data for the nine-year period from 1986-87 to 1994-95 from the
       CSO. The data is reported on a financial year basis (e.g., the 1986-87 year refers to the period
       April 1, 1986 to March 31, 1987 – hereafter we refer to year 1986-87 as 1987 and so on.) There
       are about 50,000 plants in every year, yielding about 450,000 plant-year observations for the full
       dataset. For our analysis, we exclude extremely small plants (less than or equal to 5 employees),
       as the data on these plants appear to be noisy.32
          The definitions of key wage and employment variables are explained in Table 1. Key points to
       note are that we have three broad categories of employees reported: (1) blue-collar/production
       workers (blue), (2) paid white-collar workers (white paid), and (3) working proprietors and
       unpaid family members (prop). We define the white-collar wage rate as the total white-collar
       wage bill divided by the number of paid white-collar workers. The blue-collar wage rate is defined
       as total blue-collar wage bill divided by the number of blue-collar workers.
          To analyze the effect of the tax law changes of 1992, we examine four variables:
         1. “Fraction of non-salaried owners” is defined as “working proprietors and unpaid family
            members” (prop) divided by the total white-collar employment (white paid + prop);
         2. “Profits-to-sales ratio” are the profits before taxes (reported as “profits” in the dataset)
            divided by the “gross sales” (reported in the dataset);
         3. “Wage-bill-to-sales ratio” is defined as the ratio of the total wage bill to “gross sales”; and
         4. “White-collar wages-to-profits ratio” is defined as the ratio of the white collar wage bill to
            profits before taxes.
          The total wage bill is equal to the sum of the blue-collar wage bill (bwbill) and the white-
       collar wage bill (wwbill).33 We define two related measures of wage inequality: (1) the skill
       premium, which is defined as the ratio of blue-collar wage rate to white-collar wage rate, and (2)
       the white-collar share of the total wage bill.
          The dataset is based on a survey of plants, while tax laws apply at the firm level. Because
       there could be many firms that have multiple plants within them, this raises two measurement-
       related issues. The first issue is how profit is calculated at the plant level. Plant-level profits
  32 This set of small plants constitutes about 3.75 percent of the manufacturing sector plants, but represents only 0.06 percent
of total output, 0.19 percent of employment and about 0.91 percent of total capital. While the sampling frame for the survey is
the register of plants that employ more than 10 employees, the actual dataset includes many firms with less than 10 employees.
This arises because many plants get registered even if they employ less than 10 people, even though they are required to register
only if they exceed the 10-person limit. Also once the plant is registered, it would continue to be in the sampling frame even
after the employment levels dropped below the 10-person threshold.
  33 Refer to Table 1 for definitions of the wage bill variables bwbill and wwbill.




                                                               15
      in our dataset are calculated based on subtracting from reported gross sales the materials costs,
      total wage bill, interest expenses, total rent, and depreciation. This reported profit could be a
      noisy indicator of the firm-level taxable profits for two reasons. First, for multi-plant firms, profits
      at the firm level would be an aggregate of plant-level profits, and if the profitability of different
      plants are not perfectly correlated, regressions using plant-level data could yield different results
      from using plant-level data. Secondly, for both multi- and single-plant firms, profits reported here
      are based on accounting numbers for sales, material expenses, and depreciation that could differ
      from the firm-level taxable profits for various reasons (for example, depreciation rates under tax
      laws differing from those used under Indian accounting standards). We expect these measurement
      issues to be stable over time, and have no reason to expect the resulting measurement error to
      systematically upward bias our estimates of the tax law change.34
          The second issue with using plant-level data is whether the estimates of income shifting
      and measured wage inequality effects predicted at the firm level would be biased (upwards or
      downwards) when looking at plant-level data. Because the incentives to shift income from profits
      to wages should apply to all the establishments within the firm, we expect the shift to show up
      in the plant-level data too. Again, we do not expect measurement errors from aggregation and
      differences between tax and accounting data to systematically bias our results upward.35


      5 Empirical Evidence on Direct Effects of 1992 Tax Law
      Change
      Here we present results from examining the behavioral implications of the tax law change, on
      four variables: (1) unpaid owners as fraction of white-collar employment; (2) profits-to-sales
      ratio, (3) total wage-bill-to-sales ratio, and (4) the white-collar wage-bill-to-profits ratio.

      5.1      Trends
      In figure 1, we present trends in the ratio of unpaid owners to white-collar employment for
      different types of business forms. As predicted by the model, the ratio of unpaid owners to
      white-collar employees falls sharply for partnerships after 1992. Significantly, there are no such
      effects for other categories of firms. Also note that unpaid owners are a much larger fraction
      of white-collar employment in sole proprietorships and partnerships compared to other business
      forms, as may be expected due to their generally smaller size.
          Figure 2a shows the trends in the ratio of profits-to-sales for partnerships. The ratio of
      profits-to-sales goes down in 1993 for partnerships. In figure 2b, we find that the ratio of total
      wages-to-sales goes up for partnerships following the tax law change. In figure 3, we see that the
      ratio of white-collar wage-to-profits goes up significantly beginning in 1993.
          All of these results are consistent with our model’s predictions about the impact of the tax
      law change that allowed wage payments to partners to be deducted from the partnership firm’s
  34 In fact classical measurement error in the variables could bias our estimates downward. The problem of aggregation may

be less severe for partnership firms, as they are generally smaller and hence more likely to be single-plant firms.
  35 For multi-establishment firms where different establishments belong to different industries, the industry classification of

the headquarters firm may be imprecise. Parameters identified by looking at differences across industries could be biased by
this misclassification. We do not expect this measurement error to systematically bias our results, as our primary results are
based on differences within industries (i.e., we include industry-location fixed effects).




                                                              16
taxable income beginning in 1993, prompting partners to begin paying themselves wages. This
moves some amounts from profits to the white-collar wage bill in our data. This shifting of
income from profits to partners’ wage payments results in the changes observed in figures 1, 2a,
2b, and 3.
   Note that in all our figures we examine trends in medians rather than means because the
mean value of these variables are skewed; since all of them are ratios, true or measurement error
that causes denominators close to zero give rise to extreme outliers which severely skew the
mean.
   In the next section, we examine regression specifications that allow us to examine the size
and statistical significance of the effects observed in these figures controlling for different factors.

5.2     Regression Results
Table 4 presents the results of a series of multivariate regression analyses of the four indicators
of tax-induced income shifting. The specifications include various fixed effects, including year
effects, to control for possible omitted variables. All dependent variables are winsorized by 2
percent on both ends of the distribution, to prevent outliers from skewing the mean effects.
   In the first specification, we identify the effect of the tax law change, as the difference-in-
differences effect on partnerships of the tax change, captured as year dummies for 1993, 1994,
and 1995 (1987 is the omitted year in these specifications). Inclusion of year effects implies that
the coefficient on the interaction between the period dummy and the partnership dummy captures
the difference-in-differences effect of the reform on partnerships relative to all non-partnership
businesses. We include state-industry-size dummy variables to control for unchanging location-
industry-size effects.
   In the second specification for each of the four indicators, we control for common state-
industry-size-year shocks; thus, if the effects in the first regression are driven by peculiar shocks
in the post 1992 period to certain size categories (defined using size quartile dummy variables)
of firms and/or locations and/or industries, which are correlated with the partnership dummy
(for example, if partnerships are disproportionately concentrated in some location or industry
which receives some external shock, or if smaller sized firms received a certain type of shock),
this specification would control for those shocks.
   We find that, in both the specifications and for all four variables of interest, there is a large
and significant difference-in-differences effect of the Finance Act of 1992 on income shifting in
partnerships. We find a 10 to 14 percent decline in fraction of non-salaried owners among
partnerships immediately following the tax law change, relative other firms in the same state-
industry cell. Similarly, we find a 2.2 percent to 3.3 percent decline in the profits-to-sales ratio.
The wage-bill-to-sales ratio goes up in the post-tax change period (by about 2.5 percent to 2.9
percent), while the ratio of the white-collar wage-bill-to-profits goes up significantly, by between
31 percent and 47 percent, in the post-reform period. All these effects are significant at the 1
percent level. These regressions thus confirm the impression from the graphs that 1993 marks
a sharp divergence in behavior between partnerships and other businesses not affected by the
Finance Act of 1992.
   For the profits-to-sales and the wages-to-sales ratios, there is some upward trend in the



                                                  17
       variables prior to the reform period. The relative effects are the starkest for the fraction of un-
       salaried owners and for the ratio of white-collar wage-bill-to-profits. For the latter two variables,
       there are no economically or statistically significant changes in the years before the tax law
       change; in contrast there are large and statistically significant effects in the years after the tax
       law change. Because there are no large changes in the coefficients between specifications 1 and
       2, we can conclude that these estimates are not driven by state-industry time shocks coincident
       with the tax law change. Finally, note that the pattern of the estimated coefficients (especially
       for the two variables where the tax law effect is the strongest) suggests that the biggest change
       occurred in the year 1993 (the year the tax law change came into force); this suggests that there
       was relatively rapid learning about the implications of the law.36              37




       6     Empirical Analysis of Wage Inequality Measures
       6.1     Trends
       Because the tax change of 1992 followed closely on the heels of the liberalization initiatives of
       1991, the impact of the former on income shifting between profits and white-collar wages could
       affect the analysis and conclusions about the implications of the latter. To begin to address this
       issue, first look at figure 4, which presents trends in different percentiles of the distribution of
       the log wage inequality (skill premium) over the years, and figure 5, which presents different
       percentiles of the white-collar share of the wage bill. Both figures are for the full sample of firms
       in the dataset. As is evident from the graphs, both the skill premium and the white-collar share
       of the wage bill show a significant increase (across different percentiles), but the sharp increase
       begins in the year 1993 (which corresponds to fiscal year 1992-93), the first year for which the
       new tax provisions became effective.
           In figures 6 and 7, we examine the trends in the mean of the two wage inequality measures
       for different business forms. It is evident that there was a big increase in the mean log skill
       premium for partnerships beginning in 1993. Strikingly, the magnitude of this jump is much
       higher than the changes experienced by any other type of business. (There is some increase in
       skill premium for public-limited companies, but the magnitude is much smaller than the jump
       for partnerships.) Similarly, in figure 6, we find a jump starting in 1993 in the white-collar share
       of wages, which is again much more striking for partnerships.
  36 We also ran this analysis separately for rural and urban firms to test whether urban firms which may have better access to

tax specialists/accountants were quicker in responding to the law change. The results suggest a slightly faster response rate in
urban locations (the coefficients in the urban-only regression are somewhat bigger than that for the full sample). Regarding the
fraction of non-salaried owners, the response of urban partnerships was quicker and larger than rural partnerships; similarly,
the effects are stronger for urban partnerships with regard to the white-collar wage-bill-to-profits ratio. The differences are
not stark for the other two variables (profits-to-sales and wages-to-sales ratio). We conclude that learning about the tax law
change was quite rapid in both urban and rural locations.
  37 It may be possible that some establishments that paid above-average skill premia switched from the informal sector to

“registered partnerships” status in the formal sector around the time of the tax law change, driven by other macro-economic
changes in the economy. To test this, we also ran the analysis separately for old and young firms, where “old” is defined as
establishments that were at least 10-years old, thus restricting the sample to establishments that entered well before the tax law
change was introduced. We find some evidence of a slightly larger response by older partnerships with respect to the fraction of
unpaid owners and the white-collar wage-to-profit ratio. The differences are less striking for the other two variables of interest,
with weak evidence for a slightly faster and larger response by older partnerships. These tests show that the effects for the
full sample were not driven by differential responses from establishments that entered (or exited) after the tax law change was
introduced. This conclusion is supported by an analysis using a balanced panel data sub-sample, where we found significant
responses to the tax law change by already existing partnership firms. Also, as discussed earlier, we find no significant change
in the distribution of ownership forms. (There is a downward trend over the whole period in the fraction of firms that are
partnerships, but no change in this trend around the time of the tax reform.)


                                                                18
          These figures are consistent with the model predictions (assuming that the partnerships trans-
      ferred surplus per partner greater than then pre-1993 average white-collar wage). Taken together
      with the results in Section 5 above, these graphs suggest that partnerships shifted income from
      profits to wages, and that this change had a significant effect on the observed overall average
      trends in skill premium.
          Note that the overall mean for the population is heavily affected by the changes for part-
      nerships. Since partnerships constitute 50 percent of the total number of firms (see Table 2),
      the overall population mean is impacted equivalent to half the magnitude of the mean effect on
      partnerships. From Table 2, we can see that the impact of partnerships would be somewhat
      reduced (but would still be significant) if we look at employment-weighted aggregate means of
      skill premiums and white-collar wage bill shares.

      6.2        Regression Results: Baseline Specifications
      Next, we investigate this issue more closely by performing a series of regression analyses of the
      observed trends in log skill premium and skill intensity (white-collar share of wages). We regress
      these measures on time dummies, controlling for state-industry-size fixed effects (i.e., we define
      cells by state, industry, and size, and include dummies to capture fixed effects for each cell). We
      also include interactions of the time dummies with a dummy for partnerships.
          The results are presented in Table 5a. In columns 1 and 3 the independent variables are year
      dummies; the omitted year is 1987. In columns 2 and 4, we summarize the trends using period
      dummies – period 0 (which is omitted in the regressions) refers to years 1987, 1988, 1989, and
      1990; period 1 refers to the transition period of 1991 and 1992, and period 2 refers to the period
      after the tax law change (1993, 1994, and 1995).
          In columns 1, 2, 3 and 4, we examine the log skill premium (ratio of white-collar to blue-collar
      wage rates). We find that almost all of the observed increase in the mean log skill premium can
      be attributed to changes made by partnerships. All the year coefficients after the 1992 tax law
      change (1993, 1994, and 1995 year dummies) lose statistical and economic significance, once we
      control for changes made by partnerships. The year effects are summarized in the regressions
      with period dummies (column 2 and 4). We see that there was approximately a 7.6 percent
      increase in the skill premium38 in the period after the tax law change. However, once we control
      for actions taken by partnerships, this effect completely disappears. Thus all of the post tax-
      change increase in wage inequality could be attributed to changes made by partnerships. We
      argue that for partnerships, these changes reflect the tax-induced income shifting rather than
      liberalization-induced real effects in skill premia.
          In columns 5, 6, 7, and 8, we examine the white-collar share of labor (scaled by 100, so it is
      expressed in percentage terms). We find that there is an increase in the mean white-collar share
      of wages of about 4.6 percentage points (coefficient on dummy for period 2) following the tax
      law change (from about 26.7 percent in the pre-1991 period to about 31.3 percent). We find that
      the coefficient on period 2 drops to 1.08 percent after we control for changes in partnerships;
      thus about 77 percent of the increase (3.55 percent out of 4.63 percent) in the mean white-collar
 38 Expressing changes in logged skill premium as percentage changes. This is only approximate, and is more exact for small
log point changes; the actual percentage change would be larger when the log point changes are large.




                                                            19
       share of wages can be attributed to changes made by partnerships, which reflect income shifting
       due to the 1992 tax law change.
          The results of regressing the log skill premium and the white- collar share of wages on year
       dummies are summarized in figures 7 and 8 respectively. As can be seen in the figure, the big
       jump in the mean skill premium and white-collar share of wages in 1993 disappears when we
       control for the 1992 tax change (by conditioning out the actions of partnerships). Thus the big
       jump in 1993 appears driven by the tax law change.

       6.3 Regression Results: Robustness to Trade Liberalization-related
       Causes
       Because the jump in skill premium and white-collar share of labor is observed some months
       after major reforms to trade and investment regulations were announced in July 1991, we should
       consider a number of plausible alternative explanations for the observed trends, based on the
       various theoretical explanations proposed for increases in skill premium following trade liberal-
       ization discussed in Section 3.2.
          In Section 6.2, to identify the effects of the tax change, we attributed the behavior of partner-
       ships (relative to other types of corporate entities) as being driven by the tax law change that
       affected only partnership firms. This difference-in-differences strategy controls for the pervasive
       effect of the number of different reforms introduced in 1991. To the extent that the market for
       skilled labor is common across different types of firms within and/or across industries, common
       year effects would control for the effect of trade liberalization related causes of increases in skill
       premium.
          However, the difference-in-differences identifying strategy could fail, if it was the case that
       some other change was driving the behavior of a certain groups of firms (say in certain industries)
       and partnerships happened to be concentrated among those firms (or those industries). For
       example, the market for skilled labor may be segmented, so that the various trade-related causes
       of increased demand for skilled labor affects certain industries more than others, and partnerships
       may be disproportionately concentrated in some of the most affected industries. To control for
       this, in Tables 5b and 5c, we include additional controls for dynamic effects on specific industries
       and/or firms.
          The first alternative story we examine is the reduction in tariff rates.39 As discussed in
       Section 3.2, Stolper-Samuelson effects could drive the skill premium and share of white-collar
       wages up in tariff liberalized industries. There was a significant reduction in tariff rates in India
       in 1991. So in column 3 of Table 5a and 5b, we include a variable that measures the drop in
       tariff between 1990 and 1992 at the 3-digit industry level (“Tariff drop (1990-92)”), as well as
       this variable interacted with period dummies. If the skill premium increased in the post-1991
       period in industries where tariffs were reduced, then this tariff drop variable interacted with the
       post-1992 period dummy would pick up the effect (and the coefficient on the post-1992 dummy
       would fall).
          Next, we consider the trade orientation of the industry. We use two measures – export ori-
  39 As mentioned above, each of these alternative controls are required only if the markets for skilled labor are segmented, so

that increases in skill premia are concentrated in certain industries. Dissipated effects are captured by the year effects in Table
5a.



                                                                20
       entation, measured as the mean ratio of exports to output by industry for the pre-1991 period
       (“Exports to output ratio (pre-91)”); and import orientation, measured as the mean ratio of
       imports to output by industry for the pre-1991 period (“Imports to output ratio (pre-91)”). If
       the Thoenig-Verdier (2003) or Wood (1995) type argument is true, we could expect the largest
       increases in skill premium to be concentrated among import-competing industries. If the Ver-
       hoogen (2004) explanation is true, we would expect the largest increases in skill premia in the
       export-oriented sectors. Third, we consider liberalization of FDI, measured as a dummy vari-
       able equal to one for industries that were opened to majority foreign direct investment in 1991
       (“FDI deregulation dummy”). If the Feenstra-Hansen (1997, 2003) argument holds, we could
       expect the strongest effect in the industries for which FDI was liberalized. Fourth, we include
       a control for the capital intensity – the log of the ratio of real capital to real value added for
       each establishment (“Capital-output ratio”). If trade liberalization increases demand for capital
       and if skill is complementary to capital, we should see increases in the skill-premium and white
       collar share of wages driven by capital deepening. Finally, to address the explanation offered
       by Aghion et al. (2003), we include distance to the frontier, measured as the ratio of maximum
       (over all 4-digit industries) industry mean log total factor productivity to the industry mean
       total factor productivity (“Distance to frontier”).
           Our results in Table 5b show that none of the trade-related explanations reduce the signifi-
       cance of the effect of partnerships on log skill premium. Distance to the frontier is weakly sig-
       nificant by itself, but loses significance when all other controls including the partnership dummy
       are included.40 The inclusion of all the other controls has very little effect on the partnership
       dummy, and explains very little of the post-1992 jump in log skill premium. Similar results are
       obtained for the white-collar share of wages in Table 5b. The one exception is that the capital
       output ratio appears to be important, both by itself (column 7) and with other controls (column
       9). Also, the combined regression (column 9) explains about half of the remaining increase in
       white-collar share of wages in the post-1992 period (1.083 percent drops to 0.53 percent). This
       suggests that, consistent with arguments made by Cragg and Epelbaum (1996) and Behrman,
       Birdsall, and Szekely (2000), increases in capital intensity (as well as the increased skill premium
       for capital intensive firms), play a significant role in explaining the patterns in the white-collar
       share of wages. Again, distance to the frontier is significant by itself, but drops in significance
       once other controls are included. The coefficient on partnership dummy drops very slightly in
       the combined regression (column 9).
           Overall we interpret our results as strong evidence that the observed increase in the measured
       log skill premium and the white-collar share of wages were driven primarily by the income shifting
       behavior of partnerships following the tax changes of 1992, even controlling for the effects of
       trade liberalization, trade orientation interacted with liberalization (through period dummies),
       FDI liberalization, capital deepening, and distance to the frontier.


       7     Conclusions
       In 1992, India changed its income tax law in a way that provided partnerships incentives to shift
       income from profits to wages. We find in the data that there was a strong response to these
40   This would be consistent with partnership firms being concentrated in industries further from the frontier, as defined here.


                                                               21
       incentives. The fraction of non-salaried owners, profits-to-sales ratio, the wage-to-sales ratio,
       and the white-collar wage-to-profits ratio, all change as predicted by economic theory. Crucially,
       because the tax law change affected only partnerships, we are able to identify the effects of
       the tax law change by comparing outcomes for partnerships relative to other business entities.
       The data allow us to control for a variety of fixed effects, and also for industry-size-location
       specific time-varying shocks that could affect the variables of interest.41 Our results show that
       firms respond strongly to tax incentives for income shifting in a developing country context,
       suggesting that tax policy interventions can be effective in modifying firm behavior.
          The income shifting behavior has important implications for some widely-used measures of
       wage inequality. This is especially important because the tax law change followed by just one
       year a major trade and market liberalization that might by itself have caused shifts in the skill
       premium, and thus wage inequality. We find that, without controlling for the tax law change,
       there is an increase in the mean skill premium of about 7.3 percentage points (significant at the
       1 percent level) in the post-1992 period compared to the pre-1991 period. Similarly, there is an
       increase in the mean white-collar share of the wage bill of 4.6 percentage points (significant at
       the 1 percent level). However, once we condition out the effect of the taxes (by conditioning
       out responses by partnership firms), we find only a 0.8 percent point increase in the log skill
       premium, and a 1.1 percent increase in the white-collar share of the wage bill. Our analysis thus
       suggests that the major Indian trade and market liberalization measures announced in 1991 did
       not have a large effect on wage inequality in the Indian manufacturing sector, at least in the four
       years following the liberalization.
          One should exercise caution in applying these findings to the important question of how the
       market reforms affected overall income inequality and poverty in India. First, our study focuses
       on the wage inequality and skill premium in the registered manufacturing sector only. We are
       hesitant about generalizing these results to the entire economy, as the registered manufacturing
       sector comprises a small part of the total economically active population.42 Also, note that
       increasing wage inequality is not the same as increasing poverty; for example, an increase in the
       wage rate for skilled labor could increase inequality without increasing poverty.43 Given the large
       population of extremely poor people and the importance of poverty reduction as a policy goal,
  41 In our model and analysis, we examine the incentives for avoiding taxes by shifting of income from profits to wages provided

by the 1992 tax law change. In addition to the legitimate shifting of income from profits to wages, some firms may try to evade
entity-level taxes by underreporting sales. Our checks indicate that there was no significant change in log gross sales around
the time of the 1992 tax reform for partnership firms relative to other firms within the same industry-state cells. (There is a
downward trend in the mean log gross sales for partnership firms but, unlike for the income shifting related variables, there is
no change in this trend around 1992-93.) Other ways to evade taxes may be to report additional employees, or reduce value
added by inflating material costs. We found no significant change for partnerships in either total employment or log value
added. Thus we do not find evidence for illegal tax evasion responses at the time of the tax change we are studying.
  42 Figures from the ILO (http://laborsta.ilo.org/) indicate a total economically active population (age 15 years and above) of

about 302 million in 1991. Our dataset covers about 8 million employees (see Table 2). The small proportion is not surprising
considering the large share of agriculture (about 65%, according to ILO figures) and the large share of informal manufacturing
(about 72 to 78% of employment in the manufacturing sector – see footnote 29).
  43 Banerjee and Piketty (2005) examine inequality by looking at the share of total taxable income received by the top 1

percent of the taxpayers and find an increase in such inequality in the 1990s. They find a larger growth in wage compared
to non-wage income during the 1990s. Using their data, we find a temporary increase in ratio of wage to non-wage income
around the time of the tax law change. While these results are not inconsistent with our findings, closer comparisons are
difficult given the differing nature of the two data sources. Trends in wage and overall inequality could diverge if there is rapid
growth in non-wage income due to outside factors (such as the rapid economic growth in the 1990s). In addition, trends in
the distribution of sources of taxable income could be affected by changes in the quality of tax enforcement technology for
non-wage income relative to wage income (as discussed in Banerjee and Piketty, 2005, a number of innovations in tax collection
were introduced in the 1990s).




                                                                22
      an extensive literature has examined whether poverty reduction has accelerated or decelerated
      after the reforms introduced in the early 1990s. This literature is intensely divided, with “no
      consensus on what happened to Indian poverty in the 1990s” (Deaton and Kozel, 2005). Since
      most of these studies are based on household expenditure surveys, they are unlikely to be affected
      by the measurement bias induced by tax-driven income-shifting observed in our manufacturing
      plants survey dataset.
          Our findings provide evidence for rapid and large responses by business entities and their
      principals to income shifting incentives provided by tax law changes, and is one of the first to
      provide systematic evidence of this in a developing country context. As suggested by Slemrod
      (1990), income shifting is particularly responsive to tax incentives. While this paper documents
      an episode of substantial income shifting, it also demonstrates the danger of drawing welfare
      conclusions based on estimated elasticities of a narrowly defined tax base with respect to the tax
      rate applied to that base. In this case, the elasticity of reported wages to the tax rate on wage
      income overstates the efficiency cost, per dollar raised, of taxing wage income, because some of
      the response represents a shift to (taxed) partnership income. Slemrod (1998) elaborates on this
      issue.
          The results discussed here also suggest that tax law changes could have important conse-
      quences for studies of wage inequality that rely on data that could be polluted by tax-induced
      income-shifting behavior, as have a number of studies of wage inequality that have used manu-
      facturing sector survey datasets similar to ours. As demonstrated in our study, income shifting
      from profits to wages (or vice versa) could significantly bias measured wage inequality in these
      types of datasets.44
          Finally, our study provides a cautionary tale with regard to event studies that use a before-
      and-after approach to identify the effect of government policy changes or other events. For
      example, a number of studies, especially the early studies of trade liberalization, used the before-
      and-after approach to identify the effects of liberalization on productivity and wage inequality.45
      Other tax or regulatory changes coincident with the event being studied could significantly affect
      an accurate interpretation of the investigation, unless strategies are adopted to control for these
      other changes.


      References
      [1] Acemoglu, Daron. 2003. “Patterns of Skill Premia.” Review of Economic Studies 70 (2):
         199-230.
      [2] Acharya, Shankar. 2002. ”India: Crisis, Reforms and Growth in the Nineties.” Stanford
         University Working Paper No. 139. Stanford: Center for Research on Economic Development
         and Policy Reform.
  44 Note that studies of income inequality that use data on total income may be less susceptible to biases due to income

shifting induced by tax law changes. However, even income inequality studies using individual household survey data could be
biased due to misreporting for two reasons. First, different sources of income, such as wages versus partnership income, may
be reported with different degrees of reliability. Second, in our context, anecdotal evidence and tax notifications suggest that
profits accruing to individual partners were not being reported to tax authorities; it is thus likely that this income would not
be reported in household surveys, either.
  45 See the reviews by Tybout (2001) or Epifani (2003). More recent work on trade liberalization using difference-in-differences

approaches may be less prone to this problem.




                                                               23
[3] Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2003. “The Un-
   equal Effects of Liberalization: Theory and Evidence from India.” Mimeo. London School of
   Economics, London.
[4] Banerjee, Abhijit, and Thomas Piketty. 2005. “Top Indian Incomes, 1922-2000.” The Word
   Bank Economic Review 19 (1): 1-20.
[5] Behrman, Jere, Nancy Birdsall, and Miguel Szekely. 2000. “Economic Reform and Wage
   Differentials in Latin America.” IADB Working Paper No. 435. Washington, D.C.: Inter-
   American Development Bank.
[6] Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act No. 45. 1988. Enacted by Par-
   liament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India (accessed at
   http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/Benamiact/benami.htm February 2006).
[7] Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled
   Labor within U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers.” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 367-97.
[8] Cragg, Michael I., and Mario Epelbaum. 1996. “Why Has Wage Dispersion Grown in Mexico?
   Is It the Incidence of Reforms or the Growing Demand for Skills?” Journal of Development
   Economics 51 (1): 99-116.
[9] Deaton, Angus, and Valerie Kozel. 2005. “Data and Dogma: The Great Indian Poverty
   Debate.” Princeton University Working Paper. Princeton: Research Program in Development
   Studies.
[10] DeLong, J. Bradford. 2001. “India Since Independence: An Analytic Growth Narrative.”
   University of California Working Paper. Berkeley: University of California.
[11] Epifani, Paulo. 2003. “Trade Liberalization, Firm Performance and Labor Market Outcomes
   in the Developing World: What Can We Learn from Micro-Level Data?” University of Parma
   and CSPRI-Bocconi University Working Paper. Parma: University of Parma and Bocconi:
   CSPRI-Bocconi University.
[12] Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon Hanson. 1996. “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and
   Relative Wages.” In Political Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati,
   edited by Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A. Irwin, 89-127. Cambridge,
   MA: MIT Press.
[13] Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon Hanson. 1997. “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative
   Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras.” Journal of International Economics 42 (3-4):
   371-93.
[14] Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon Hanson. 2003. “Global Production Sharing and Rising
   Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages.” In Handbook of International Trade, edited by E.
   Kwan Choi and James Harrigan, 146-85. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
[15] Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, and Nina Pavcnik. 2004. “Trade, Inequality, and Poverty:
   What Do We Know? Evidence from Recent Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing
   Countries.” NBER Working Paper No. 10593. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
   Research (accessed at http://www.nber.org/papers/w10593).
[16] Gordon, Roger H., and Joel Slemrod. 2000. “Are ’Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply Income
   Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?” In Does Atlas Shrug?..The Economic
   Consequences of Taxing the Rich, edited by Joel Slemrod. New York: Russell Sage Foundation
   and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[17] Hanson, Gordon H., and Anne Harrison. 1999. “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality
   in Mexico.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52 (2): 271-88.


                                             24
[18] Income Tax Act, 1961 (as amended by the Finance Act 1992 accessed at
   http://www.taxmann.com/TaxmannDit/DisplayPage/dpage1.aspx ).
[19] Kremer, Michael, and Eric Maskin. 2003. “Globalization and Inequality.” Harvard University
   Working Paper. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
[20] MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey, and Roger Gordon. 1997. “How Much Do Taxes Discourage Incor-
   poration?” Journal of Finance 52 (2): 477-505.
[21] Nagaraj, R. 1999. “How Good Are India’s Industrial Statistics? An Exploratory Note.”
   Economic and Political Weekly 34 (6): February 6-12.
[22] Pavcnik, Nina. 2003. “What Explains Skill Upgrading in Less Developed Countries?” Jour-
   nal of Development Economics 71 (2): 311-28.
[23] Pradhan, Basanta K., and M. R. Saluja. 1998. “Industrial Statistics in India: Sources,
   Limitations and Data Gaps.” Economic and Political Weekly 33 (21): May 23-29.
[24] Ramani,    K. K.,      N. C. Jain,       Sunil K. Ramani,              K. R. Lakshmi-
   narayanan, and Pritesh Mehta. 2004. Doing Business in                   India (accessed at
   http://www.laws4india.com/nrilaws/dbi/dbi homepage.asp).
[25] Revenga, Ana. 1997. “Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The Case of
   Mexican Manufacturing.” Journal of Labor Economics 15 (3): S20-S43.
[26] Sivadasan, Jagadeesh. 2005. “Productivity Consequences of Foreign Direct Investment and
   Trade Liberalization: Micro-evidence from Indian Manufacturing Sector Reforms.” Working
   Paper. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.
[27] Slemrod, Joel. 1990. “The Economic Impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.” In Do Taxes
   Matter? The Impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 edited by Joel Slemrod. Cambridge, MA
   MIT Press.
[28] Slemrod, Joel. 1998. “Methodological issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income
   Elastcities.” National Tax Journal, December, 51(4), pp. 773-788.
[29] Subrahmanya, M. H. Bala. 2003. “Unorganized Manufacturing Industry in India: Its Chang-
   ing Role and Declining Significance during Industrial Liberalization.” Indian Institute of Sci-
   ence Working Paper. Bangalore: Department of Management Studies.
[30] Tax Reform Committee. 1991. Interim Report. New Delhi: Government of India, Ministry
   of Finance (Department of Revenue).
[31] Thoenig, Matthias and Thierry Verdier. 2003. “A Theory of Defensive Skill-based Innovation
   and Globalization.” American Economic Review 93 (3): 709-2
[32] Tybout, James R. 2001. “Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on ‘New’ Trade Theories.” Penn-
   sylvania State University Working Paper. University Park: Pennsylvania State University.
[33] Verhoogen, Eric. 2004. “Trade, Quality upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Man-
   ufacturing Sector: Theory and Evidence from an Exchange-Rate Shock.” Mimeo, University
   of California, Berkeley.
[34] Wood, Adrian. 1995. “How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
   tives 9 (3): 57-80.




                                               25
      Appendix 1: Restrictions on deductible remuneration to partners in the Finance
                                                     Act, 199246



    The amount of remuneration paid to “working partners” that is deductible while calculating the
    partnership firm’s taxable profits is limited to:


      (a) on the first Rs. 75,000 of the book-profit, or in           Rs. 50,000 or at the rate of 90 percent
      case of a loss                                                  of the book-profit, whichever is more;

      (b) on the next Rs. 75,000 of the book-profit                   at the rate of 60 percent;

      (c) on the balance of the book-profit                           at the rate of 40 percent




46 Extract   from Section 40(b) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, after amendments introduced by the Finance Act, 1992.


                                                           26
Table 1: Definition of employment and wage variables (traced to primary variables in the data)
(See data appendix for definitions of other variables.)
Variable            Label                                          Definition                      Source

Employment variables
totwrkrs      Workers (nos.)                                       Equivalent to blue-collar/      In data
                                                                   production workers
totemp              All employees (nos.)                           =totwrkrs + supervisory and     In data
                                                                   managerial staff + other
                                                                   employees
totpersons          Total persons engaged                          =totemp + working proprietors   In data
                                                                   + unpaid family members
blue                Number of blue-collar workers                  =totwrks                        Defined
white               Number of white-collar workers                 =totpers - totwrkr              Defined
prop                Number of proprietors & family                 =totpers – totemp               Defined
                    members
white_paid          Paid white-collar employees                    =white – prop1                  Defined


Wage variables
wages          Wages to workers                                    =wages to blue-collar workers   In data
salaries       Salaries to employees                               =wages to blue-collar plus      In data
                                                                   wages to white-collar
bwage               Blue-collar wages                              =wages                          Defined
wwage               White-collar wages                             =salaries-wages                 Defined
bonuswrkrs          Bonus paid to workers                          =bonus to blue                  In data
bonusemp            Bonus to employees                             =bonus to blue + white          In data
bbon                Blue-collar bonus                              =bonuswrkrs                     Defined
wbon                White-collar bonus                             =bonusemp-bonuswrkrs            Defined
wemol               White-collar emol. (wages + bonuses)           =wwage+wbon                     Defined
bemol               Blue-collar emol. (wages + bonuses)            =bwage+bbon                     Defined
totben              Total value of benefits to all empl.           =contribution to PF + welfare   In data2
                                                                   expenses
wben                White-collar benefits                          =totben*wemol/(wemol+bemol)     Defined
bben                Blue-collar benefits                           =totben*bemol/(wemol+bemol)     Defined
bwbill              Total blue-collar wage bill                    =wemol + wben                   Defined
wwbill              Total white-collar wage bill                   =bemol + bben                   Defined

Wage rates, skill premium, and white-collar share of wage bill
bwrate            Blue-collar wage rate                 =bwbill/blue                               Defined
wwrate            White-collar wage rate                =wwbill/white_paid                         Defined
skprem            Skill premium                         =wwrate/bwrate                             Defined
wshare            White-collar share of wage bill       = wwbill/(wwbill+bwbill)                   Defined3
log_skpr          Log (skill premium)                   =log(skprem)                               Defined
log_wsh           Log(white-collar share of wage bill)  =log(wshare)                               Defined
    1.   Assuming proprietors and family do not get paid any remuneration.
    2.   Subcomponents aggregated for 1987 and 1988.
    3.   Winsorized by 0.5 percent on both sides of the distribution to control for outliers.
Table 2: Different types of business entities in the Indian manufacturing sector for a single
cross-section (year 1991, adjusted for sampling weights)

                                         Number of       Fraction      Total            Fraction
 Corporate Type                           Plants        (number)     Employment      (Employment)

 Partnership: Joint family                      6,962         7.6%         202,429               2.5%
 Partnership: Other                            39,016        42.4%       1,383,364              16.8%
 Partnerships: Total                           45,978        50.0%       1,585,793              19.3%

 Private-limited company                       16,035        17.4%       1,099,042              13.4%
 Public-limited company                         7,678         8.4%       3,091,401              37.6%
 Companies: Total                              23,713        25.8%       4,190,443              50.9%

 Individual proprietorship                     16,027        17.4%         404,726              4.9%

 Others                                         6,204         6.7%       2,044,163              24.9%

 Total                                         91,922       100.0%       8,225,124          100.0%
Table 3: Tax rates for different entities (1986-87 to 1994-95)
Source: Income tax Web sites, Statistical Abstract of India (various years)
                                      1986-   1987-    1988-    1989-    1990-   1991-   1992-   1993-    1994-
                                         87      88       89       90       91      92      93      94       95
 Individuals
      0 to 18,000                       0%       0%      0%       0%       0%      0%      0%      0%       0%
      18 to 22,000                     25%      25%     25%      20%       0%      0%      0%      0%       0%
      22 to 25,000                     25%      25%     25%      20%      20%     20%      0%      0%       0%
      25 to 28,000                     30%      30%     30%      30%      20%     20%      0%      0%       0%
      28 to 30,000                     30%      30%     30%      30%      20%     20%     20%      0%       0%
      30 to 35,000                     30%      30%     30%      30%      30%     30%     20%     20%       0%
      35 to 40,000                     30%      30%     30%      30%      30%     30%     20%     20%       0%
      40 to 50,000                     30%      30%     30%      30%      30%     30%     20%     20%      20%
      50 to 60,000                     40%      40%     40%      40%      40%     40%     30%     30%      20%
      60 to 100,000                    40%      40%     40%      40%      40%     40%     30%     30%      30%
      100 to 120,000                   50%      50%     50%      50%      50%     50%     40%     40%      30%
      120 to 150,000                   50%      50%     50%      50%      50%     50%     40%     40%      40%
      >150,000                         50%      50%     50%      50%      50%     50%     40%     40%      40%

 Partnership firms
      0 to 10,000                       0%       0%      0%       0%       0%      0%     40%     40%      40%
      10 to 15,000                      5%       5%      5%       5%       0%      0%     40%     40%      40%
      15 to 25,000                      5%       5%      5%       5%       6%      6%     40%     40%      40%
      25 to 50,000                      7%       7%      7%       7%       6%      6%     40%     40%      40%
      50 to 100,000                    15%      15%     15%      15%      12%     12%     40%     40%      40%
      >100,000                         24%      24%     24%      24%      18%     18%     40%     40%      40%

 Public-ltd cos (domestic)             50%      50%     50%      50%      40%     45%     45%     45%      40%
 Private-ltd cos (domestic)            55%      55%     55%      55%      45%     50%     50%     50%      40%

 Cooperatives
     0 to 10,000                       15%      15%     15%      15%      10%     10%     10%     10%      10%
     10 to 20,000                      25%      25%     25%      25%      20%     20%     20%     20%      20%
     >20,000                           40%      40%     40%      40%      35%     35%     35%     35%      35%
 Union surcharge on income tax:
 Partnership firms:
   
  For the year 1989-90: 8 percent of income tax if total income exceeds Rs.50,000/-.
  For the year 1991-92: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs.75,000/-.
     For the years 1992-93 and 1993-94: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
 Individuals (residents only)
   
  For the year 1989-90 : 8 percent of income tax if total income exceeds Rs.50,000/-
  For the years 1990-91 and 1991-92: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs.75,000/-
  For the years 1992-93 and 1993-94: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs.1,00,000/-
     For the year 1994-95: Nil
 Domestic companies:
   
  For the year 1989-90: 8 percent of income tax, if total income exceeds Rs50,000/-
     For the years 1990-91 to 1994-95: 15 percent of income tax, if total income exceeds Rs75,000/-
 Coops:
   
  For the year 1989-90: 8 percent of income tax if total income exceeds Rs.50,000/-
  For the years 1990-91 and 1991-92: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs.75,000/-
  For the years 1992-93 and 1993-94: 12 percent of income tax if taxable income exceeds Rs.1,00,000/-
     For the year 1994-95: Nil
                                                               Mean fraction of non-salaried owners                                                                Median profits-to-sales ratio: Partnerships




                                                                                                                                           0.04
 0.50
 0.40




                                                                                                                                           0.03
 0.30




                                                                                                                                           0.03
 0.20
 0.10




                                                                                                                                           0.02
 0.00




                                               1987   1988     1989        1990           1991   1992         1993         1994     1995




                                                                                                                                           0.01
                                                             Individual proprietorships                 Partnership: joint family                 1987     1988      1989       1990         1991    1992      1993         1994    1995

                                                             Partnership: other                         Public limited companies
                                                             Private limited companies                  Others                                                         Partnership: joint family            Partnership: other



Figure 1: Proprietors and unpaid family members as a fraction of                                                                            Figure 2a: Median profits-to-sales ratio for partnership firms
total white-collar employment

                                                         Median total wage-bill-to-sales ratio: Partnerships                                               Median white-collar wage-bill-to-profits ratio: Partnerships
0.07 0.07 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.08 0.09 0.09




                                                                                                                                             0.45
                                                                                                                                             0.40
                                                                                                                                             0.35
                                                                                                                                             0.30
                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                                                             0.10




                                               1987   1988    1989         1990           1991   1992         1993         1994     1995            1987    1988     1989        1990         1991   1992        1993        1994   1995


                                                                 Partnership: joint family                Partnership: other                                            Partnership: joint family            Partnership: other



Figure 2b: Median total wage-bill-to-sales ratio for partnership                                                                            Figure 3: Median white-collar wage-bill-to-profits ratio for
firms                                                                                                                                       partnership firms
Table 4: Direct effect of the tax law change: Baseline regressions on full sample
All dependent variables are winsorized by 2 percent on both ends of the distribution. D_partnership is a dummy equal to one for partnership firms. Standard errors are
clustered at industry level. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                            Fraction of Non-Salaried          Profits-to-Sales Ratio         Wage-Bill-to-Sales         White-Collar Wage-
                                                    Owners                                                        Ratio                 Bill-to-Profits Ratio
                                                     (1)           (2)                (1)            (2)         (1)          (2)              (1)          (2)

D_partnership                                       0.155            0.148          0.054         0.054          -0.039       -0.04         -0.057        -0.019
                                                [0.008]**        [0.008]**     [0.004]**      [0.005]**      [0.004]**    [0.005]**       [0.022]*       [0.025]
(Year=1988)*D_partnership                          -0.002            0.003         -0.001        -0.002               0      -0.002          0.034          0.03
                                                  [0.004]          [0.005]        [0.005]       [0.006]         [0.004]     [0.005]        [0.035]       [0.039]
(Year=1989)*D_partnership                           0.001           -0.003         -0.006        -0.007               0       0.001          0.045         0.036
                                                  [0.005]          [0.005]        [0.006]       [0.006]         [0.005]     [0.006]        [0.032]       [0.042]
(Year=1990)*D_partnership                               0            0.002         -0.013         -0.01           0.005       0.005         -0.017        -0.035
                                                  [0.004]          [0.005]       [0.006]*       [0.006]         [0.005]     [0.006]        [0.031]       [0.038]
(Year=1991)*D_partnership                           0.006            0.007         -0.008        -0.007           0.009        0.01         -0.001        -0.019
                                                  [0.005]          [0.006]      [0.005]+        [0.006]       [0.005]+      [0.007]        [0.030]       [0.041]
(Year=1992)*D_partnership                           0.004            0.008         -0.012        -0.012           0.014        0.02         -0.001        -0.027
                                                  [0.004]          [0.005]       [0.005]*      [0.006]*      [0.004]**    [0.006]**        [0.031]       [0.035]
(Year=1993)*D_partnership                          -0.109           -0.095         -0.022        -0.023           0.025       0.028           0.38         0.311
                                                [0.010]**        [0.008]**     [0.007]**      [0.007]**      [0.005]**    [0.007]**      [0.040]**     [0.044]**
(Year=1994)*D_partnership                          -0.143           -0.119         -0.033        -0.032           0.023       0.021           0.47         0.400
                                                [0.008]**        [0.008]**     [0.005]**      [0.006]**      [0.004]**    [0.005]**      [0.040]**     [0.046]**
(Year=1995)*D_partnership                          -0.155           -0.131         -0.032        -0.035           0.029       0.030          0.465         0.381
                                                [0.008]**        [0.008]**     [0.006]**      [0.006]**      [0.005]**    [0.005]**      [0.039]**     [0.042]**
Constant                                            0.228            0.219         -0.045        -0.033           0.198       0.189           0.41         0.501
                                                [0.004]**        [0.004]**     [0.004]**      [0.002]**      [0.003]**    [0.002]**      [0.021]**     [0.007]**

Year effects                                         Yes              No             Yes            No            Yes           No             Yes           No
State-ind-size effects                               Yes              No             Yes            No            Yes           No             Yes           No
State-ind-size-year effects                          No               Yes            No             Yes           No            Yes            No            Yes

Observations                                      420200           420200        350102         350102         350024       350024         407515        407515
R-squared                                           0.40             0.46          0.16           0.13           0.28         0.25           0.08          0.08
                                                 Log ratio of white to blue-collar wage (skill premium)
          0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50 0.52                      Mean                                                                                                   Percentile: p25




                                                                                                                     0.20
                                                                                                                     0.18
                                                                                                                     0.16
                                                                                                                     0.14
                                                                                                                     0.12
                                          1987    1989        1991         1993    1995                                                              1987    1989         1991         1993     1995




                                                         Percentile: p50                                                                                            Percentile: p75
          0.40 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50




                                                                                                                     0.72 0.74 0.76 0.78 0.80 0.82




                                          1987    1989        1991         1993    1995                                                              1987    1989         1991         1993     1995




Figure 4: Trends in mean and percentiles of log skill premium


                                                                     White-collar share of wage bill
                                                            Mean                                                                                                   Percentile: p25
      34.0




                                                                                          18.0
      32.0




                                                                                          16.0
      30.0




                                                                                          14.0
      28.0




                                                                                          12.0
      26.0




                                                                                          10.0




                                          1987   1989        1991         1993    1995                                           1987                       1989        1991         1993     1995




                                                        Percentile: p50                                                                                            Percentile: p75
                                                                                          40.0 42.0 44.0 46.0 48.0
      30.0
      26.0 28.0
      24.0
      22.0




                                          1987   1989        1991         1993    1995                                           1987                       1989        1991         1993     1995




Figure 5: Trends in mean and percentiles of white-collar share of wage bill
     0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65          Mean log ratio of white to blue-collar wage (skill premium)




                                               1987    1988     1989         1990           1991   1992            1993        1994    1995


                                                               Individual proprietorships                 Partnership: joint family
                                                               Partnership: other                         Public limited companies
                                                               Private limited companies                  Others



Figure 6: Mean log skill premium by business type


                                                                  Mean white-collar share of wage bill
               45.0
               40.0
               35.0
               30.0
               25.0
               20.0




                                               1987    1988     1989         1990           1991   1992          1993        1994     1995


                                                               Individual proprietorships                 Partnership: joint family
                                                               Partnership: other                         Public limited companies
                                                               Private limited companies                  Others



Figure 7: Mean white-collar share of wage bill by business type
Table 5a: Skill premium trends – controlling for tax law change
All regressions include state-industry-size fixed effects. log_skpr is log ratio of white-collar to blue-collar wage rate. wshare is
white-collar share of the wage bill. D_partnership is a dummy equal to one for partnership firms. Standard errors are clustered at
industry level. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                        (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
       Dependent variable           log_skpr     log_skpr     log_skpr     log_skpr      wshare       wshare      wshare       wshare
 Year=1988                              -0.015                    -0.015                    0.179                    0.324
                                     [0.004]**                  [0.007]*                  [0.161]                  [0.273]
 Year=1989                               0.001                    -0.008                    0.189                    0.156
                                       [0.005]                   [0.007]                  [0.179]                  [0.286]
 Year=1990                               0.012                     0.011                    0.416                    0.421
                                      [0.006]*                 [0.007]+                  [0.194]*                  [0.299]
 Year=1991                               0.002                    -0.002                    0.665                    0.566
                                       [0.005]                   [0.007]                [0.242]**                  [0.345]
 Year=1992                              -0.002                    -0.015                    1.073                    0.735
                                       [0.006]                 [0.008]+                 [0.214]**                 [0.342]*
 Year=1993                               0.063                    -0.006                    4.349                     1.08
                                     [0.007]**                   [0.008]                [0.262]**                [0.336]**
 Year=1994                               0.082                     0.011                    4.899                    1.219
                                     [0.009]**                   [0.008]                [0.304]**                [0.381]**
 Year=1995                               0.076                     0.012                    5.257                    1.638
                                     [0.007]**                   [0.008]                [0.353]**                [0.448]**
 tpd=1 (1991,92)                                    -0.001                     -0.007                   0.663                    0.417
                                                   [0.003]                    [0.005]               [0.154]**                 [0.201]*
 tpd=2 (1993,94,95)                                  0.073                      0.008                    4.63                    1.083
                                                 [0.005]**                    [0.005]               [0.239]**                [0.233]**
 D_partnership                                                   -0.138        -0.138                                -6.06      -6.334
                                                              [0.009]**     [0.007]**                            [0.562]**   [0.471]**
 (Year=1988)*D_partnership                                            0                                             -0.342
                                                                [0.008]                                            [0.303]
 (Year=1989)*D_partnership                                        0.011                                             -0.232
                                                                [0.010]                                            [0.297]
 (Year=1990)*D_partnership                                       -0.009                                             -0.491
                                                                [0.010]                                            [0.337]
 (Year=1991)*D_partnership                                       -0.008                                             -0.432
                                                                [0.008]                                            [0.363]
 (Year=1992)*D_partnership                                        0.008                                             -0.132
                                                                [0.010]                                            [0.357]
 (Year=1993)*D_partnership                                        0.127                                              5.908
                                                              [0.011]**                                          [0.414]**
 (Year=1994)*D_partnership                                         0.13                                              6.784
                                                              [0.012]**                                          [0.472]**
 (Year=1995)*D_partnership                                        0.114                                              6.682
                                                              [0.011]**                                          [0.494]**
 (tpd=1)*D_partnership                                                         0.001                                             -0.01
                                                                             [0.006]                                           [0.214]
 (tpd=2)*D_partnership                                                         0.123                                             6.724
                                                                           [0.007]**                                         [0.339]**
 Constant                               0.414        0.414        0.488        0.486      26.537       26.744      29.884       30.119
                                    [0.005]**    [0.002]**    [0.007]**    [0.004]**    [0.176]**    [0.104]**   [0.372]**   [0.238]**
 Observations                         385531       385531       385531       385531       421561       421561      421561      421561
 R-squared                               0.17         0.17         0.18         0.18         0.33         0.33        0.34        0.34
                          Log skill premium: Coefficients on year dummies
     0.50
     0.48
     0.46
     0.44
     0.42
     0.40




             1987      1988      1989         1990   1991      1992        1993        1994           1995


                          Log skill premium            Log skill premium: adjusted for partnerships



Figure 8: Coefficient on year dummies on log skill premium from Table 4 (with and without controls for
partnership firms)


                    White-collar share of wage bill: Coefficients on year dummies
     32.00
     31.00
     30.00
     29.00
     28.00
     27.00
     26.00




             1987      1988      1989         1990   1991       1992       1993        1994           1995


                          Log skill premium            Log skill premium: adjusted for partnerships



Figure 9: Coefficient on year dummies on white-collar share of wage bill from Table 4 (with and without
controls for partnership firms)
Table 5b: Log skill premium (ratio of white-collar to blue-collar wage rate) trends – alternative explanations
All regressions include state-industry-size fixed effects. D_partnership is a dummy equal to one for partnership firms. Tariff drop (1990-92) is the drop in tariff between
1990 and 1992 for 3-digit industries. Exports-to-output ratio and imports-to-output ratio are pre-91 averages for 3-digit industries. FDI deregulation dummy is equal to
one for industries where foreign investment up to 51 percent was permitted in 1991. Capital-output ratio is the log of the ratio of real capital to real value added. Distance
to frontier is the ratio of maximum (over all 4-digit industries) industry mean log total factor productivity to the industry mean total factor productivity. Standard errors
are clustered at industry level. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
 tpd=1 (1991,92)                                            -0.001       -0.007       -0.005        -0.002       -0.003        0.001       -0.002       -0.026       -0.029
                                                           [0.003]      [0.005]      [0.007]       [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.004]      [0.003]      [0.027]      [0.031]
 tpd=2 (1993,94,95)                                          0.073        0.008        0.086         0.075        0.074        0.074        0.068        0.148        0.011
                                                         [0.005]**      [0.005]    [0.009]**     [0.005]**    [0.006]**    [0.006]**    [0.005]**    [0.044]**      [0.047]
 D_partnership                                                           -0.138                                                                                      -0.143
                                                                      [0.007]**                                                                                   [0.006]**
 (tpd=1)*D_partnership                                                    0.001                                                                                       0.002
                                                                        [0.006]                                                                                     [0.006]
 (tpd=2)*D_partnership                                                    0.123                                                                                       0.121
                                                                      [0.007]**                                                                                   [0.007]**
 (tpd=1)*Tariff drop (1990-92)                                                          0.012                                                                         0.013
                                                                                      [0.023]                                                                       [0.027]
 (tpd=2)*Tariff drop (1990-92)                                                         -0.044                                                                        -0.036
                                                                                      [0.034]                                                                       [0.033]
 (tpd=1)*Exports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                           -0.002                                                           -0.003
                                                                                                   [0.002]                                                          [0.003]
 (tpd=2)*Exports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                           -0.006                                                           -0.004
                                                                                                   [0.006]                                                          [0.005]
 (tpd=1)*Imports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                                         0.004                                               0.019
                                                                                                                [0.015]                                             [0.017]
 (tpd=2)*Imports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                                         0.002                                               0.034
                                                                                                                [0.014]                                           [0.012]**
 (tpd=1)*FDI deregulation dummy                                                                                               -0.007                                 -0.009
                                                                                                                             [0.007]                                [0.007]
 (tpd=2)*FDI deregulation dummy                                                                                               -0.007                                 -0.006
                                                                                                                             [0.008]                                [0.008]
 Capital-output ratio                                                                                                                       0.008                     0.009
                                                                                                                                        [0.001]**                 [0.001]**
 (tpd=1)* Capital-output ratio                                                                                                             -0.001                    -0.001
                                                                                                                                          [0.002]                   [0.002]
 (tpd=2)* Capital-output ratio                                                                                                              0.001                    -0.002
                                                                                                                                          [0.002]                   [0.002]
 (tpd=1)*Distance to frontier                                                                                                                            0.035        0.022
                                                                                                                                                       [0.040]      [0.043]
 (tpd=2)*Distance to frontier                                                                                                                           -0.109        0.006
                                                                                                                                                     [0.064]+       [0.064]
 Constant                                                    0.414         0.486        0.421        0.421        0.421        0.422        0.417        0.407        0.498
                                                         [0.002]**     [0.004]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.004]**
 Observations                                              385531        385531       354524       359722       359722       385531       325510       364722       300598
 R-squared                                                    0.17          0.18         0.16         0.17         0.17         0.17         0.18         0.17         0.18
Table 5c: White-collar share of wage bill trends – alternative explanations
All regressions include state-industry-size fixed effects. D_partnership is a dummy equal to one for partnership firms. Tariff drop (1990-92) is the drop in tariff between
1990 and 1992 for 3-digit industries. Exports-to-output ratio and imports-to-output ratio are pre-91 averages for 3-digit industries. FDI deregulation dummy is equal to
one for industries where foreign investment up to 51 percent was permitted in 1991. Capital-output ratio is the log of the ratio of real capital to real value added. Distance
to frontier is the ratio of maximum (over all 4-digit industries) industry mean log total factor productivity to the industry mean total factor productivity. Standard errors
are clustered at industry level. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
 tpd=1 (1991,92)                                              0.663       0.417         0.25        0.608       0.531        0.599         0.46        -0.38      -1.229
                                                          [0.154]**    [0.201]*      [0.308]    [0.148]**   [0.159]**    [0.187]**    [0.156]**     [1.356]      [1.479]
 tpd=2 (1993,94,95)                                            4.63       1.083        4.474         4.73       4.526        4.492        4.039      10.221          0.55
                                                          [0.239]**   [0.233]**    [0.462]**    [0.228]**   [0.282]**    [0.310]**    [0.285]**   [2.621]**      [3.069]
 D_partnership                                                           -6.334                                                                                   -6.584
                                                                      [0.471]**                                                                                [0.448]**
 (tpd=1)*D_partnership                                                    -0.01                                                                                      0.13
                                                                        [0.214]                                                                                  [0.204]
 (tpd=2)*D_partnership                                                    6.724                                                                                     6.467
                                                                      [0.339]**                                                                                [0.361]**
 (tpd=1)*Tariff drop (1990-92)                                                         1.285                                                                        1.367
                                                                                     [0.856]                                                                     [0.938]
 (tpd=2)*Tariff drop (1990-92)                                                         0.715                                                                        2.513
                                                                                     [1.744]                                                                     [1.844]
 (tpd=1)*Exports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                          -0.002                                                           0.017
                                                                                                  [0.038]                                                        [0.046]
 (tpd=2)*Exports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                          -0.338                                                         -0.164
                                                                                                  [0.275]                                                        [0.170]
 (tpd=1)*Imports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                                        0.701                                              0.122
                                                                                                               [0.573]                                           [0.625]
 (tpd=2)*Imports-to-output ratio (pre-91)                                                                        1.345                                              1.386
                                                                                                               [1.001]                                           [0.969]
 (tpd=1)*FDI deregulation dummy                                                                                              0.247                                  0.459
                                                                                                                           [0.305]                               [0.293]
 (tpd=2)*FDI deregulation dummy                                                                                              0.526                                  0.976
                                                                                                                           [0.413]                              [0.425]*
 Capital-output ratio                                                                                                                     0.798                     0.852
                                                                                                                                      [0.084]**                [0.057]**
 (tpd=1)* Capital-output ratio                                                                                                            0.044                     0.098
                                                                                                                                        [0.062]                  [0.063]
 (tpd=2)* Capital-output ratio                                                                                                            0.346                     0.245
                                                                                                                                      [0.062]**                [0.070]**
 (tpd=1)*Distance to frontier                                                                                                                         1.464         1.063
                                                                                                                                                    [1.949]      [2.086]
 (tpd=2)*Distance to frontier                                                                                                                        -8.075       -1.386
                                                                                                                                                   [3.752]*      [4.264]
 Constant                                                   26.744       30.119        26.31      26.703       26.699      26.742       26.751      26.648        30.193
                                                          [0.104]**    [0.238]**   [0.102]**    [0.102]**    [0.102]**   [0.103]**    [0.129]**   [0.100]**    [0.199]**
 Observations                                               421561       421561      388270       394162       394162      421561       355710      399328       328979
 R-squared                                                     0.33         0.34        0.33         0.33         0.33        0.33         0.36        0.33          0.36
                                                                         Appendix
Appendix Table 1a: Fraction of Partnership firms, and entry rates (1987-1995)1
Year           Fraction        Fraction New        Fraction New                                        Fraction Partnerships
             Partnerships         (Total)          (Partnerships)                    60.0%
1987                  55.5%               2.4%               1.1%                    55.0%
1988                  55.1%               2.7%               1.2%
1989                  52.6%               2.5%               1.1%                    50.0%
1990                  51.1%               2.5%               1.0%                    45.0%
1991                  50.0%               2.9%               1.1%
                                                                                     40.0%
1992                  48.3%               2.6%               1.0%
1993                  47.0%               2.0%               0.6%                    35.0%
1994                  46.0%               2.6%               0.9%                            1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
1995                  44.7%               2.7%               0.9%

Appendix Table 1b: Analysis of the choice of partnership organizational form (1987-1995)1
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                  Linear      Probit       Logit
Log(Gross Sales)                                    -0.044      -0.128      -0.208
                                                 [0.004]**   [0.020]**   [0.032]**
Log(Age of Plant: Winsorized by 0.5%)                            0.077       0.126
                                                             [0.027]**   [0.044]**
Trend (= Year - 1985)                               -0.007      -0.019       -0.03
                                                 [0.001]**   [0.005]**   [0.008]**
tpd=1 (1991,92)                                      0.003      -0.001      -0.003
                                                   [0.004]     [0.011]     [0.018]
tpd=2 (1993,94,95)                                   0.003      -0.004      -0.007
                                                   [0.006]     [0.017]     [0.028]
Constant                                              1.21       1.887       3.066
                                                 [0.063]**   [0.250]**   [0.406]**
State-industry fixed effects                           Yes         No          No
Observations                                       350102      350103      350103
R-squared                                             0.23


1
  Appendix Tables 1a and 1b, and Figure 1 relate to footnote 22 in the text. There is a downward trend in the fraction of partnerships in
the sample. There is no change in this trend around the time of the tax reform (1992). Also there is no significant change around 1992 in
the fraction of entrants that are partnerships. Table 1b indicates no significant change in the propensity to be incorporated as a partnership
after the 1992 tax law change.
                                                                                                                                                             Appendix
Appendix Table 2: Regression estimates of the direct effects of the tax law change: Variation of response across age and                           location2
 “Old” establishments are defined as those ``old" that are at least 10-years old. Urban establishments are those located in areas coded as urban. Other year dummies and
year dummies interacted with the partnership dummy are omitted. Standard errors are clustered at industry level. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant
at 1%.
                               Fraction of Non-Salaried               Profits-to-Sales Ratio             Wage-Bill-to-Sales Ratio            White-Collar Wage-Bill-to-
                                       Owners                                                                                                      Profits Ratio
                                   1          2          3              1          2              3          1           2            3          1           2          3
                                Full     Urban         Old            Full     Urban           Old         Full      Urban         Old        Full     Urban         Old
                                           only       only                      only           only                   only         only                   only      only

(yr==1993)*D_partner          -0.097        -0.12      -0.102       -0.027      -0.022        -0.02       0.031         0.03       0.028       0.332       0.355        0.399
                           [0.016]**    [0.012]**   [0.026]**    [0.007]**   [0.007]**     [0.009]*   [0.006]**    [0.007]**   [0.008]**   [0.041]**   [0.048]**    [0.058]**
(yr==1994)*D_partner          -0.133       -0.148       -0.15       -0.035       -0.03       -0.025       0.026        0.022       0.021       0.422        0.44        0.484
                           [0.008]**    [0.009]**   [0.011]**    [0.006]**   [0.006]**    [0.008]**   [0.005]**    [0.006]**   [0.008]**   [0.041]**   [0.048]**    [0.054]**
(yr==1995)*D_partner          -0.148       -0.164      -0.161       -0.037      -0.032       -0.031       0.033         0.03       0.034       0.402       0.392         0.43
                           [0.008]**    [0.008]**   [0.011]**    [0.006]**   [0.006]**    [0.008]**   [0.005]**    [0.006]**   [0.006]**   [0.039]**   [0.046]**    [0.062]**
Constant                         0.2          0.2       0.198       -0.033      -0.024       -0.017        0.19        0.189       0.214       0.499        0.55        0.564
                           [0.006]**    [0.005]**   [0.007]**    [0.002]**   [0.002]**    [0.002]**   [0.002]**    [0.002]**   [0.002]**   [0.006]**   [0.008]**    [0.008]**

State-ind-year effects           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

Observations                 420200       296768      239979      350102       251318      198079       350024      251249      198008       407515      289757       230063
R-squared                      0.26         0.29        0.28        0.13         0.12        0.16         0.25        0.24        0.30         0.08        0.09         0.11
Number of clusters             1097         1019         950        1045          977         908         1045         977         908         1088        1013          941




2
    Appendix table 2 relates to footnote 37 and 38 in the text. Refer text for a discussion of these results.
                                                                                                            Appendix

Appendix Figure 2a: Log sales of partnership firms (relative to others in the same state-
industry)3
This figure plots the coefficient on year dummies interacted with a partnership dummy, in a regression where the
dependent variable is Log (Gross Sales). State-industry-year effects were included in this regression, so the
coefficients can be interpreted as the change in Log (Gross Sales) for partnership firms relative to other firms within
the same state and industry.

      -0.3
              1987   1988    1989    1990    1991    1992    1993     1994    1995
    -0.35

      -0.4

    -0.45

      -0.5

    -0.55

      -0.6

               Log sales of partnerships relative to others (within state-industry)


Appendix Figure 2b: Log employment and value added of partnership firms (relative to others
in the same state-industry)3
This figure plots the coefficients on year dummies interacted with a partnership dummy, from regressions where the
dependent variables are Log (Total Employment) and Log(Value Added). State-industry-year effects were included
in this regression, so the coefficients can be interpreted as the change in the dependent variables for partnerships
firms relative to other firms within the same state and industry.

     -0.2
             1987    1988   1989    1990     1991    1992     1993     1994    1995
    -0.25

     -0.3

    -0.35

     -0.4

    -0.45

     -0.5

    -0.55

     -0.6

                            Log(Total Employment)      Log(Value Added)




3
 Figures 2a and 2b relate to footnote 42. We find no evidence of significant jumps in sales or
total employment or value added, which would have accompanied certain types of tax
avoidance measures.
