NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INPUT AND TECHNOLOGY CHOICES IN REGULATED
INDUSTRIES: EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH CARE SECTOR
Daron Acemoglu
Amy Finkelstein
Working Paper 12254
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12254
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

We are grateful to David Autor, David Cutler, Jon Gruber, Jerry Hausman, Rob Huckman, Paul Joskow,
Nolan Miller, Joe Newhouse, Joshua Rauh, Nancy Rose, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at the
MIT public finance and industrial organization lunches, the NBER Productivity conference, the NBER IO
conference, the International Industrial Organization Conference, the Harvard-MIT-BU health seminar, and
Chicago GSB for helpful comments. We also thank Adam Block, Amanda Kowalski, Matthew Notowidigdo,
Erin Strumpf, and Heidi Williams for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Daron Acemoglu and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Input and Technology Choices in Regulated Industries: Evidence From the Health Care Sector
Daron Acemoglu and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 12254
May 2006
JEL No. H51, I18, L50, L51, O31, O33
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the implications of regulatory change for the input mix and technology choices
of regulated industries. We present a simple neoclassical framework that emphasizes the change in
relative factor prices associated with the regulatory change from full cost to partial cost
reimbursement, and investigate how this a ects firms’ technology choices through substitution of
(capital embodied) technologies for tasks previously performed by labor. We examine these
implications empirically by studying the change from full cost to partial cost reimbursement under
the Medicare Prospective Payment System (PPS) reform, which increased the relative price of labor
faced by U.S. hospitals. Using the interaction of hospitals’ pre-PPS Medicare share of patient days
with the introduction of these regulatory changes, we document a substantial increase in capital-labor
ratios and a large decline in labor inputs associated with PPS. Most interestingly, we find that the
PPS reform seems to have encouraged the adoption of a range of new medical technologies. We also
show that the reform was associated with an increase in the skill composition of these hospitals,
which is consistent with technology-skill or capital-skill complementarities.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-262F
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

1

Introduction

There is broad agreement that diﬀerences in technology are essential for understanding productivity diﬀerences across nations, industries and firms. Despite this agreement, we know relatively little about the empirical determinants of technology choices and of adoption of capital
goods embodying new technologies. The lack of empirical knowledge is even more pronounced
when we turn to regulated industries, such as health care, electricity and telecommunications,
which are not only important for their sizable contributions to total GDP, but have been at the
forefront of technological advances over the past several decades. In this paper, we investigate
how input and technology choices respond to changes in regulation regime.
Starting in the mid-1980s, a number of diﬀerent industries in a variety of countries experienced a change in regulation regime away from full cost reimbursement towards some type
of “price cap”.1 These new regulation regimes often entailed a mixture of “partial cost reimbursement” and “partial price cap”. Under this mixed regime–which we refer to hereafter as
“partial cost reimbursement”–only expenditures on capital inputs are reimbursed, while labor
expenses are supposed to be covered by the fixed price paid per unit of output. Consequently, a
change from full cost to partial cost reimbursement increases the relative price of labor inputs,
among other things.
Despite many examples of this type of partial cost reimbursement, including the Medicare
Prospective Payment System (PPS) reform in the United States which we study in this paper,
partial cost reimbursement has received little theoretical or empirical attention. For example,
in his recent survey, Joskow (2005, p. 36) notes:
“Although it is not discussed too much in the empirical literature, the development of
the parameters of price cap mechanisms .... have typically focused primarily on operating
costs only, with capital cost allowances established through more traditional utility planning
and cost-of-service regulatory accounting methods”.

To investigate the implications of changes in regulation away from full cost reimbursement,
we develop a simple neoclassical model of firm behavior under regulation. The most common
approaches to regulation are the optimal regulation models, for example as in Laﬀont and
1

Examples include the telecommunications sector in the United States and United Kingdom, gas, electric and
water utilities in the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Australia, and parts of Latin America (see, for example,
Laﬀont and Tirole 1993, Armstrong, Cowen and Vickers, 1994, Joskow, 2005) and the Medicare Prospective
Payment System for US hosptials which is the focus of this paper.

1

Tirole (1993), and the rate of return regulation of Averch and Johnson (1962) and Baumol
and Klevorick (1970). Neither is appropriate as a framework for guiding empirical work in this
setting, however, for at least two reasons. First, cost reimbursement regulation, both in general
and in the health care sector in particular, does not have the screening structure posited in the
optimal regulation models, nor does cost reimbursement in the health care sector regulate the
rate of return on capital as in the Averch and Johnson model. Second, neither of these two
approaches provides a framework for analyzing the impact of regulation regime on technology
adoption (though it may be possible to extend these approaches to do so).
Our neoclassical framework is similar to Averch and Johnson, but focuses on cost reimbursement rather than rate of return regulation. It links the input and technology choices of
firms to the relative factor prices they face, which are themselves determined by the regulation
regime.2 We show that under fairly mild assumptions, a change in regulation regime from full
cost to partial cost reimbursement will be associated with an increase in capital-labor ratios.
The implications of the change in regulation for the overall level of labor and capital inputs
(and the scale of activity) are ambiguous and depend on the generosity of the partial price
cap that replaces cost reimbursement. In the context of the Medicare PPS reform, existing
qualitative and empirical evidence suggests a relatively low price cap. We present evidence that
the reform is associated with a decline in overall labor inputs and in the Medicare share of
hospital activity, both of which would be predicted by our framework if the level of the price cap
is suﬃciently low. Despite the decline in labor inputs, our simple framework shows that capital
expenditures can increase, and perhaps more surprisingly, the firm may be induced to adopt
more advanced technologies. This configuration is more likely when there are decreasing returns
to capital and labor (or technology and labor) and the elasticity of substitution between these
factors is high. Intuitively, the increased relative price of labor induces the firm to substitute
technology and capital embodying new technologies for tasks previously performed by labor.
This result also has implications for the famous labor push theory of innovation suggested
by Hicks (1932) and Habakkuk (1962), which claims that higher wages encourage innovation.
Although this result is not possible under competitive markets and constant returns to capital
and labor, we derive conditions under which such a result might obtain.3
The bulk of the paper empirically investigates the impact of the Medicare Prospective
2
In contrast, in the Averch and Johnson model, as in the modified model we present in Appendix B, input
choices are not directly aﬀected by relative prices, but are chosen in order to satisfy various regulatory constraints
faced by firms.
3
Strictly speaking, the labor push theory of innovation refers to the case in which the only change is an
increase in the price of labor. In the theory section, we derive the conditions under which such a change in the
price of labor will encourage technology adoption (or capital deepening). However, in our empirical setting, the
introduction of PPS is associated with both an increase in the price of labor and some increase in the price of
output (increased reimbursement for health services provided to Medicare patients). Our empirical results on
the eﬀect of PPS on technology adoption therefore do not provide direct evidence for the labor push theory.

2

Payment System (PPS) in the United States. PPS, introduced in October 1983, changed
reimbursement for hospital inpatient expenses of Medicare patients from full cost to partial cost
reimbursement, resulting in significant changes in the relative factor prices faced by hospitals.
The motivation behind the reform was to reduce the level and growth of hospital spending,
which had been rising rapidly (as a share of GDP) for several decades.
The PPS reform provides an attractive setting for studying the impact of regulatory change
on firm input and technology choice for several reasons. First, the health care industry is one
of the most technologically-intensive and dynamic sectors in the United States. Indeed, rapid
technological change is believed to be the major cause of both the dramatic increase in health
spending as a share of GDP and the substantial health improvements experienced over the last
half century (Newhouse, 1992, Fuchs, 1996, Cutler, 2003). Understanding the determinants of
technological progress in the health care sector, and the role played by government policy, is
therefore of substantial interest in its own right. Second, government regulation is ubiquitous in
this industry. Finally, because of substantial diﬀerences in the importance of Medicare patients
for diﬀerent hospitals, there is an attractive source of variation to determine the eﬀects of such
a regulatory reform on input and technology choices.
Our empirical strategy is to exploit the interaction between the introduction of PPS and the
pre-PPS share of Medicare patient days (Medicare share for short) in hospitals. We document
that before the introduction of PPS, hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare shares do not display
systematically diﬀerent trends in their input or technology choices. In contrast, following PPS,
hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare share show significantly diﬀerent trends.
Consistent with the predictions of our motivating theory, there is a significant and sizable
increase in the capital-labor ratio of higher Medicare share hospitals associated with the change
from full cost to partial cost reimbursement. This change in the capital-labor ratio is made up
of a decline in the labor inputs of high-Medicare share hospitals, with approximately constant
capital inputs. Perhaps most interestingly, we find that the introduction of PPS is associated
with a significant increase in the adoption of a range of new health care technologies. We
document this pattern both by looking at the total number of diﬀerent technologies used by
hospitals, and also by estimating hazard models for a number of specific high-tech technologies
that are in our sample throughout.4 The increase in technology adoption and the decline
in labor inputs associated with the increase in the relative price of labor also suggests that
there is a relatively high degree of substitution between technology and labor. We present
suggestive evidence of one possible mechanism for this substitution; the introduction of PPS
4

As we discuss below, increased technology adoption, combined with more or less constant overall capital
expenidtures, suggests that there was likely a decline in some other type of capital expenditures, such as
structures.

3

is associated with a decline in length of stay, which may represent substitution of high-tech
capital equipment for relatively labor-intensive hospital stays.
Finally, we present evidence that the introduction of PPS is associated with an increase
in the skill composition of hospital nurses. This pattern buttresses our results on increased
capital-labor ratios and technology adoption, since the consensus view in the literature is that
skilled labor is complementary to capital and/or technology (e.g., Griliches, 1956, Berman et
al. 1994, Autor et al. 1998, Krusell et al., 2000, Acemoglu, 2002).
We consider a number of alternative interpretations for our findings and conclude that
the evidence for them is not compelling. We therefore interpret our finding of PPS-induced
changes in input mix and technology adoption in the health care sector to be a response to the
changes in relative factor prices induced by the change in regulation regime. Consequently, to
our knowledge, this makes ours the first paper to document that technology adoption in the
health care sector is aﬀected by relative factor prices.5
It is also noteworthy that our findings run counter to the general expectation that PPS
would slow the growth of expensive technology diﬀusion (see, for example, Sloan et al., 1988,
Weisbrod, 1991, and the discussion of initial expectations in Coulam and Gaumer, 1991). However, most prior analyses of PPS have conceived of it as a move from full cost reimbursement to
full price cap reimbursement and have overlooked the fact that it was only a partial price cap
on non-capital expenditures; both our theoretical and empirical results show the importance
of the increase in the relative price of labor resulting from the partial price cap structure.6
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we develop a simple neoclassical framework to investigate the implications of the change in regulation regime on input
and technology choices. Section 3 reviews the relevant institutional background on Medicare
reimbursement. Section 4 describes the data and presents some descriptive statistics. The
econometric framework is presented in Section 5. Our main empirical results are presented in
Section 6, while Section 7 shows that they are robust to a number of alternative specifications.
Section 8 concludes. Appendix A contains the proofs from Section 2, and Appendix B discusses
a number of further theoretical issues.
5

In this respect, our paper is related to Newell et al. (1999) who study the eﬀect of energy price increases
on the energy eﬃciency of a variety of appliances. See also Greenstone (2002) on the eﬀect of environmental
regulations on plant level investment. In the hospital sector, past work has suggested that hospital technology
adoption appears to increase in response to traditional fee-for-service health insurance (Finkelstein, 2005) and
to slow in response to managed care organizations (Cutler and Sheiner, 1998, Baker, 2001, Baker and Phibbs,
2002). In the context of the health sector more generally, the rate of pharmaceutical innovation appears to
increase in response to increased (expected) market size (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004, Finkelstein, 2004) or to tax
subsidies for R&D (Yin, 2005).
6
The literature on PPS is reviewed in Section 3.

4

2

Motivating Theory

There are many conceptual diﬃculties in modeling both the demand for and supply of health
care; the demand for health care is often determined by the technologies and the diagnoses that
are available, and neither the supply nor the demand for health care can be separated from
various private and social insurance policies and government regulation. Our purpose here is
not to present a comprehensive model of the health care market, but rather to develop an
organizing framework for the empirical work, and also to provide a number of simple insights
that are applicable to other industries regulated by full cost or partial cost reimbursement.

2.1
2.1.1

A Neoclassical Model of Regulation
Environment

Four simplifying assumptions in our approach are worth highlighting at the outset. The first is
that hospitals maximize profits. Clearly, non-profit or public hospitals have other objectives as
well, but starting with the profit-maximizing case is a useful benchmark. It is also consistent
with a large empirical literature that finds essentially no evidence of diﬀerential behavior across
for-profit and non-profit hospitals (see Sloan, 2000, for a recent review of this literature).
Second, we assume that, at least at the margin, there is considerable fungibility between labor
and capital inputs used for Medicare purposes and labor and capital inputs used for nonMedicare purposes; descriptions of how Medicare reimbursement operates in practice suggest
that this is a realistic assumption (OTA, 1984, CBO, 1988). This allows us to model Medicare
input reimbursement as taking a simple form in which hospital i is reimbursed for a fraction
mi of its capital and labor costs, where mi is the “Medicare share” of this hospital. Appendix
B shows that the basic implications of our analysis of the impact of a change in regulation
regime continue to hold without fungibility. Third, we assume that hospitals are price takers
in the input markets, facing a wage rate of w per unit of labor and a cost of capital equal to R
per unit of capital.7 Finally, we assume that hospitals are price takers for Medicare patients.8
Suppose that hospital i has a production function for total health services given by
F̃ (Ai , Li , Ki , zi )
7

(1)

In practice, some hospitals might have monopsony power for some component of their labor demand. For
example, Staiger et al. (1999) find evidence of hospital monopsony power in the market for registered nurses.
Incorporating any such monopsony power would have no eﬀect on our main results.
8
In practice, unlike in the standard model of perfectly competitive firms, hospitals may not be able to choose
the total number of Medicare patients. Either a hospital is the only one in the area, thus facing an essentially
constant demand for Medicare services, or it may be competing with other hospitals in the area, in which case,
the number of Medicare patients will depend on the quality of service. This would require a more involved
analysis where the firm chooses both quantity and quality, and there is quality competition. Although we believe
this is an important area for theoretical analysis, it falls outside the scope of our paper.

5

where Li and Ki are total labor and capital hired by this hospital, zi is some other input, such
as managerial eﬀort (or doctors, who are not directly hired and paid by hospitals themselves),
and Ai is a productivity term, which may diﬀer across hospital, for example because of their
technology choices or other reasons. We assume that F̃ is increasing in all of its inputs and
twice continuously diﬀerentiable for positive levels of inputs.
For simplicity, we will interpret (1) as the production function of the hospital, though
equivalently, it could be interpreted as its revenue function (with the price substituted in as a
function of quantity). We also assume that zi is fixed, and, without loss of any generality, we
normalize it to zi = 1, and begin with the case in which Ai is exogenous. This gives:
F (Ai , Li , Ki ) ≡ F̃ (Ai , Li , Ki , zi = 1) ,

(2)

which we assume exhibits decreasing returns to scale in capital and labor (for example, because
the original production function F̃ exhibited constant returns to scale). Since F̃ is increasing in its inputs and twice continuously diﬀerentiable for positive inputs, so is F , and we
denote the partial derivatives by FL and FK (and the second derivatives by FLL , FKK and
FLK ). Moreover, we make the standard Inada type assumption that limLi →0 FL (Ai , Li , Ki ) =
limKi →0 FK (Ai , Li , Ki ) = ∞ and limLi →∞ FK (Ai , Li , Ki ) = limKi →∞ FK (Ai , Li , Ki ) = 0. In
addition, we will often look at the cases in which F (Ai , Li , Ki ) is homothetic or homogeneous
in Li and Ki , or in Ai and Li .9
2.1.2

Full Cost Reimbursement Regulation

Under the original regulation, which we refer to as full cost reimbursement, each hospital
receives reimbursement for some fraction of its labor and capital used for Medicare purposes.10
It also receives a copayment from Medicare patients as well as revenues from non-Medicare
patients (where the hospital might have some market power, which we are incorporating into
the F function). Denoting the total price per unit of health care services under the cost
reimbursement regulation system by q > 0, the maximization problem of the hospital is
max π f (i) = qF (Ai , Li , Ki ) − (1 − mi sL ) wLi − (1 − mi sK ) RKi ,

Li ,Ki

(3)

where sL < 1 and sK < 1 are constants capturing the relative generosity of labor and capital
Medicare reimbursement and mi ∈ [0, 1] is the Medicare share of the hospital, which we take
9
If F (Ai , Li , Ki ) is homothetic in Li and Ki , then FK (Ai , Li , Ki ) /FL (Ai , Li , Ki ) is only a function of Ki /Li .
Alternatively, homotheticity in Li and Ki is equivalent to F (Ai , Li , Ki ) ≡ H1 (Ai ) H2 (φ (Li , Ki )), where H1 (·)
and H2 (·) are increasing functions, and φ is increasing in both of its arguments and exhibits constant returns to
scale. If F (Ai , Li , Ki ) is homogeneous of degree α in Li and Ki , then FK (Ai , Li , Ki ) /FL (Ai , Li , Ki ) is again
only a function of Ki /Li , but in addition F (Ai , Li , Ki ) ≡ H1 (Ai ) φ (Li , Ki )α , where φ is increasing in both of
its arguments and exhibits constant returns to scale.
10
As discussed in Section 3, under the pre-PPS system, Medicare-related capital and labor expenses were
reimbursed in proportion to Medicare’s share of patient days or charges (see Newhouse, 2002, p. 22).

6

as given for now and endogenize in subsection 2.2.11
The first-order conditions of this maximization problem are
³
´
qFL Ai , Lfi , Kif = (1 − mi sL ) w, and
³
´
qFK Ai , Lfi , Kif = (1 − mi sK ) R,

(4)
(5)

for labor and capital, respectively, where the superscript f refers to full cost reimbursement.
The Inada and the diﬀerentiability assumptions imply that these first-order conditions
are necessary, and the decreasing returns (strict joint concavity) of F implies that they are
suﬃcient. Taking the ratio of these two first-order conditions we have
³
´
FK Ai , Lfi , Kif
(1 − mi sK ) R
³
´ =
,
(1 − mi sL ) w
FL Ai , Lfi , Kif

(6)

which shows that the relative input choices of the hospital will be similar to that of an unregulated firm (hospital) with the same production technology, except for the relative generosity
of capital and labor reimbursements. Equation (6) combined with the decreasing returns assumption on F implies that an increase in sK /sL , which corresponds to capital reimbursements

becoming more generous relative to labor reimbursements, will increase Ki /Li . Similarly, a
decrease in the relative price of capital, R/w, will increase Ki /Li . The impact of changes in
mi on Ki /Li will depend on whether sK is greater or less than sL . In the former case, capital
is favored relative to labor, so higher mi will be associated with greater capital intensity.
2.1.3

Partial Cost Reimbursement Regulation

Our main interest is to compare the full cost reimbursement regulation regime described above,
which is a stylized description of the regulation policy before PPS, to the partial cost reimbursement that came with PPS. As described above, under this new regime, capital continues
to be reimbursed as before, but labor reimbursements cease, and instead, hospitals receive additional payments from Medicare for health services provided to Medicare patients. We model
this as an increase in q to (1 + θmi ) q, where θ > 1 incorporates the fact that the extent to
which a hospital receives the subsidy is also a function of its Medicare share.12
11

The assumption that sL < 1 and sK < 1 ensures that, at the margin, labor and capital costs are always
positive for the hospital. In fact, all we need is that mi sL < 1 and mi sK < 1, so in practice when mi ≤ m̄ for
some m̄ < 1, we can have sL > 1 and sK > 1. The case in which there is true cost plus reimbursement whereby
the hospital makes money by hiring more inputs is discussed in Appendix B.
12
In practice, the price subsidy under PPS is a function of Medicare (diagnosis-adjusted) admissions. Modeling
it as a function of the Medicare share, mi –which corresponds roughly to Medicare share of total output (see
Section 2.2)–is a simplifying assumption, with no major eﬀect on our theoretical results.

7

Now the maximization problem of hospital i is
max π p (i) = (1 + θmi ) qF (Ai , Li , Ki ) − wLi − (1 − mi sK ) RKi .

Li ,Ki

(7)

The first-order necessary and suﬃcient conditions are
(1 + θmi ) qFL (Ai , Lpi , Kip ) = w, and

(8)

(1 + θmi ) qFK (Ai , Lpi , Kip ) = (1 − mi sK ) R,

(9)

where the superscript p refers to partial cost reimbursement. (8) and (9) jointly imply
FK (Ai , Lpi , Kip )
(1 − mi sK ) R
.
p
p =
w
FL (Ai , Li , Ki )

(10)

Comparison of (10) to (6) immediately yields the following result (proof in Appendix A):
Proposition 1 Suppose F (Ai , Li , Ki ) is homothetic in Li and Ki . Then, the move from full
cost reimbursement to partial cost reimbursement increases capital-labor ratio, i.e.,
Kif
Kip
>
.
Lpi
Lfi
Moreover, this eﬀect is stronger for hospitals with greater Medicare share, i.e.,
!
Ã
Kip /Lpi
/∂mi > 0.
∂
Kif /Lfi

(11)

(12)

This proposition is the starting point for our empirical work. It shows that the move from
full to partial cost reimbursement should be associated with an increase in capital-labor ratios.
Moreover, equation (12) provides an empirical strategy to investigate this eﬀect by comparing
hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare shares (from the pre-reform period).
Next, we would like to know the impact of the change in regulation regime on the level of
inputs and the total amount of health services. It is clear that the results here will depend on
the generosity of the price subsidy (price cap) θ > 0. We can obtain more insights by focusing
on the case where the price cap, θ, is suﬃciently low. This case is particularly relevant, since
it is consistent with the existing evidence,13 and because the empirical work below will show
that the price cap appears to have been less than suﬃcient to overturn the eﬀects of decreased
cost subsidies.
Let us consider the extreme case with θ = 0 (clearly, by continuity, the same results apply
when θ is suﬃciently small around zero). In this case, we can analyze the eﬀect of the change
13
Qualitative descriptions of the PPS suggest a relatively low level of the price cap, particularly after the first
year of the program (Coulam and Gaumer, 1991). The empirical evidence reviewed by Cutler and Zeckhauser
(2000) and Coulam and Gaumer (1991) indicates that the introduction of PPS was associated with a decline in
hospital profit margins, which is also consistent with a relatively low level of the price cap.

8

in the cost reimbursement regime as comparative statics of sL ; a reduction in sL from positive
to zero is equivalent to a change in regulation regime from full cost reimbursement the partial
cost reimbursement.
Proposition 2 Suppose that θ = 0, and let Li (sL ) and Ki (sL ) be the optimal choices for
hospital i at labor subsidy rate sL . Then
−mi FKK
dLi (sL )
=
> 0.
dsL
FLL FKK − (FLK )2

(13)

Moreover, let F (Ai , Li , Ki ) be homogeneous of degree α < 1 in Li and Ki , i.e., F (Ai , Li , Ki ) =
H1 (Ai ) φ (Li , Ki )α , with φ (·, ·) exhibiting constant returns to scale. Let the (local) elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor of the φ (·, ·) function be σ φ . Then
dKi (sL )
1
S σφ .
S 0 if and only if
dsL
1−α

(14)

This proposition, which is also proved in Appendix A, shows that when the price cap is
not very generous, the firm will respond to the switch from full to partial cost reimbursement
by reducing its labor input, i.e., dLi (sL ) /dsL > 0.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that even in this case, capital inputs may increase, i.e.,
dKi (sL ) /dsL ≤ 0 is possible. Whether they do so or not depends on the amount of “decreasing

returns” to labor and capital, which is measured by the α parameter, and the elasticity of
substitution, σ φ . If σ φ < 1, so that labor and capital are gross complements in the φ function,
capital will always decline as well. Similarly, if α = 1, so that there are constant returns to

scale to capital and labor jointly, again, capital will always decline. However, if α < 1 and
there is suﬃcient substitution between labor and capital, i.e., σ φ > 1, the firm can (partially)
make up for the decline in its labor demand by increasing its capital inputs.
This is an important result both for understanding the response of capital inputs to an
increase in the cost of labor in general, and for our specific case. The general relevance of this
result stems from the labor push theory of innovation suggested by Hicks (1932) and Habakkuk
(1962) as discussed in the Introduction. Despite a lengthy literature on this subject, there is
still no agreement on the relevance of these ideas, especially since in the standard neoclassical
growth model with constant returns to scale, this can never happen.14 Proposition 2 shows
that this result is possible when there are diminishing returns (either in terms of production
technology or revenues) and when capital and labor are suﬃciently substitutable.
14
This is obvious in Proposition 2, because of constant returns to scale, i.e., α = 1. Alternatively, with
constant returns to scale in labor and capital, the Euler theorem implies that FLK > 0, so (14) immediately
yields dKi (sL ) /dsL > 0.

9

2.1.4

Technology Choices

The overall amount of capital inputs used by the hospital is a combination of capital embodying new technologies and other types of capital, such as structures (e.g., buildings). These
diﬀerent types of capitals may respond diﬀerentially to the change in regulation. To study how
technology will respond to the regulation regime, we now model technology choices.
Suppose that technology is always embodied in capital, and it can be measured by a real
number, i.e., Ai ∈ R+ , as specified by the production functions in (1) or (2). In particular,

let us posit that there is a large number of (perfectly substitutable) technologies, each indexed
by x ∈ [0, ∞). Technology x requires a capital outlay of κ (x).15 We rank technologies such

that κ (x) is increasing. Furthermore, to simplify the analysis, let us assume that κ (·) is
continuously diﬀerentiable. Since the productivity of the hospital depends only on how many

of these technologies are adopted, i.e., only on Ai , it will adopt low x technologies before high
x technologies, i.e., there will exist a cutoﬀ level x∗i such that hospital i adopts all technologies
x ≤ x∗i , and moreover, clearly x∗i ≡ Ai . Hence the capital cost of technology for hospital i

when it adopts technology Ai it is

Ka,i ≡

Z

Ai

κ (x) dx,

(15)

0

which is in addition to its capital costs for structures. Note from (15) that the marginal cost of
adopting technology Ai is κ (Ai ), and moreover, since κ (x) is increasing, this marginal cost is
increasing in Ai . Other diﬀerences in productivity across hospitals are ignored for simplicity.
Since we now allow for the adoption of new technologies embodied in capital, the remaining
capital is interpreted as “structures” capital and denoted by Ks,i . Hence, we write
η
F (Ai , Li , Ks,i ) = ψ(Ai , Li )β Ks,i

(16)

where η ∈ [0, 1 − β) and ψ exhibits constant returns to scale, which imposes homogeneity of
degree β < 1 between Ai and Li . The rest of the setup is unchanged.

Once again, since for arbitrary θ’s, total output (health services) and inputs can increase
or decrease, we focus on the case of θ = 0. We have (proof in Appendix A):
Proposition 3 Suppose that θ = 0 and the production function is given by (16) with ψ (·, ·)

exhibiting constant returns to scale. let Li (sL ), Ai (sL ), Ka,i (sL ) and Ks,i (sL ) be the optimal
15

In practice, new technologies may diﬀer in their productivity and may also require both capital and labor
inputs for their adoption and operation. In the latter case, changes in the relative prices of capital and labor
will also aﬀect which technologies are more likely to be adopted. We do not model these issues explicitly both
to simplify the analysis and also because we cannot measure the relative capital intensity of technologies in our
empirical work.

10

choices for hospital i at labor subsidy rate sL . Let εψ be the (local) elasticity of substitution
between Li and Ai in the function ψ (·, ·). Then we have
dKs,i (sL )
dLi (sL )
> 0 and
> 0.
dsL
dsL

(17)

∂Ka,i (sL )
∂Ai (sL )
1−η
S εψ .
S 0 and
S 0 if and only if
∂sL
∂sL
1−β−η

(18)

and

This proposition generalizes Proposition 2 to an environment with labor, capital and technology choices, and is the starting point of our empirical analysis of technology choices. It
indicates that the same kind of comparison between the elasticity of substitution and returns
to scale also guides whether or not technology adoption will be encouraged by the change in
the regulation regime. In this case, the comparison is between the elasticity of substitution
between technology (or capital embodying the new technology) and labor, εψ , and a composite
term capturing both decreasing returns to labor and technology and to the structures capital.
In particular, when η = 0, the condition in (18) is equivalent to that in (14), but when η > 0,
this condition would be harder to satisfy for a given level of β, because structures capital also
adjusts, leaving less room for technology adjustment (though naturally in practice a higher
η would correspond to a lower β).16 Nevertheless, the qualitative insights are similar, and
indicate that the essence of the labor push theory will apply with suﬃcient decreasing returns
and a suﬃciently large degree of substitution between technology and labor.
The important implication for our empirical work is that even if the price cap under the
partial regulation regime is not very generous, so that overall labor inputs decline, technologylabor substitution may induce further technology adoption. Naturally, technology and capital
expenditures on technology are more likely to increase when θ is positive (i.e., with θ > 0, they
may increase even when εψ < (1 − η) / (1 − β − η); see also footnote 29). Nevertheless Proposition 3 gives a useful benchmark and highlights the importance of substitutability between
labor and technology (or capital).17
Another interesting implication of Proposition 3 is that we could have a configuration in
which expenditures on technology (and overall technology adoption) increase with the switch
16

In practice, the condition εψ ≥ (1 − η) / (1 − β − η) in (18) may not be too restrictive since, in addition to
the structures capital, doctors’ labor is excluded from the ψ function. Thus if we think of doctors as included in
the factor z in terms of the original production function F̃ , the parameter β would correspond to the share of
technology (equipment capital) and nurse and custodian labor, while η is the share of structures capital. If, for
example, β is approximately 0.5 and η is about 0.1, the condition εψ ≥ (1 − η) / (1 − β − η) would be satisfied
if the elasticity of substitution between technology and labor is greater than 2.5.
17
In the health services sector, there is a natural substitution between technology and labor, which takes place
by varying the length of stay in hospital. Use of more high-tech equipment may save on labor by allowing patients
to leave earlier, which amounts to substituting technology for labor. We investigate this issue empirically below.

11

from full cost reimbursements to PPS, while total capital expenditures may decrease or remain unchanged, because they also include the component on structures expenditure. This is
relevant for interpreting the empirical results below.
2.1.5

Skill Composition of Employment

Finally, in our empirical work we also look at changes in the composition of the workforce, in
particular, of nurses. To do this, the production function can be generalized to
F (Ai , Ui , Si , Ki )

(19)

where Ui denotes unskilled labor (nurses) while Si denotes skilled labor (nurses). An increase
in capital/labor ratio and technology adoption will increase the ratio of skilled to unskilled
labor as long as technology and/or capital is more complementary to skilled than to unskilled
labor. To state the result here in the simplest possible form, suppose that Ai is fixed, so that
the main eﬀect of the change in regulation will work through an increase in the capital stock
overall (including equipment as well as structures capital). We have (proof omitted):
Proposition 4 Suppose that F (Ai , Ui , Si , Ki ) is homothetic in Ui , Si and Ki , and denote
the (local) elasticity of substitution between Ui and Ki by σ U and the elasticity of substitution
between Si and Ki by σ S . Then
Sif
Sip
if and only if σ S Q σ U .
p R
Ui
Uif
This proposition therefore shows that when capital is more complementary to skilled than
unskilled labor, the removal of the implicit subsidy to labor involved in the change from full cost
reimbursements to partial cost reimbursement will increase the skill composition of hospitals.
A similar proposition could be stated for the case in which the main margin of adjustment is
technology (embodied in capital), which would correspond to technology-skill complementarity
rather than capital-skill complementarity.

2.2

Choice of Medicare Share

We now briefly discuss how the Medicare share of hospital i, mi , can be endogenized. Suppose
that the hospital produces two distinct “products,” Medicare health services and non-Medicare
health services (the latter may also include outpatient Medicare, which is reimbursed diﬀerently). Let the production functions for these two products be
Fm (Am,i , Lm,i , Km,i ) and Fn (An,i , Ln,i , Kn,i ) ,

12

with respective prices qm and qn , and exogenous technology terms Am,i and An,i , and let
mi =

Fm (Am,i , Lm,i , Km,i )
,
Fm (Am,i , Lm,i , Km,i ) + Fn (An,i , Ln,i , Kn,i )

(20)

be the Medicare share of total output. Alternatively, we could have defined mi as the Medicare
share of total operating expenses, mi = Lm,i / (Lm,i + Ln,i ), or the Medicare share of capital
expenses, mi = Km,i / (Km,i + Kn,i ), in both cases with identical results.
The maximization problem of the hospital under full cost reimbursement is:
max

Lm,i ,Km,i ,
Ln,i ,Kn,i ,mi

π m (i) = qm Fm (Am,i , Lm,i , Km,i ) + qn Fn (An,i , Ln,i , Kn,i )

(21)

− (1 − mi sL ) w (Lm,i + Ln,i ) − (1 − mi sK ) R (Km,i + Kn,i ) ,
subject to (20).
This maximization problem can be broken into two parts. First, maximize
qm Fm (Am,i , Lm,i , Km,i ) + qn Fn (An,i , Ln,i , Kn,i ) with respect to Lm,i , Km,i , Ln,i and Kn,i for
given mi and subject to (20) and to the constraints that Li = Lm,i +Ln,i and Ki = Km,i +Kn,i .
Define the value of the solution to this problem as F (Li , Ki , mi ), which only depends on the
total amount of labor Li = Lm,i + Ln,i and total amount of capital Ki = Km,i + Kn,i . Once
this first step of maximization is carried out, the solution to the maximization under full cost
reimbursement in (21) can be obtained from
max π̃ m (i) = F (Li , Ki , mi ) − (1 − mi sL ) wLi − (1 − mi sK ) RKi .

Li ,Ki ,,mi

Similarly, with the same assumptions as in subsection 2.1, the maximization problem under
the partial cost reimbursement regulation regime (with θ = 0) can be written as
max π̃ p (i) = F (Li , Ki , mi ) − wLi − (1 − mi sK ) RKi .

Li ,Ki ,,mi

This implies that the analysis in subsection 2.1 can be carried out as before, with the
only addition that now mi is also a choice variable. The following proposition generalizes
Proposition 1 to this case (proof in Appendix A):
Proposition 5 Let the Medicare shares with full and partial cost reimbursement be, respectively, mfi and mpi , then as long as
mfi − mpi

mfi

(1 − mpi )

<

sL
,
sK

(22)

the move from full the partial cost reimbursement regulation increases the capital-labor ratio,
i.e.,
Kif
Kip
> f.
Lpi
Li
13

(23)

Notice that (22) is automatically satisfied if mfi ≤ mpi , and we obtain the same results as

in subsection 2.1 in this extended model with endogenous Medicare share. However, a similar
analysis to the one in subsection 2.1 establishes that since θ = 0, we should have mfi > mpi . The
additional implication for the empirical work is that the Medicare share should decline after
the introduction of PPS. This implication provides a consistency check for the other results
suggesting that the price cap under PPS was not very generous. It is also useful to note that
even when mfi > mpi , (22) is not very restrictive, so empirically we expect the capital-labor
ratio to increase after the introduction of PPS even if the Medicare share is observed to decline.

3

Overview of Medicare Reimbursement Policies

The Medicare Prospective Payment System (PPS) was introduced in October 1983 (fiscal year
1984) in an attempt to slow the rapid growth of health care costs and Medicare spending.
Under the original (pre-PPS) system of cost reimbursement, Medicare reimbursed hospitals
for a share of their capital and labor inpatient expenses, where the share was proportionate
to Medicare’s share of patient days in the hospital (OTA, 1984, Newhouse, 2002, p. 22). By
contrast, under PPS, hospitals are reimbursed a fixed amount for each patient based on his
diagnosis, but not on the actual expenditures incurred on the patient. At a broad level, this
reform can be thought of as a change from cost reimbursement to fixed price cap reimbursement,
and indeed, it is often described in these terms (e.g., Cutler, 1995).
However, an important but largely overlooked feature of the original PPS system–and a
central part of our analysis–is that initially only the treatment of inpatient operating costs
was changed to a prospective reimbursement basis. For the first eight years of PPS, capital
costs continued to be fully passed back to Medicare under the old cost-based reimbursement
system, and capital reimbursement only became fully prospective in 2001. Thus for almost
its first 20 years, the Medicare Prospective Payment System continued to reimburse capital
costs at least partly on the margin.18 The reason for the diﬀerential treatment of operating
and capital costs, both in this case and more generally in other regulated industries, appears
to be the greater diﬃculty in designing a prospective payment system for capital (CBO, 1988,
Cotterill, 1991, Joskow, 2005).
The PPS reform is thus an example of a switch from full cost reimbursement to partial cost
18

The original legislation specified that the treatment of capital costs would be unchanged for the first three
years of PPS (i.e. through October 1, 1986), and instructed the Department of Health and Human Services to
study potential methods by which capital costs might be incorporated into a prospective payment system. In
practice, a series of eleventh-hour delays postponed any change in Medicare’s reimbursement for capital costs
until October 1, 1991, at which point a 10-year transition to a fully prospective payment system for Medicare’s
share of inpatient capital costs began (GAO, 1986, CBO, 1988, Cotterill, 1991).

14

reimbursement, as described in Section 2. To our knowledge, this feature of PPS has received
no theoretical or empirical attention, even though almost all empirical examinations of the
impact of PPS focus on the initial PPS period when partial cost reimbursement was in eﬀect.
Coulam and Gaumer (1991) and Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) review the extensive empirical literature on the eﬀects of PPS. Broadly speaking, this literature concludes that PPS
was associated with declines in hospital spending and in Medicare utilization (both admissions and length of stay), but not with substantial adverse health outcomes. However, most
of this literature is based on simple pre-post (time-series) comparisons. Important exceptions
include Feder et al.’s (1987) study of the impact of PPS on spending, and Staiger and Gaumer
(1990) and Cutler’s (1995) studies of the impact of PPS on health outcomes. Staiger and
Gaumer (1990) pursue an empirical approach similar to our strategy below, which exploits the
interaction between the introduction of PPS and hospital-level variation in the importance of
Medicare patients. Our empirical findings below are consistent with the time-series evidence
from this literature that there has been a decrease in hospital expenditures and in utilization
associated with PPS. To our knowledge, our work is the first to investigate the impact of PPS
on labor and capital inputs and the skill composition of the workforce.
Finally, there is a small empirical literature, again using pre-post comparisons, to study
the impact of PPS on technology adoption, which finds little conclusive evidence of any eﬀect
of PPS (Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, 1988, 1990, Sloan et al., 1988). To our
knowledge, ours is also the first theoretical or empirical study to show that PPS might have
been associated with an overall increase in technology adoption.

4

Data and Descriptive Statistics

4.1

The AHA Data

Our analysis of the impact of PPS uses seven years of panel data from the American Hospital
Association’s (AHA) annual census of U.S. hospitals. PPS took eﬀect at the start of each
hospital’s fiscal year on or after October 1, 1983. Our data consist of four years prior to PPS
(fiscal years 1980 - 1983) and three years post PPS (fiscal years 1984 - 1986). We interpret the
year of the data as corresponding to the hospital’s fiscal year.19
We restrict our analysis to the first three years of PPS, during which the treatment of capital
was specified in advance (in particular, we do not use data from the subsequent period when
there was uncertainty concerning the treatment of capital, see footnote 18). We also exclude
19
In practice, the data may consist of somewhat less than three years post PPS since only about one quarter
of hospitals begin their fiscal year on October 1. In addition not all hospitals report data for the 12-month
period corresponding to their fiscal year. We discuss these issues in more detail in the interpretation of the
empirical results below.

15

from the analysis the four states (MA, NY, MD and NJ) that received waivers exempting
them from the federal PPS legislation. Because these four states also experienced their own
idiosyncratic changes in hospital reimbursement policy during our period of analysis (often right
around the time of the enactment of federal PPS), the states are not useful for us as controls
(Health Care Financing Administration, 1986, Health Care Financing Administration, 1987,
Antos, 1993, MHA, 2002). These four states contain about 10 percent of the nation’s hospitals,
leaving us with a sample of about 6,200 hospitals per year.20
The data contain information on total input expenditures and its components, employment
and its components, and a series of binary indicator variables for whether the hospital has a
variety of diﬀerent technologies. All of these input and employment data refer to the total
amounts for the hospital, and therefore are unaﬀected by any potential reallocation of factor
usage within the hospital, e.g., to nursing home or outpatient units that may be aﬃliated with
the hospital. In addition, we also observe inpatient hospital utilization, specifically admissions
and patient days. The expenditure and utilization data for year t are in principle measured
for the twelve-month reporting period from October 1, t-1 through September 30, t; the
employment and technology variables are in principal measured as of September 30, t. Note
that hospital employment and payroll consist of nurses, technicians, therapists, administrators,
and other support staﬀ; most doctors are not included as they are not directly employed or
paid by the hospital. With the exception of patient days, none of the variables are reported
separately for Medicare. We use Medicare’s share of patient days in the hospital as the key
source of our cross-sectional variation in the impact of PPS across hospitals (see below).
Medicare explicitly defines a hospital’s reimbursable capital costs to include interest and
depreciation expenses (GAO, 1986, OTA, 1984, Cotterill, 1991), each of which we can identify
in the AHA data.21 Since changes in interest expenses may reflect financing changes rather
than real input changes, we focus on depreciation expenses (which are about two-thirds of
combined interest and depreciation expenses). Medicare uses straight-line depreciation to
reimburse hospitals for the depreciation costs of structures and equipment (CBO, 1988). The
estimated life of an asset is determined by the American Hospital Association; during the time
20
Cutler (1995) uses MA as a control state relative to other New England states in his study of the impact
of PPS on health outcomes, as PPS was only introduced in MA in FY 1986. Because Medicare and Medicaid
experimented with alternative forms of rate setting in MA between FY 1982 and FY 1985 (Health Care Financing
Administration, 1987), MA is not suitable as a control state for our analysis of the eﬀect of relative factor price
changes resulting from PPS (although these do not necessarily pose a problem for Cutler’s analysis of the impact
of PPS on health outcomes).
21
Capital-related insurance costs, property taxes, leases, rents, and return on equity (for investor-owned
hospitals) are also included in capital costs. In practice, however, capital costs are primarily interest and
depreciation expenses, which are also the items reported separately in the AHA data and used by the overseers
of Medicare to study Medicare capital costs (e.g. CBO, 1988, Prospective Payment Assessment Commission,
1992, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, 1999).

16

period we study, it ranged from 4 to 40 years depending on the asset; lives of 5 and 10 year
tend to be the most common (AHA, 1983). Depreciation expenses therefore measure past and
current capital expenditures rather than the capital stock (which would have been the ideal
measure). Since the cost of capital and equipment prices should not vary systematically across
hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare shares, depreciation expenses should be a good proxy for the
capital stock.
Our baseline measure of the capital-labor ratio, Ki /Li in terms of the model, is therefore
the “depreciation share” defined as depreciation expenses divided by operating expenses. We
define operating expenses as total input expenses net of interest and depreciation expenses.
Just under two-thirds of operating expenses are payroll expenses (including employee benefits),
with the remainder consisting of supplies and purchased services. Depreciation expenses are
on average about 4.5 percent of operating expenses (see Table 1), indicating that the hospital
sector is much less capital intensive than many other regulated industries.22

4.2

Descriptive Statistics and Time Series Evidence

Table 1 gives the basic descriptive statistics for our key variables over the entire sample.
Changes in these variables over time are depicted in Figures 1-3.
Figure 1 shows the simple time-series average of hospital capital-labor ratio (depreciation
share). Consistent with Proposition 1, the time-series displays a striking increase in the average
capital-labor ratio at the time of PPS’s introduction (FY 1984) both in absolute terms and
relative to the pre-existing time-series pattern. Proposition 2 suggests that if the level of the
price cap θ is suﬃciently low, labor inputs should fall, but even in this case, capital inputs may
rise or remain unchanged. Consistent with this, the time-series shows a pronounced decrease in
labor inputs (real operating expenditures) relative to the pre-existing trends (Figure 2). They
also show no evidence of a deviation in capital inputs (real depreciation expenditures) from
the pre-existing time-series trend (Figure 3).23
The time-series evidence is only suggestive, however, since it may be driven by other secular
changes in the hospital sector or the macro economy more generally. Our empirical work below
exploits the within-variation for hospitals, in particular, focusing on the interaction between
the introduction of PPS and the pre-PPS Medicare share (the empirical counterpart of mi in
the model). It is nonetheless interesting that this very diﬀerent empirical strategy will show
patterns quite similar to those visible in Figures 1-3.
22

The National Income Product Accounts indicate that the share of capital in value added in health services
is 12.8% during the period of our data. In contrast, the share of capital in electric, gas and sanitary services
is 64.1% and in telephone and telegraph, it is 49%. We are grateful to Veronica Guerrieri for help with the
National Income Product Accounts
23
To match the empirical work below, the time series in Figures 2 and 3 are presented on a log scale; in
practice, the pattern is similar if we look at absolute levels.

17

5

Econometric Framework

The motivating theory developed in Section 2 suggests an empirical strategy for detecting the
eﬀects of PPS reform based on variation across hospitals in their (pre-PPS) Medicare share,
mi . Proposition 1 indicates that the regulatory change should be associated with an increase
in the capital-labor ratio for all aﬀected hospitals (i.e., for all hospitals with mi > 0), but with
a larger eﬀect in hospitals with a higher mi (see equation (12)). Based on this reasoning, our
basic estimating equation is
yit = αi + γ t + X0it · η+β · (P OSTt · mi ) + εit ,

(24)

where yit is the outcome variable of interest in hospital i at time t. In our first empirical models,
yit will represent the capital-labor ratio (measured as the depreciation share) to investigate the
predictions in Proposition 1. We will later use the same framework to investigate the responses
of a number of other outcomes.
In our estimating equation (24), αi represents a full set of hospital fixed eﬀects, γ t stands
for a full set of year dummies, and Xit is a vector of other covariates, which are not included in
the baseline regressions, but will be added in several of the robustness checks below. Finally,
εit is a random disturbance term capturing all omitted influences.
The main variable of interest is the interaction term (P OSTt · mi ) with coeﬃcient β. Here

P OSTt is a dummy variable which takes the value equal to 1 for the three post-PPS years
(1984-1986). A useful variant of this equation is
yit = αi + γ t + X0it · η+β · (P OSTt · mi ) + φ · (d1983 · mi ) + εit ,

(25)

where d1983 is a dummy for the year 1983. The interaction term (d1983 · mi ) acts as a pre-

specification test; it will be informative on whether there are any diﬀerential trends in the
variables of interest by Medicare share before the introduction of PPS.
We will also estimate a more flexible version of these equations of the form
yit = αi + γ t + X0it · η+

X

t≥1981

β t · mi + εit .

(26)

Relative to (24) or (25), the model in (26) allows both time-varying post-PPS eﬀects and also
a more flexible investigation of whether there are any diﬀerential trends in the variables of
interest by Medicare share in any of the pre-PPS years.
In all models, to account for potential serial correlation of the observations from the same
hospital, we adjust the standard errors by allowing for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix
within each hospital over time (see Wooldridge, 2002, p. 275). In practice, this does not have
much eﬀect on the standard errors.
18

A key question is how to measure mi empirically. Because reimbursement in the pre-PPS
regime was based on Medicare’s share of patient days in the hospital (Newhouse, 2002, p. 22),
we define mi as the share of Medicare inpatient days. Since, as discussed in the motivating
theory, the Medicare share mi is likely to respond endogenously to the regulatory change, we
measure mi in 1983, the year prior to the implementation of PPS.
Figure 4 shows the considerable variation across hospitals in their Medicare share in 1983.
The average hospital’s Medicare share is almost two-fifths (38 percent), with a standard deviation of over one fifth (21 percent). The mass point of almost 15 percent of hospitals which we
have coded as having zero Medicare share reflects that fact that certain types of hospitals–
specifically federal, long-term, psychiatric, children’s, and rehabilitation hospitals–were exempt from Medicare PPS (OTA, 1985, Newhouse, 2002, p. 27). The exemption stems from
the extremely low Medicare share of these hospitals. For our purposes, we code their mi as 0
since they would not be aﬀected by the reform. In the robustness analysis below, we show that
the main results can be obtained when we identify the eﬀect of PPS using only the variation
between zero share and non-zero share hospitals, or using only the variation in mi among
hospitals coded with a non-zero mi .
The identifying assumption in estimating equations (24), (25), and (26) is that, absent
the introduction of PPS, hospitals with diﬀerent mi ’s would not have experienced diﬀerential
changes in their outcomes in the post-PPS period. However, mi is not randomly assigned.
Indeed, in the cross-section prior to PPS, a larger mi is correlated with a smaller size (as
measured, for example, by input expenditures) and higher depreciation share.24 Any fixed
diﬀerences across hospitals will be absorbed by the hospital fixed eﬀects, the αi ’s. However,
such systematic diﬀerences raise concerns about whether, absent the introduction of PPS in
FY 1984, hospitals with diﬀerent mi would have experienced similar changes in the outcomes
of interest. Equations (25) and (26) allow us to use the pre-PPS data to investigate the validity
of this identifying assumption by looking for diﬀerential trends prior to PPS. The results below
will show little evidence of such pre-existing trends, supporting our identifying assumption.
Motivated by the theoretical predictions, we estimate equations (24), (25), and (26) for
various dependent variables: capital-labor ratio (depreciation share), log labor inputs (log
operating expenditures), log capital inputs (log depreciation expenditures), Medicare share of
patient days, log average length of hospital stay, and the share of nurse employment that is
high-skill. When the dependent variable is not already a share, we estimate the equation in
logs.25
24

These and other results mentioned in the paper but not shown in the tables are available upon request from
the authors.
25
A level specification would constrain the outcomes of each hospital to grow by the same absolute amount
within a year, which is inappropriate given the considerable variation in size across hospitals.

19

6

Main Results

6.1

Results on Capital-Labor Ratio

Proposition 1 suggests that the move from full cost to partial cost reimbursement should increase the capital-labor ratio. We investigate this in Table 2, which shows that the introduction
of Medicare PPS is associated with a statistically and economically significant increase in the
capital-labor ratio (depreciation share).
Column (1) shows the estimation of our most parsimonious equation, (24). The P OSTt
variable is simply a dummy for the three years in which PPS is in eﬀect in our sample (19841986). In this specification, the coeﬃcient β on the key interaction term (mi · P OSTt ), is

estimated as 1.129 (standard error = 0.108). This is both a highly statistically significant and
economically large eﬀect. Given that the average hospital has a 38 percent Medicare share

prior to PPS, this estimate suggests that in its first three years, the introduction of PPS was
associated with an increase in the depreciation share of about 0.42 (' 1.129 × 0.38) for the

average hospital. Since the average depreciation share is about 4.5, this corresponds to a
sizable 10 percent increase in the capital-labor ratio of the average Medicare share hospital.26
Column (2) investigates whether the diﬀerential growth in the capital-labor ratio between

high and low Medicare share hospitals was present before the introduction of PPS by estimating
equation (25). The estimate of the key parameter, β, is essentially unchanged, while the
coeﬃcient φ on the interaction between the 1983 dummy and the Medicare share, (d1983 · mi ),

is very small (practically zero) and highly insignificant. This indicates that relative to the years
1980 through 1982, hospitals with a larger mi did not experience a statistically or economically

significant change in their capital-labor ratio in 1983 (the year before PPS) relative to hospitals
with a smaller mi . This is supportive of the identifying assumption that absent the introduction
of PPS, hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare shares would have experienced similar changes in their
capital-labor ratios.
Column (3) shows the results from estimating the more flexible equation (26) in which each
year dummy is interacted with the hospital’s 1983 Medicare share; the omitted year is 1980.
This allows a further investigation of the identifying assumption as well as an examination of
the timing of the response to PPS. The results indicate that relative to their 1980 spending,
26
We can use this estimate to derive a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the elasticity of substitution between
total capital and labor. Assuming that sL ≈ 1, the increase in relative labor costs could be estimated to be
about 75% for the average aﬀected hospital (i.e., 1/ (1 − sL mi ) ≈ 1/ (1 − 0.4) ≈ 0.75). This would imply that
the capital-labor ratio changed by about 10% in response to a 75% change in relative labor costs, which would
be consistent with an elasticity of substitution of about 0.13. In practice, however, the implied elasticity of
substitution is likely to be considerably higher, for 0.75 is likely to be a significant overestimate of the change
in the relative costs of labor, since the fungibility between Medicare and non-Medicare costs is likely to apply
at the margin, but not on average, and because sL ≈ 1 is likely to be an overestimate.

20

hospitals with a larger Medicare share did not experience a significant change in their capitallabor ratio relative to hospitals with a smaller Medicare share in the pre-PPS years 1981 or
1983, but there is a one-time downward blip in 1982.27 Thus, the pattern over all four pre-PPS
years suggests that, if anything, the capital-labor ratio may have been declining in hospitals
with a larger Medicare share relative to hospitals with a smaller Medicare share. There is a
pronounced shift in this pattern starting in 1984, the first year that PPS is in place. In this
year, hospitals with a larger Medicare share experience a statistically significant increase in the
capital-labor ratio relative to hospitals with a smaller Medicare share, confirming the results
in the previous two columns.
In a pattern that will repeat itself for many of the other dependent variables that we analyze,
the results in column (3) also indicate that the magnitude of the increase in the capital-labor
ratio associated with PPS grows from 1984 to 1985 and again from 1985 to 1986. This likely
reflects, at least in part, lags in the implementation of PPS both in actuality and as measured
in our data. PPS was eﬀective at the beginning of the hospital’s fiscal year starting on or after
October 1, 1983. Hospitals were therefore added to the new regime throughout its first year in
operation, with some not entering the new system until midway or late in the 1984 calendar
year (OTA, 1985). Moreover, not all hospitals follow the AHA instructions to report data for
year t for the twelve month period from October 1, t-1 to September 30, t; in any given year,
about half appear to instead report data for the twelve-month period corresponding to their
fiscal year. This also contributes to a staggered implementation of PPS in the data. However,
the fact that the increase in the size of the eﬀect from 1984 to 1985 (i.e., from a year in which
only some hospitals were fully under the system to a year in which all were) is quite similar to
the increase in the size of the eﬀect from 1985 to 1986 (two years in which all aﬀected hospitals
were under the system) suggests that lags in implementation alone cannot fully account for
the time pattern we observe. Lags in the hospital response to the new reimbursement regime
(perhaps due to adjustment costs) may have also played a role.
Whatever its underlying cause, the empirical evidence in column (3) that the impact of
PPS appears to grow over time suggests that a more appropriate parameterization of the postPPS period may be a trend rather than a single post-PPS dummy. This motivates yet another
slight variation on our estimating equation,
⎛
⎞
X
(t − 1983) · mi ⎠ + φ · (d1983 · mi ) + εit , .
yit = αi + γ t + X0it · η+β̃ · ⎝

(27)

t≥1984

27

This one-year blip in 1982 is not a major concern for our results. We show in Section 7 that our results are
robust to numerous alterantive specifications that deal flexibly with potential mean reversion and to including
a linear trend interacted with Medicare share. Moreover, our results are also robust to excluding the 1982 data
from the analysis, with or without including a linear trend interacted with Medicare share (not shown).

21

which imposes a linear structure on the post-PPS eﬀects. This equation has the advantage of
summarizing the post-PPS patterns more parsimoniously than equation (26).
Columns (4) and (5) estimate equation (27) with and without the pre-specification test
term, (d1983 · mi ). In both cases, there is a very precisely estimated coeﬃcient of β̃ of about

0.53 (standard error approximately 0.05). In column (5) as in column (2), there is no evidence
of a pre-PPS diﬀerential eﬀect. With a similar calculation to above, the estimate of 0.53

suggests that, in its first three years, PPS was associated, on average, with an approximately
4 percent per year increase in hospitals’ capital-labor ratio.

6.2

Results on Labor and Capital Inputs and Medicare Share

Proposition 2 suggests that if the price cap θ is low, labor inputs should decline in response to
the move to partial cost reimbursement. Table 3 investigates the diﬀerential change in (log)
labor inputs (log operating expenses) across hospitals with diﬀerent pre-PPS Medicare shares;
it reports results from estimating equations (24), through (27) with this alternative dependent
variable. Consistent with Proposition 2, the results suggest that the move from full cost to
partial cost reimbursement was associated with a decline in labor inputs. Once again, the
estimates are quite precise. For example, the estimate of β, the coeﬃcient on the interaction
term (mi · P OSTt ), in column (1) is -0.141 (standard error = 0.016). Column (2) shows no
evidence of a pre-existing trend. The estimates suggest that during the first three years of

PPS, there was a decline of about 5 percent (' 0.141 × 0.38) in labor inputs for an average
Medicare share hospital.

The estimates in column (3) again suggest that the impact of PPS was increasing over the
first three years in which it was in place.28 Correspondingly, the linear trend specifications
in columns (4) and (5) also fit the data very well and produce precise estimates of about
-0.07. This implies that, during its first three years, the PPS reform was associated, on
average, with an approximately 3 percent (' 0.07 × 0.38) per year decline in labor inputs.

The specifications also show some evidence of a small and marginally statistically significant

increase in labor inputs in more aﬀected hospitals in some of the pre-PPS years. Although this
may raise concerns about the potential for mean reversion that may contaminate our estimate
of the impact of PPS, Section 7 will show that the results are highly robust to a number of
specifications that flexibly deal with potential mean reversion issues.
Table 4 estimates our baseline models for log capital inputs (log depreciation expenses). The
results indicate essentially no statistical or substantive eﬀect on capital inputs. These results
28

Another potential explanation for the time pattern in the adjustment of labor inputs to PPS, besides the
possible explanations discussed above, is that the level of the price cap θ was tightened after the first year of
PPS (Coulam and Gaumer, 1991), which would naturally lead to further declines in labor inputs.

22

suggest that the decline in labor inputs was not associated with a corresponding decline in
capital inputs. This is consistent with the theoretical result in Proposition 2 that even when
the price cap θ is low enough that labor inputs decline, capital inputs need not decrease and
may in fact increase when there is suﬃcient substitutability between capital and labor.29
We have interpreted the results for labor and capital inputs as corresponding to the predictions of the theoretical model when the price cap θ is relatively low. As discussed in footnote
13, the existing evidence is suggestive of a low price cap. In addition, recall from Section 2.2
that when the price cap is low, the move to partial cost reimbursement should be associated
with a decline in the Medicare share mi . Consistent with this, Table 5 shows that PPS is
associated with a decline in Medicare’s share of patient days.30 The point estimate in our
preferred specification (column 5) is -0.032 (standard error = 0.003), and suggests that, for
its first three years, PPS was associated with about a 1 percentage point (' 0.032 × 0.38) per

year decline in the Medicare share of patient days, or a 2 - 3 percent per year decline relative
to the baseline.

6.3

Technology Adoption

The AHA data contain a series of binary indicators for whether the hospital has various
“facilities”, such as a blood bank, open heart surgery facilities, CT scanner, occupational
therapy, genetic counseling, and neonatal intensive care. These data have been widely used
to study technology adoption decisions in hospitals (e.g. Cutler and Sheiner, 1998, Baker and
Phibbs, 2002, Finkelstein, 2005). Since they contain only indicator variables for the presence or
absence of various facilities, we cannot study upgrading of existing technology or the intensity
of technology use, but we can study the total number of facilities, which provides one proxy
for the Ai variable in the theoretical model
Overall, during our time period, the AHA collects information on the presence of 113
diﬀerent facilities. These are listed, together with their sample means and the years in which
they are available, in Appendix Table A. On average, a given facility is reported in the data
for 4.6 out of the possible 7 years; only one-quarter of the technologies are in the data for all
seven years. Moreover, as is readily apparent from Appendix Table A, the list encompasses
29

Recall that the value of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor necessary for capital inputs
not to decline depends on the level of the price cap, θ. If θ were zero, the elasticity of substitution would have
to exceed 1 (cfr., Proposition 2). However, if θ is positive (but small), even when the elasticity of substitution
is less than 1, labor inputs would decline while capital inputs may not.
30
To prevent a mechanical correlation between the cross-sectional variation, mi , and the dependent variable,
in this table we define mi based on the hospital’s Medicare share in 1980, and exclude 1980 from the analysis.
All of our previous results are robust to this alternative specification. Also, while we code the regressor mi to be
zero for the approximately 15 percent of hospitals that are exempt from PPS, we allow the dependent variable
in this case to take its actual value for all hospitals. On average over 1981 - 1986, the dependent variable is
0.38; it is 0.09 (0.43) for exempt (non-exempt) hospitals.

23

a range of very diﬀerent types of facilities. Given these two features of the data, we pursue
two complementary approaches to analyzing the impact of the change from full to partial cost
reimbursement on technology adoption.
Our first approach (consistent with the perfect substitutability across diﬀerent technologies in the model) treats all facilities equally and estimates equations (24)-(27) using the
(unweighted) number of facilities that hospital i has in year t as the dependent variable (in
this specification, year fixed eﬀects take care of the unbalanced panel nature of the data).
Our second approach estimates separate hazard models of the time to adoption for specific
technologies that are in the data for all of the years of our sample.
6.3.1

Number of Facilities

In our first approach, the dependent variable is the raw count of the number of facilities of each
hospital. This dependent variable ranges from 0 to 77 with an average of 25. Approximately 10
percent of the hospital-years in the sample have zero facilities. Table 6 shows the results. Panel
A reports the OLS estimates. Since there are a large number of zero’s, we cannot estimate this
equation in logs, nor is there a natural scaling factor to use in the denominator to turn this
into a share estimate. Instead Panel B reports the analogous results from the conditional fixed
eﬀects Poisson model (Hausman et al., 1984). For the model corresponding to equation (25)
above, this approach amounts to assuming the following conditional expectation for the number
of facilities for hospital i at time t, Nit , given the sample mean of the vector of covariates Xi ,
X̄i , for hospital i:31
£
¤
E Nit | αi , X̄i = exp(αi + γ t + X0it · η+β · (P OSTt · mi ) + φ · (d1983 · mi )).

(28)

Because this equation is nonlinear and cannot be estimated consistently with fixed eﬀects, we
follow Hausman et al. (1984), and estimate the conditional logit transformation:
¤
£
exp(γ t + X0it · η+β · (P OSTt · mi ) + φ · (d1983 · mi ))
N̄i ,
E Nit | αi , X̄i , N̄i = PT
0
τ =1 exp(γ τ + Xiτ · η+β · (P OSTτ · mi ) + φ · (d1983 · mi ))

(29)

where N̄i is the average number of facilities for hospital i over the sample. This transformation removes the unobserved hospital eﬀects, the αi ’s, and enables consistent estimation. We
estimate equation (29) with quasi-maximum likelihood and calculate the fully-robust variancecovariance matrix (see Wooldridge, 2002, pp. 674-676).
In practice, the results are not sensitive to whether we use OLS or the conditional fixed
eﬀect Poisson model. In either case, the estimates suggest that the change from full to partial
31

The analogs of our other estimating equations, (26) and (27), are obtained by replacing
³P the β · (P OSTt · m´i )
term with a full set of interactions between mi and post-1981 year dummies, or with β̃·
t≥1984 (t − 1983) · mi .

24

cost reimbursement is associated with a statistically and economically significant increase in
the number of facilities of aﬀected hospitals.
The point estimate from the OLS specification in column (1) is 2.621, suggesting that,
on average, the regulatory change is associated with an increase of about one new facility
(' 2.621 × 0.38) in a hospital over its first three years; this corresponds to about a 4 percent

increase over the average number of facilities in a hospital (which is about 25). The magnitude
of the estimated eﬀect is quite similar in the conditional fixed eﬀect Poisson specification in

column (6); the point estimate of 0.12 suggests that the introduction of PPS is associated with
an approximately 5 percent (' 0.120 × 0.38) increase in the number of new facilities for the

average Medicare share hospital over its first three years.

The results in Table 6 are also broadly supportive of our identifying assumption of no
diﬀerential trends across hospitals in the number of facilities prior to PPS. Columns (3) and
(8) show some evidence of a diﬀerential decline in the number of facilities in higher Medicare
share hospitals in 1981 relative to 1980, but reassuringly, there is no similar pattern among
any of the other pre-PPS years 1981, 1982 or 1983. Although the results in columns (3) and
(8) may raise concerns about mean reversion, Section 7 will show that the results are robust
to several diﬀerent checks against mean reversion.
One diﬀerence with the previous set of findings is the time pattern of the impact of PPS
in the flexibly estimated specification (columns 3 or 8); rather than the approximately linear
growth for the other variables studied so far, the number of facilities in the aﬀected hospitals
shows a statistically significant increase from 1983 to 1984, and again from 1984 to 1985, but
the eﬀect then appears to decline somewhat from 1985 to 1986 (OLS specification) or at least
not rise further from 1985 to 1986 (Poisson specification).
6.3.2

Hazard Models

A drawback to the preceding analysis is that it treats all technologies as perfect substitutes.
As an alternative, we estimate separate hazard models of the time to adoption for specific
technologies that are in the data for all of the years of our sample. We focus on 10 technologies
that were identified as “high tech” by previous researchers (Cutler and Sheiner, 1998, Baker,
2001, and Baker and Phibbs, 2002), and that are present in our data in all years. Two of these
are cardiac technologies (cardiac catheterization and open heart surgery), two are diagnostic
technologies (CT scanner and diagnostic radioisotope facility), four are radiation therapies
used in cancer treatment (megavoltage radiation therapy, radioactive implants, therapeutic
radioisotope facility, and x-ray radiation) and the remaining two are the neonatal intensive
care unit and organ transplant. Figure 5 plots the diﬀusion pattern over our sample period
of each of these 10 technologies; they diﬀer in both their initial diﬀusion level and in whether
25

and how rapidly they are diﬀusing over our sample period.
In the hazard model analysis, we exclude hospitals that have a given technology in 1980
(since they are not “at risk” of failure–i.e., of adoption), and treat hospitals that have still not
adopted the technology by 1986 (the end of our sample period) as censored. Our first model
is an exponential (i.e., constant baseline) proportional hazard model of the form:
¡
¢
λt = α exp γ t + φ · d1983 · mi + β · (P OSTt · mi ) + X0i · η ,

(30)

where λt denotes the conditional probability that the hospital adopts the technology in question
at time t, given that it has not yet adopted the technology, and α denotes the constant baseline
hazard parameter (which we estimate). The assumption of the proportional hazard model is
that the covariates shift the baseline hazard proportionally. Our second model is a Cox semiparametric proportional hazard model, which allows for a fully flexible, non-parametric baseline
hazard λ0 , and is estimated by a transformation similar to that in equation (29)–see Kiefer
(1988). In the Cox model, we do not include year fixed eﬀects, since the fully flexible baseline
hazard is also specified with respect to calendar time.
Since we have at most a single transition (adoption) for each hospital, we cannot include
hospital fixed eﬀects in the hazard model analysis. Instead, we control for a range of timeinvariant hospital characteristics (denoted by Xi ). These are mi (i.e., the hospital’s 1983
Medicare share), the square of mi , the number of beds in 1983, and dummy variables for
whether the hospital is a general (non-speciality) hospital, whether it is short term, whether
it is federal, whether it is located in an urban area, and a complete set of state fixed eﬀects.32
Table 7 reports the results from both models.33 To conserve space, we report results only
from a specification similar to equation (25), which includes a single interaction between the
Medicare share, mi , and the post-PPS period dummy, P OSTt as well as the pre-specification
test with the interaction between mi and the dummy for the year 1983.34 Panel A of Table
7 reports the results from the exponential proportional hazard model, while Panel B reports
results from the Cox proportional hazard model. For each technology in each panel, we report the coeﬃcient and the standard error on P OSTt · mi and d1983 · mi . To illustrate the

magnitude of our estimates, we also translate the hazard model coeﬃcient on P OSTt · mi into
32
Our previous results are very similar if we estimate the models controlling for these covariates instead of
hospital fixed eﬀects.
33
We also estimated (but do not report) extended hazard models allowing for unobserved hospital heterogeneity parameterized by a gamma distribution using the discrete time nonparametric baseline proportional
hazard framework of Han and Hausman (1990). Our results are not sensitive to this extension, though there
was evidence of statistically significant hospital heterogeneity (estimates from the Han-Hausman model without
heterogeneity were very similar to the Cox model). For computational reasons, the Han-Hausman models were
estimated without the state fixed eﬀects (results from the exponential hazard or Cox models are not sensitive
to whether or not state fixed eﬀect are included).
34
As with the results for the total number of facilities, the results from hazard model estimates of individual
technologies do not indicate that the impact of PPS grows continually over the three PPS years in our sample.

26

the implied change in the proportion of hospitals that adopt the technology between 1981 and
1986 associated with changing mi from zero to its mean value.
Since we look at 10 diﬀerent technologies, the per-technology p-values will be lower than
when each technology is viewed as part of a “family of hypotheses” that PPS had no eﬀect
on any of the 10 technologies. We therefore also report the family-wise error rate adjusted
p-value [in square brackets]. This p-value corresponds to the probability of rejecting the null
hypothesis of no eﬀect on a given technology under the null family of hypotheses of no eﬀect
on any of the technologies.35 The family-wise adjusted p-values are about 5 times larger than
the standard p-values.
Both panels of Table 7 show similar results and suggest that the shift from full cost to partial
cost reimbursement was associated with increased technology adoption. At a 5 percent cutoﬀ,
the results from the exponential (Cox) model using the standard p-values suggest that PPS is
associated with increased adoption of 7 (6) of the 10 specific technologies. The results using
the family-wise adjusted p-values suggest that PPS is associated with an increased adoption
of 3 of the 10 technologies. Two of these three technologies, open heart surgery and CT
scan, are likely to be used disproportionately by Medicare patients. Our interpretation of the
increase in adoption following the PPS is thus along the lines of Proposition 3, and relies on
technology-labor substitution.36
While we cannot definitively pinpoint the mechanism for this technology-labor substitution,
we can provide some evidence of one natural mechanism, the use of technology to reduce the
length of stay. The typical hospital day is relatively nurse- or custodial care-intensive. By
increasing the intensity of treatment up front, hospitals may be able to reduce length of stay
on the margin. Consistent with this, Table 8 presents evidence that Medicare PPS is associated
with declines in log average length of stay, defined as log(patient days/admissions).37
It is also noteworthy that the other technology for which the family-wise adjusted p-values
(as well as the standard p-values) show a statistically significant increase in adoption is the
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), which is likely to be used almost exclusively by nonMedicare patients. Although an eﬀect of the PPS on NICU may at first appear puzzling (or
35
We calculate these family-wise error rate adjusted p-values based on 10,000 iterations of the free step-down
resampling method of Westfall and Young (1993). This is more powerful than the standard Bonferroni correction
because it does not assume independence across the 10 outcomes and sequentially removes hypotheses from the
family after they are rejected; see Kling and Liebman (2004) for an application and a more detailed discussion
of this method.
36
As noted before, hospital labor consists of nurses, orderlies, administrators, and custodial staﬀ but does not
include doctors (who are neither employed by nor paid by the hospitals). Thus the technologies may well be
complementary with physicians (or particular physician specialties) but still substitutes for hospital labor.
37
Because the dependent variable is mechanically related to the cross-sectional variation of Medicare share of
patient days in 1983, we again drop 1980 from the sample and re-define the cross-sectional variation as Medicare
share of patient days in 1980.

27

even concerning), it is consistent with the growing body of evidence of “spillovers” from the
nature of health insurance of one group of patients to the treatment of another group.38 Such
spillovers could be incorporated into the framework in Section 2 by relaxing the assumption
that zi in the production function (1) is constant. A change from full cost to partial cost
reimbursement would then encourage a firm to switch its managerial eﬀorts (a component of zi )
from Medicare-related activities to non-Medicare activities, potentially inducing the adoption
of non-Medicare related technologies.39 Another reason for such spillovers is the presence of
complementarities in the operation or adoption of new technologies; adopting a number of new
Medicare-related technologies may reduce the costs (and/or increase the benefits) of adopting
other, non-Medicare, technologies. Finally, in practice, Medicare’s cost-based reimbursement
rules permitted hospitals considerable latitude in determining which costs to assign to Medicare
(OTA, 1984, CBO, 1988), allowing some degree of fungibility in the reimbursement of capital
expenses. In light of all these considerations, we do not find it surprising that there is evidence
of some eﬀect of PPS on adoption of non-Medicare technologies.

6.4

Changes in Skill Composition

Finally, Proposition 4 suggests that when technology (or capital) is more complementary to
skilled than to unskilled labor, the induced increase in technology (or in the capital-labor ratio)
should cause a change in the composition of the workforce towards more skilled employees. We
can identify full-time equivalent employment of two types of nurses in the data, Registered
Nurses (RN’s) and Licensed Practitioner Nurses (LPN’s); together these constitute about onequarter of total hospital employment.40 RN’s are considerably more skilled than LPN’s.

41

Table 9 shows that the introduction of PPS appears to be associated with an increase in
the proportion of nurses that are relatively more skilled nurses (the RN’s). These results are
somewhat weaker than our previous findings; for example, in one specification, there is evidence
38

For example, Baicker and Staiger (2005) find that increases in the hospital reimbursement rate of Medicaid–
which primarily reimburses for childbirth and pediatrics–is associated with declines not only in infant mortality
but also in heart attack mortality among the elderly Medicare population. Similarly, Baker (1997) finds that
higher managed care penetration in private insurance is associated with decreased hospital spending on fee-forservice Medicare patients. Most closely related to our findings, Dafny (2005) finds that in response to increases
in average reimbursement rates for Medicare patients with specific diagnoses, hospitals spread the increased
revenue uniformly across the treatment of all patients.
39
Note that this is a distinct eﬀect on technology adoption from that highlighted in Proposition 3, which
focuses on the technologies directly substituting for the tasks previously performed by the labor that was being
subsidized under the full cost reimbursement regime.
40
The total amount of hospital employment accounted by nurses is about one-third, but the other nursing
categories do not have consistent names across years, making it impossible for us to use them in this exercise.
41
RN certification requies about twice as many years of training as LPN certification, which is reflected in
the approximately 50 percent higher hourly wage of RN’s relative to LPN’s. We are grateful to Doug Staiger
for providing us with the estimates of hourly wages by occupation from the 2000 Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups of the CPS.

28

of a marginally statistically significant eﬀect prior to PPS in the same direction as the PPS
(column 2). In our preferred specification (column 5), the pre-PPS eﬀect is not statistically
significant, but is still of the same sign as the main eﬀect and about half the magnitude.
Overall, we interpret these findings as broadly suggestive of a potential increase in the skill
content of employment associated with the induced increase in technology adoption. Since, as
discussed in the Introduction, the existing view in the literature is that capital and technology
are more complementary to skilled labor than unskilled labor, evidence that PPS is associated
with increases in the skill composition of hospitals’ workforces provides indirect support for
our results concerning the eﬀect of PPS on capital-labor ratios and technology adoption.

6.5

Alternative Interpretations

We have so far oﬀered our preferred interpretation that the observed changes in factor demands
and technology are a response to the change in relative factor prices induced by PPS. There
are a number of alternative interpretations for our results, however the evidence suggests that
they are less compelling than our preferred interpretation.
One potential alternative is that the increase in the depreciation share, documented in
Table 2, may be a mechanical eﬀect. Depreciation is a backward looking measure, and thus
the ratio of depreciation to operating expenses may mechanically increase in response to a
proportional scaling back of capital and labor inputs. But in practice, we see no scaling
back of capital includes, and moreover, this alternative explanation would suggest that the
eﬀect should attenuate over time, whereas the results in column (3) of Table 2 indicate that
the eﬀect appears to grow over time. Another related concern would be that the PPS-induced
reduction in hospitals’ Medicare share (see Table 5) could mechanically cause an increase in the
capital-labor ratio if Medicare patients are treated in a less capital-intensive manner than nonMedicare patients. Empirically, however, Medicare patients appear to be more capital-intensive
than non-Medicare patients; in the 1983 cross-section, hospitals with a higher Medicare share
have a statistically significantly higher depreciation share, with or without controlling for a
rich set of covariates. In addition, neither of these two “mechanical” explanations is consistent
with the evidence of PPS-induced changes in technology adoption and skill composition.
Another possible interpretation is that the increase in the capital-labor ratio may partly
reflect a strategic response by hospitals to the possibility that capital reimbursement may be
made prospective in the future; if so, hospitals may wish to build up their historical capital
costs to increase their future prospective capital reimbursement rates. The incentive for such
a strategic response is not obvious, however, since it was not a priori clear if and when capital
reimbursement would be made prospective, nor how or whether own historical costs would
aﬀect any prospective reimbursement rates (see e.g., GAO, 1986, CBO, 1988). Moreover,
29

to the extent that the response reflects the results from such “gaming”, we might expect it
to occur predominantly–or at least disproportionately–on the more easily manipulatable
financing dimension (e.g., interest expenditures, or leveraging) rather than on the depreciation
share per se. However, in Table 12 below, we find no evidence that PPS is associated with
an increase in debt financing of capital expenditures (“leveraging up”). Finally, this type of
gaming response should also not translate into eﬀects on other margins, such as technology
adoption or the skill composition of the workforce.42
Turning to the technology adoption results, one potential concern is the presence of secular
increases in medical technology during this time period. Since the elderly are among the most
intensive users of medical technology, there may be a spurious association between Medicare
share and technology adoption trends. The evidence of an impact of PPS on the adoption
of the NICU (a non-Medicare technology) is reassuring in this regard. Moreover, several of
the technologies for which we find an impact of PPS are in fact not diﬀusing over our sample
period (see Figure 5). Most importantly, the results from our pre-specification test (d1983 · mi )

in Tables 6 and 7 show no systematic evidence of diﬀerential trends in technology adoption
across hospitals with diﬀerent Medicare share before the introduction of PPS.
An alternative interpretation for our technology findings is that PPS reimbursement on the

price cap (i.e., output) side is not fully prospective (McClellan, 1996, 1997); the reimbursement
a hospital receives for a Medicare patient varies not only based on the patient’s diagnosis,
but also, in some cases, on the type of treatment he or she receives, particularly the type
of surgery, if any. These features may have increased hospitals’ incentives to perform these
surgeries, and consequently induced them to adopt the technologies needed to perform them.
However, the evidence suggests that this type of incentive eﬀect is unlikely to be the driving
factor behind our technology adoption results. For we find equally strong results for procedures
which are not reimbursed more generously after PPS. As noted by McClellan (1996), for ad
hoc reasons, there are separate reimbursement rates for patients who have a heart attack
if they undergo percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PCTA) or coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG), but not if they spend time in the cardiac care unit (CCU). Hazard
models estimated for adoption of the CCU show that the introduction of PPS is associated
with an increased rate of adoption of the CCU even though this was not a technology whose
42
Even if the eﬀect is not merely a strategic one, the magnitude of the input response may be aﬀected by
hospitals’ expectations that continued reimbursement of capital costs might be temporary. A priori, however,
it is not clear how such expectations (even if they were important) would aﬀect magnitudes. On the one hand,
the response might be larger because the relative subsidy to capital is expected to be temporary and hospitals
may attempt to incur and pass through their capital costs while they still can. On the other hand, if there are
adjustment costs, the response may be smaller than the case in which the change in the regulatory regime is
expected to be permanent.

30

use was associated with any increased reimbursement rate.43 Moreover, there is no evidence
that hospitals vary resources per patient in response to the subsequent changes in Medicare’s
relative reimbursement rates of various health services (though there is evidence of nominal
responses, so-called “upcoding,” see, e.g., Dafny, 2005).
Finally, since PPS applied only to hospital inpatient expenditures, it may have encouraged
a real or nominal reallocation of some inpatient hospital activity to outpatient or nursing home
units of the hospital. Previous empirical evidence suggests that PPS was, in fact, associated
with re-allocation of some inpatient hospital activity to hospital outpatient units, although
there is no evidence of re-allocation to nursing homes (Coulam and Gaumer, 1991). However,
any such reallocations within the hospital can not explain our findings regarding the impact of
PPS on input and technology choices, as our input and technology measures are inclusive of
hospital-based outpatient units and hospital-based nursing home facilities.44 Of course, if some
activities were spun oﬀ out of the hospital completely, these could potentially contribute to
our estimated decline in labor inputs; they could not, however, explain the estimated increase
in technology adoption. Moreover, the empirical evidence is not suggestive of such spin-oﬀ
behavior. We find no evidence that the introduction of PPS is associated with an increased
probability of having a hospital-based nursing home unit (results not reported), and although
we cannot use our empirical strategy to investigate the impact of PPS on the creation of
freestanding nursing home facilities, there is no evidence in the time series of an increase in
total nursing home use over our time period (HCFA, 1999 p.178).

7

Robustness Checks

7.1

Alternative Specifications

We present robustness results for our main dependent variables: depreciation share (capitallabor ratio), log labor inputs, log capital inputs, and the number of facilities.45 In line with
the pattern of results shown in Tables 2, 3, 4 and 6, we report results with the post-PPS
period parameterized by a linear trend as in equation (27) for all outcomes except the number
of facilities, for which we report results with the post-PPS period parameterized by a single
indicator post-PPS dummy variable as in equation (25).
Column (1) of Table 10 reproduces the baseline results. To investigate the concern that
43
Information on whether a hospital has a CCU is available from 1980-1985 (see Appendix Table A). The
other technology adoption results in Table 7 are robust to excluding 1986 from the data.
44
The estimated impact of PPS on the capital-labor ratio looks quite similar if we instead use measures of
capital and labor that exclude any inputs used in a hospital-based nursing home (results not reported).
45
To save space, we only report the robustness analysis of the number of facilities in the OLS specification.
Results from the conditional fixed eﬀect Poisson model were similar, except that we did not estimate the
first-diﬀerenced specification (column 4) since this specification cannot be consistently estimated within the
conditional fixed eﬀects Poisson model.

31

our results may be spuriously picking up underlying diﬀerential trends by hospitals with different pre-PPS Medicare shares, our first robustness exercise adds an interaction between the
Medicare share (in 1983), mi , and a linear trend (i.e., in terms of our estimating equations
above, the vector of covariates Xit now includes mi · t). The estimates in column (2) show that
our main results are generally robust to the inclusion of this linear trend.46

A related but diﬀerent concern is that of mean reversion. In particular, if high Medicare
share hospitals are adjusting back to some hospital-specific equilibrium level, this may be
picked up by our post-PPS times Medicare share interaction. To investigate this issue, column
(3) interacts the value of the dependent variable for each hospital in 1982 with a full set of
year dummies. This specification thus flexibly controls for any mean-reverting dynamics as
well as any potential diﬀerential trends that depend on hospital baseline characteristics (e.g.,
based on technology levels). The estimates are remarkably similar to the baseline and show
no evidence that mean reversion or diﬀerential trends based on pre-treatment characteristics
had any significant eﬀect on our results.
As another check on the serial correlation properties of the error term and patterns of mean
reversion, column (4) estimates the model in first diﬀerences rather than in levels. This specification is also useful as a check on the strict exogeneity assumption necessary for consistency
of the fixed eﬀects estimator (Wooldridge, 2002, p. 284), and on the potential importance of
measurement error in the data (Griliches and Hausman, 1986). The first-diﬀerenced results in
column (4) are very similar to the baseline results.47
Column (5) deals with concerns about measurement error in our key variable, the Medicare
share, by instrumenting for the 1983 Medicare share with past values. The results are again
similar to the baseline estimates. The only exception is in Panel C where now there is a small
and marginally significant negative eﬀect on log capital inputs. Since the baseline estimate
in column (1) is also negative (but insignificant) for this variable, this evidence might suggest
that there might have been a small decline in log capital inputs following the introduction of
PPS, though this result is not robust across specifications (see especially column 8). Whether
or not this is the case is not essential for the interpretation of the rest of our results.
Several other specification checks investigated the sensitivity of our findings to diﬀerences
46

The only exception is in Panel C for log capital inputs, where we now find a significant pre-PPS eﬀect.
We find a similar significant pre-PPS positive eﬀect on log capital inputs in the first-diﬀerenced specification in
column (4) and the specification excluding small regional hospitals in column (7) as well. Nevertheless, since
neither here nor in our base specifications is there any evidence of an impact of PPS on total log capital inputs,
these results are not a major problem for our approach and simply show that the capital input results are in
general less precisely estimated.
47
The one exception is for the number of facilities (Panel D), which now show a pre-PPS eﬀect of the same
sign as the estimated PPS eﬀect that is significant at 5%. However, since this is the only specification among
many where we find a same-signed significant pre-PPS eﬀect for the number of facilities, we interpret this as
partly driven by sampling variability.

32

across areas and groups of hospitals. Since the price cap of Medicare PPS was phased in over
a four-year period as a combination of hospital-specific historical rates, regional average rates
and national rates (CBO, 1998, Gaumer and Staiger, 1990), regional diﬀerences in the level of
the price cap might contribute to diﬀerential regional eﬀects of PPS. Column (6) includes a
full set of interactions between the (nine) census region dummies and year eﬀects. In addition,
exceptions to PPS for some small rural hospitals made the reimbursement of operating costs
potentially not as prospective for these hospitals, which constitute about 20 percent of all
hospitals, although obviously a much smaller proportion of hospital beds (Staiger and Gaumer,
1990, Newhouse, 2002, p. 31). Column (7) therefore excludes the approximately 20 percent of
hospitals that are outside an MSA and had fewer than 50 beds in 1983. The results in column
(6) and (7) are again very similar to the baseline estimates in column (1).
We also looked at results weighted by hospital size (measured as the number of beds in
1983). Hospital size is highly right skewed; while the 90th percentile is only four times bigger
than the median, the 99th percentile is more than double the 90th percentile (and the largest
hospitals are over twice as big as the 99th percentile). Consequently, a regression weighted
by hospital size eﬀectively only compares the behavior of the hospitals within the top 5th
percentile or so. To avoid this, while still weighting by hospital size, we exclude the top ventile
(i.e., the top 5%) of hospitals.48 The weighted results, shown in column (8), are on the whole
very similar to those in column (1).
The evidence in Table 7 of an impact of PPS on the adoption of non-Medicare technologies
such as NICU raises the concern that there may be diﬀerential trends across hospitals related
to other demographic diﬀerences of their patient-bases, which may be confounding our estimates. To check for this possibility, column (9) includes d1983 · bi and P OST T REN Dt · bi (i.e.,
´
³P
t≥1984 (t − 1983) · bi as in equation (27)) or P OSTt · bi in Panel D, where bi is the new-

born share of non-Medicare patient days (defined analogously to mi ). The inclusion of these
variables has no major eﬀect on any of our results. In addition, the coeﬃcients on d1983 · bi and
P OST T REN Dt · bi (or P OSTt · bi in Panel D) are economically and statistically insignificant
(not shown in column 9).49

Looking across hospital ownership types, we find that the estimated impact of PPS is
generally quite similar across publicly-owned, for-profit, and non-profit hospitals. The one
exception is the technology adoption eﬀects of PPS which appears to be more pronounced in
48

Excluding the top or the bottom ventile or the top or the bottom decile of hospitals from the unweighted
regressions has no perceptible eﬀect on the results (not shown). Moreover, regressions weighted by log of hospital
size without excluding the top 5% also produce very similar results (again not shown to save space).
49
Including these additional interactions also has no eﬀect on the hazard model estimates. We only find
significant eﬀects of P OSTt · bi for NICU, where it has the expected sign, but the magnitude is much smaller
than those of the changes in response to relative factor prices induced by PPS.

33

publicly-owned hospitals (results not shown).
Finally, we explored the heterogeneity in the estimated eﬀect of PPS based on the type of
variation in mi used to identify its eﬀects. Recall that federally-owned hospitals, long-term
hospitals, and certain speciality hospitals–together totalling 15 percent of all hospitals–were
exempted from PPS, and were coded as having a zero Medicare share (see Figure 4). Table 11
explores how the estimated eﬀect of PPS varies depending on whether we use the variation in
Medicare share provided by these exempt hospitals to identify the eﬀect of PPS. Column (1)
replicates the baseline findings. In column (2), we add a full set of year dummies interacted with
each of the three categories that provide an exemption from PPS to equations (25) and (27). As
a result, identification of the eﬀect of PPS comes only from within-hospital type variation in mi
and the three types of hospitals that are exempt from Medicare PPS are not used to estimate
its impact. Column (3) presents the complementary approach in which identification of PPS
comes only from between-hospital type variation in mi ; here, we instrument the interaction
terms d1983 · mi and P OST T REN Dt · mi with the full set of year dummies interacted with
each of the three exemption categories. The results indicate that the basic findings are robust

to using either the within or between variation. Most of the estimated eﬀects of quite similar in
size using either source of variation, although the estimated impact of PPS on the capital-labor
ratio is substantially larger using the between variation than the within variation.
In summary, a wide variety of alternative specifications (some of them reported in Tables
10 and 11) suggest that the PPS-related increase in capital-labor ratio and decline in log
labor inputs are robust to a battery of checks. The results on the number of facilities are
also robust; although a number of specifications produced opposite-signed and statistically
significant pre-PPS results (in particular, columns 4, 6, 7, and 8), which might raise concerns
about mean reversion, the estimated eﬀects on facilities are highly robust to several checks for
mean reversion. The results on log capital inputs are on the whole less precise, but they are
consistent with our interpretation of no eﬀect of PPS on overall capital inputs.

7.2

Alternative Dependent Variables

Table 12 investigates the robustness of our results to alternative measures of various dependent
variables. Once again, the first column repeats the baseline regressions for comparison. Panel
A shows that the results for log labor inputs are robust to using alternative measures of labor
inputs, such as log payroll expenditures rather than log operating expenditures (see column 2).
Log payroll expenditures (which are just under two-thirds of log operating costs) are a more
direct measure of labor costs, but they are not our preferred measure, since they do not include
the full set of costs that experienced the relative price change under PPS. It is also interesting
to consider the impact of PPS on the non-payroll portion of operating expenses. This may
34

include elements of capital (or variable, non-labor costs more generally) such as pills, lab tests,
and needles; it may also include capital equipment that hospitals lease and therefore treat as
operating expenses for an accounting purposes. The results in column (3) suggest that the
PPS-induced increase in the price of operating expenditures relative to capital expenditures
was associated with a similar decline in log non-payroll operating expenses as in log payroll
expenses. Columns (4) and (5) show that our results for log labor inputs are also generally
robust to using log employment or using log nurses, defined as RN’s plus LPN’s, though with
both of these dependent variables, there is some evidence of pre-PPS eﬀects, in one case of the
same sign as the main eﬀect, and in the other of the opposite sign.
Panels B and C show that the results for log capital inputs and the capital-labor ratio are
robust to using interest expenses as well as (or instead of) depreciation expenses to measure
capital inputs. In particular, in all cases, the PPS eﬀect is qualitatively similar, though in
some specifications there is evidence of an opposite-signed pre-PPS eﬀect. The results in Panel
B suggest that PPS is not associated with any substantive or statistical change in either log
depreciation or log interest expenditures. Consistent with this, the results in Panel C suggest
that the (proportional) increase in the capital-labor ratio is quite similar when depreciation
expenses or interest expenses are used to proxy for capital inputs.

8

Conclusions

This paper has investigated the impact of regulatory change on firm input mix and technology
choices. We presented a simple neoclassical framework that emphasizes changes in relative
factor prices faced by regulated firms under diﬀerent regimes and how this may aﬀect input
mix and technology choices. We then investigated this possibility empirically by studying
the impact of the introduction of the Medicare Prospective Payment System (PPS) in the
United States. This reform changed the reimbursement for Medicare-related inpatient hospital
expenses from a full cost reimbursement system for both labor and capital inputs to a partial
cost reimbursement system, and thereby raised the relative price of labor.
Consistent with the framework we developed, the empirical results suggest that the PPS
reform is associated with an increase in the capital-labor ratio. This decline stems mainly
from a decline in labor inputs. We also found that the introduction of PPS is associated
with a significant increase in the adoption of a range of new health care technologies. Within
our theoretical framework, this would be the case when there is a relatively high degree of
substitutability between technology and hospital labor. We presented suggestive evidence of
technology-labor substitution working through declines in the length of stay. We also found
an increase in the skill composition of these hospitals, which is consistent with technology-skill

35

(or capital-skill) complementarities.
Our empirical findings suggest that relative factor prices are an important determinant of
technology diﬀusion in the hospital sector and perhaps in other sectors as well. They raise
an interesting question for further research of whether other factors that increase the relative
price of labor for hospitals, such as labor unions or the tax treatment of capital expenditures,
also encourage capital deepening and technology adoption.
Our findings do not address the eﬃciency and welfare consequences of the increase in
relative labor prices associated with a move to PPS. These depend in part on the relative
generosity of labor and capital reimbursement under the previous full cost reimbursement
system, and also on other pre-existing distortions in the health care sector. However, the
evidence that the move to PPS was not associated with substantial adverse health outcomes
(Cutler, 1995, Staiger and Gaumer, 1990) suggests that at least on the health dimension there
were no substantial adverse welfare eﬀects.
It is also worth emphasizing that our findings regarding technology adoption run counter to
the general expectation that PPS would likely reduce the pace of technology adoption (Sloan
et al., 1988, Coulam and Gaumer, 1991, Weisbrod, 1991). Such expectations were formed by
considering PPS as a full price cap system, and hence overlooked the associated relative factor
price changes. This highlights the potential importance of the details of regulation policy in
determining its ultimate impact. The particular detail we have focused on–the exemption
of capital costs from a price cap–appears to be quite common in practice. For example, the
subsequent Medicare prospective payment reimbursement system for home health care also
excluded capital-related costs (in particular, “durable medical equipment” such as hospital
beds or oxygen equipment) from the price cap (Federal Register, 2000).
Naturally, our empirical results directly speak only to the impact of regulatory change in
the hospital sector. It is possible that the health care sector is not representative of regulatory
eﬀects in other sectors, for example because most hospitals are non-profit or public entities or
because the health care sector is significantly less capital intensive than many other regulated
industries (recall footnote 22). Nevertheless, the theoretical framework we develop should be
applicable to other regulated industries, many of which operate under some form of partial cost
reimbursement (see Joskow, 2005). An investigation of the response of input and technology
choices to similar regulatory changes in other industries is another interesting area for future
research and would be particularly useful for understanding the extent to which the results
presented here generalize to other industries.

36

9

Appendix A: Proofs from Section 2

Proof of Proposition 1: Taking the ratio of (10) to (6), we obtain
FK (Ai , Lpi , Kip ) /FL (Ai , Lpi , Kip )
³
´
³
´ = (1 − mi sL ) .
FK Ai , Lfi , Kif /FL Ai , Lfi , Kif

³
´
When F (Ai , Li , Ki ) is homothetic in Li and Ki , the left-hand side is a decreasing function of (Kip /Lpi ) / Kif /Lfi ,
which immediately establishes (11), since (1 − mi sL ) < 1, and (12), since (1 − mi sL ) is decreasing in
mi . QED
Proof of Proposition 2: To prove this proposition, totally diﬀerentiate the first-order conditions
(4) and (5) with respect to Li , Ki and sL , and write the resulting system as
µ
¶µ
¶ µ
¶
FLL FLK
dL
−mi
=
dsL .
dK
FLK FKK
0
Applying Cramer’s rule immediately gives (13), and the fact that FLL FKK − (FLK )2 > 0 and FKK < 0
follows from the concavity of F , thus establishing the fact that dLi (sL ) /dsL > 0 as stated in (13).
Similarly, from Cramer’s rule
mi FLK
dKi (sL )
=
(31)
2.
dsL
FLL FKK − (FLK )
Therefore, this will be positive when FLK > 0 and negative when FLK < 0. When F is homogeneous
α
of degree α, i.e., F (Ai , Li , Ki ) = H1 (Ai ) φ (Li , Ki ) , it is easy to verify that
FLK ∝ (α − 1) φL φK + φLK φ.
Recall that when φ exhibits constant returns to scale, the elasticity of substitution is given by
σφ ≡

φL φK
.
φLK φ

This implies that FLK < 0 if and only if 1/ (1 − α) < σ φ and positive if and only if 1/ (1 − α) > σ φ ,
thus establishing (14). QED
Proof of Proposition 3: Using the form in (16), the first-order necessary and suﬃcient conditions
(under full cost reimbursement) are
qβψ L (Ai , Li )ψ(Ai , Li )β−1 Hs (Ks,i ) = (1 − mi sL ) w
qβψ A (Ai , Li )ψ(Ai , Li )β−1 Hs (Ks,i ) = (1 − mi sK ) Rκi (Ai )
qψ(Ai , Li )β Hs0 (Ks,i ) = (1 − mi sK ) R.
Taking logs and totally diﬀerentiating with respect to Ai , Li , Ks,i and sL , we obtain the system of
equations
⎞
⎛
ψ
ψ (A ,L )
(A ,L )
LL

i

i

AL

ψ L (Ai ,Li )
⎜
⎜ − (1 − β) ψL (Ai ,Li )
ψ(Ai ,Li )
⎜
⎜
ψ AL (Ai ,Li )
⎜
ψ A (Ai ,Li )
⎜
⎜ − (1 − β) ψL (Ai ,Li )
ψ(Ai ,Li )
⎝
ψ L (Ai ,Li )
β ψ(Ai ,Li )

i

i

ψ L (Ai ,Li )
A (Ai ,Li )
− (1 − β) ψψ(A
i ,Li )
0
κ (A )
(Ai ,Li )
− κii (Aii ) ψψAA(A
i ,Li )
A
A (Ai ,Li )
− (1 − β) ψψ(A
i ,Li )
A (Ai ,Li )
β ψψ(A
,L
)
i
i

η
Ks,i
η
Ks,i

η−1
Ks,i

⎟⎛
⎞ ⎛
⎟
dLi
⎟
⎟⎝
dAi ⎠ = ⎝
⎟
⎟
dKs,i
⎟
⎠

−mi
1−mi sL

0
0

⎞

⎠ dsL .

Applying Cramer’s rule again, and using the fact that (16) is strictly concave, we immediately obtain
dLi (sL ) /dsL > 0, dKs,i (sL ) /dsL > 0 and that dAi (sL ) /dsL is proportional to
(1 − η) ψ AL ψ + (1 − β) (η − 1) ψ A ψ L + βηψ A ψ L .

37

Again using the definition of the elasticity of substitution with constant returns to scale, i.e., εψ ≡
ψ A ψ L /ψ AL ψ, and the fact that Ka,i is a monotonic transformation of Ai yields (18). QED
Proof of Proposition 5: The first-order conditions with respect to capital and labor imply
´
³
1 − mfi sL (1 − mpi sK )
FK (Ai , Lpi , Kip ) /FL (Ai , Lpi , Kip )
³
´
³
´=
³
´
.
FK Ai , Lfi , Kif /FL Ai , Lfi , Kif
1 − mfi sK

The right hand side of this equation being less than 1 is suﬃcient for (23), which is in turn guaranteed
by assumption (22). QED

10

Appendix B: Cost Plus Reimbursement Without Fungibility

The analysis in the text was simplified by the fact that we allowed the hospital to substitute labor (and
capital) between the Medicare and non-Medicare products, and focused on the case where sL mi < 1
and sK mi < 1. The combination of these two assumptions implied that that the hospital always faced
positive marginal costs of hiring more labor, capital and technology.
An alternative model would be one in which there is cost plus reimbursement, in the sense that
for every dollar spent on capital or labor, the hospital receives more than one dollar back, that is,
sL > 1 and sK > 1, and there is no fungibility. In this case, the model developed in 2.1 needs to be
modified, since it would imply that the hospital would like to choose infinite amounts of capital and
labor (unless FL and FK become negative). This would not only be unrealistic, but would also run
into regulatory constraints. This Appendix briefly discusses how the analysis is modified once these
regulatory constraints are incorporated. In particular, Medicare stipulates that hospitals can charge for
“reasonable and customary” costs for Medicare services. We interpret this as implying that the amount
of reimbursement required by the hospitals has to be less than a fraction of the average productivity of
each factor that is being reimbursed under Medicare.
Let us simply focus on the Medicare services provided by the hospital and ignore technology choices
(which, as before, can be incorporated in a straightforward manner). Moreover, assume throughout
that sL > 1 and sK > 1. This implies that the profits of the hospital i are
πf (i) = qF (Li , Ki ) + sL wL̃i + sK RK̃i − wLi − RKi

(32)

where Li and Ki are the total amounts of capital and labor hired by the hospital, while L̃i and K̃i are
the total amounts of labor and capital for which the hospital requests reimbursement from Medicare.
Although we have assumed that there is no fungibility, in the sense that the hospital cannot demand
reimbursement for labor and capital used for other purposes, it can always use additional labor and
capital for Medicare-related activities even if it does not ask for reimbursement. We will see that this
might be useful depending on how tight the reimbursement constraints imposed by Medicare are.
In particular, we model these constraints as follows:
sL wL̃i ≤ BL F (Li , Ki )

(33)

sK RK̃i ≤ BK F (Li , Ki ) .

(34)

Simply put, these constraints require the reimbursement received from Medicare for labor and capital
not to exceed a certain fraction of the health services provided to Medicare patients. To clarify this
interpretation, for example, (33) can be expressed as sL w/BL ≤ F (Li , Ki ) /L̃i , which shows that this
constraint equivalently requires the average product of labor (used for reimbursement) not to exceed a
certain threshold.

38

All the other assumptions from the main model, in particular, that F is increasing, strictly concave
and twice continuously diﬀerentiable in both of its arguments, still apply. The constraints (33) and
(34) also explain why we had to allow for the hospital to be able to choose more labor and capital than
the amounts for which it demands reimbursement from Medicare. In particular, imagine that BL is
very small (in the limit, BL → 0). If we had imposed that L̃i = Li and labor were an essential factor
of production, then the hospital would have to shutdown; but with our formulation, and in reality, it
can function profitably by choosing L̃i < Li . This discussion also shows that if the reimbursement
constraints (33) and (34) are not too binding, the solution will typically have L̃i = Li and K̃i = Ki .
Consequently, under full cost (plus) reimbursement, the firm chooses L̃i , Li , K̃i and Ki to maximize
(32) subject to (33), (34) and the natural constraints arising from non-fungibility that L̃i ≤ Li and
K̃i ≤ Ki (so that the amount of labor and capital reimbursed are less than the total amount of labor
and capital used in Medicare-related activities).
Lemma 1 Profit maximization implies that with full cost reimbursement, both (33) and (34) will be
binding.
Proof. Suppose not, and that for example, (33) is slack. Since F is increasing in Li and sL > 1,
the hospital can set L̃i = Li and increase Li until (33) binds, which will increase the value of profits in
(32), yielding a contradiction. The same argument applies to (34), proving the lemma.
This lemma enables us to substitute for constraints (33) and (34) and write the maximization
problem under full cost reimbursement regulation as follows:
max
L̃i ,Li ,K̃i ,Ki

(q + BL + BK ) F (Li , Ki ) − wLi − RKi

(35)

subject to L̃i ≤ Li and K̃i ≤ Ki . Intuitively, if the hospital will hire more labor or capital than what
it demands reimbursement for, the marginal cost of this labor and capital will be given by the factor
market prices, w and R, and the amounts BL F (Li , Ki ) and BK F (Li , Ki ) will be perceived by the
hospital as lump-sum transfers. Alternatively, the firm will hire exactly L̃i and K̃i .
The first-order conditions of this problem are
³
´
(q + BL + BK ) FL Lfi , Kif ≥ w and L̃fi ≤ Lfi
(36)
³
´
(q + BL + BK ) FK Lfi , Kif ≥ R and K̃if ≤ Kif ,

(37)

π f (i) = (q + BP ) F (Li , Ki ) + sK RK̃i − wLi − RKi

(38)

both holding with complementary slackness and f denoting full cost reimbursement.
Lemma 1 has another important implication for our analysis. If the solution to the maximization
problem of the hospital involves L̃fi = Lfi and K̃if = Kif , then (33) and (34) define two equations in two
unknowns L̃fi and K̃if , and moreover, decreasing returns to capital and labor implies that there exists
a unique tuple (L∗ , K ∗ ) satisfying these two equations. Therefore, if we have the second inequalities in
(36) and (37) hold as equality, we must have L̃fi = Lfi = L∗ and K̃if = Kif = K ∗ . The above discussion
then suggests that as long as (33) and (34) are not very restrictive (i.e., are suﬃciently generous), we
will be in a situation in which the firm hires the levels of labor and capital that will exactly satisfy these
two constraints, (L∗ , K ∗ ).
Next let us turn to the partial cost reimbursement regime, where there is no reimbursement for
labor, so the constraint (33), as well as sL , are removed, and the firm now receives q + BP per unit of
Medicare health services where BP ≥ 0. The maximization problem then becomes

subject to (34) and K̃i ≤ Ki . We then immediately have the following result which parallels Lemma 1
(proof omitted):
Lemma 2 Profit maximization implies that with partial cost reimbursement, (34) will be binding.

39

Consequently, the maximization problem of the firm can be written as:
max
L̃i ,Li ,K̃i ,Ki

(q + BP + BK ) F (Li , Ki ) − wLi − RKi ,

subject to K̃i ≤ Ki . In this case, we have the following first-order conditions:
(q + BP + BK ) FL (Lpi , Kip ) = w, and
(q + BP + BK ) FK (Lpi , Kip ) ≥ R and K̃ip ≤ Kip ,
with the second condition holding with complementary slackness.
The diﬃculty in the analysis in this case stems from the fact that either of (33) or (34) could
be very tight, with correspondingly large Lagrange multipliers. For example, this would be the case
when BL → 0, so that there was eﬀectively no reimbursement of labor because of the tightness of the
“reasonable and customary” constraint. Nevertheless, the following proposition can be established:
Proposition 6 Suppose that under full cost reimbursement Lfi = L∗ and Kif = K ∗ . Consider a change
to partial cost reimbursement with BP < BL , then we have
Lpi < Lfi .

(39)

Moreover, if F is homogeneous of degree β < 1 in Li and Ki , then
Kif
Lfi

<

Kip
.
Lpi

(40)

Proof. The first-order conditions for (35) imply that (q + BL + BK ) FL (L∗ , K ∗ ) ≥ w and
(q + BL + BK ) FK (L∗ , K ∗ ) ≥ R, while the first-order conditions for (38) imply (q + BP + BK ) FL (Lpi , Kip ) =
w and (q + BP + BK ) FK (Lpi , Kip ) ≥ R. To obtain a contradiction suppose that Lpi ≥ Lfi . Lemma 2
implies that (34) holds as equality. Since Lpi ≥ Lfi = L∗ , (34) then implies Kip ≥ Kif = K ∗ . First,
suppose that Kip = K ∗ . Then diminishing returns to labor implies that (q + BL + BK ) FL (L∗ , K ∗ ) ≥ w
is inconsistent with (q + BP + BK ) FL (Lpi , K ∗ ) = w, Lpi ≥ L∗ and BP < BL , yielding a contradiction.
Second, suppose that Kip > K ∗ . Then (37) implies (q + BP + BK ) FK (Lpi , Kip ) = R. Then, BP < BL
implies that
(q + BP + BK ) FL (Lpi , Kip ) > (q + BL + BK ) FL (L∗ , K ∗ )
(q + BP + BK ) FK (Lpi , Kip ) > (q + BL + BK ) FK (L∗ , K ∗ ) ,
which is inconsistent with Kip > K ∗ and Lpi ≥ L∗ given decreasing returns, yielding another contradiction, and establishing that we must have Lpi < L∗ , i.e., (39).
To obtain (40), first note that if Kip ≥ K̃if = K ∗ , given (39), (40) would apply immediately.
Therefore, we only have to show that it also holds when Kip < K̃if = K ∗ . Suppose this is the case.
Then, use Lemma 2 and the homogeneity assumption on F , to reexpress (34) as
µ p ¶
Li
p
p β
sK RK̃i (Ki ) ≤ BK F
,1 .
Kip
Since K̃ip ≤ Kip < K̃if = K ∗ , it must be that Lpi /Kip < Lfi /Kif , establishing (40).
This proposition generalizes the results from our basic analysis with fungibility in subsection 2.1 to
the case without fungibility, though the results are weaker since they hold under some additional conditions. Most importantly, the main results apply as long as the full cost reimbursement is suﬃciently
generous to start with so as to ensure Lfi = L̃fi = L∗ and Kif = K̃if = K ∗ , and partial cost reimbursement is less generous than full cost reimbursement as captured by the condition that BP < BL . Both
of these appear as plausible conditions in the context of the PPS reform.

40

11

References
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market”, Journal

of Economic Literature, XL, 7-72.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2003. “Factor Prices and Technical Change: From Induced Innovations
to Recent Debates” in Philippe Aghion, Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz and Michael Woodford (editors) Knowledge, Information and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: in Honor
of Edmund S. Phelps, New Jersey, Princeton University Press, 464-491.
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Linn. 2004. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
from the Pharmaceutical Industry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1049-1090.
American Hospital Association. 1983. Estimated Useful Lives of Depreciable Hospital
Assets. American Hospital Association, Chicago IL.
Antos, Joseph. 1993. “Waivers, Research, and Health System Reform.” Health Aﬀairs:
179-183
Armstrong, Mark, Simon, Cowen and John, Vickers. 1994. Regulatory Reform: Economic
Analysis and British Experience, Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.
Averech, Harvey and Leland Johnson. 1962. “Behavior of the Firm under Regulatory
Constraint.” American Economic Review 52: 1053-1069.
Baicker, Katherine and Douglas Staiger. 2005. “Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal
Health Care Funds, and Patient Mortality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1).
Baker, Laurence, “HMOs and Fee for Service Health Care Expenditures: Evidence from
Medicare.” Journal of Health Economics, XVI (1997), 453-481.
Baker, Laurence. 2001. “Managed Care and Technology Adoption in Health Care: Evidence
from Magnetic Resonance Imaging.” Journal of Health Economics, 20: 395-421.
Baker, Laurence and Ciaran Phibbs. 2002. “Managed care, technology adoption, and
health care: the adoption of neonatal intensive care.” Rand Journal of Economics 33: 524-548.
Baumol, William and Alvin Klevorick. 1970. “Input Choices and Rate of Return Regulation: An Overview of the Discussion” Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science,
1:162-190.
Binswanger, Hans and Vernon Ruttan. 1978. Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions
and Development, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Congressional Budget Oﬃce. 1988. “Including Capital Expenses in the Prospective Payment System.”
Cotterill, Philip. 1991. “Prospective payment for Medicare hospital capital: Implications
of the research.” Health Care Financing Review, Annual Supplement: 79-86.
Coulam, Robert and Gary Gaumer. 1991. “Medicare’s prospective payment system: A

41

critical appraisal.” Health Care Financing Review, Annual Supplement: 45 -77.
Cutler, David. 2003. Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health
Care System. Oxford University Press.
Cutler, David. 1995. “The Incidence of Adverse Medical Outcomes Under Prospective
Payment.” Econometrica 63(1): 29-50.
Cutler, David and Louise Sheiner. 1998. Managed Care and the Growth of Medical Expenditures.” In Alan Garber (ed). Frontiers in Health Policy Research.
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2000. “The Anatomy of Health Insurance” in
A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds. Handbook of Health Economics, Volume IA, Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Dafny, Leemore. 2005. “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?” American Economic Review 95(5): 1525-1547.
David, Paul. 1975. Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth: Essays on American and British Experience in the Nineteenth Century, London, Cambridge University Press.
Feder, Judith, Jack Hadley, and Stephen Zuckerman. 1987. “How did Medicare’s Prospective Payment System Aﬀect Hospitals?” New England Journal of Medicine 317(14): 867-873.
Federal Register. 2000. U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, D.C. July 3.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2004. “Static and Dynamic Eﬀects of Health Policy: Evidence from the
Vaccine Industry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 527-564.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2005. “The Aggregate Eﬀects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicare.” NBER Working Paper 11619.
Fuchs, Victor. 1996. “Economics, Values, and Health Care Reform.” Presidential Address
of the American Economic Association, American Economic Review, March 1996.
GAO. 1986. “Medicare: Alternative for Paying Hospital Capital Costs.”
GAO. 2000. “Medicare Hospital Payments: PPS Includes Several Policies Intended to Help
Rural Hospitals.”
Greenstone, Michael. 2002. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulation on Industrial
Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of
Manufacturers.” Journal of Political Economy 110(6).
Griliches, Zvi. 1956. “Capital-Skill Complementarity” Review of Economics and Statistics,
LI, 465-68.
Griliches, Zvi and Jerry Hausman. 1986. “Errors in Variables in Panel Data.” Journal of
Econometrics 31: 93-118.
Habakkuk, H. J. 1962. American and British Technology in the Nineteenth Century: Search
for Labor Saving Inventions, Cambridge University Press.

42

Han, Aaron and Jerry Hausman. 1990. “Flexible Parametric Estimation of Duration and
Competing Risk Models.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 5:1-28.
Health Care Financing Administration. 1986. Status Report: Research and Demonstrations
in Health Care Financing. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Baltimore MD.
Health Care Financing Administration. 1987. Status Report: Research and Demonstrations
in Health Care Financing. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Baltimore MD.
Health Care Financing Administration. 1999. Statistical Supplement. U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services: Baltimore MD.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches. 1984. “Econometric models for count
data with an application to the patents-R&D relationship.” Econometrica 52(4): 909-938.
Hicks, John. 1932. The Theory of Wages, Macmillan, London.
Joskow, Paul. 2005. “Incentive Regulation in Theory and Practice: Electricity Distribution
and Transmission Networks.” Mimeo.
Kiefer, Nicholas. 1988. “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions.” Journal of
Economic Literature 26(2): 646-679.
Kling, Jeﬀrey and Jeﬀrey Liebman. 2004. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Eﬀects
on Youth.” Unpublished mimeo.
Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni Violante. 2000. “Capital Skill
Complementary and Inequality” Econometrica, 68, pp. 1029-1053.
Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole. 1993. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
Regulation. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
McClellan, Mark. 1996. “Medicare Reimbursement and Hospital Cost Growth.” in David
Wise (ed) Advances in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McClellan, Mark. 1997. “Hospital Reimbursement Incentives: An Empirical Analysis.”
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 6 (1): 91-128.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). 1999. “Report to Congress: Medicare
Payment Policy.” March. Available on line at http://www.medpac.gov.
Newell, Richard, Adam Jaﬀe and Robert Stavins. 1999. “The induced innovation hypothesis and energy-saving technological change.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August,
pp.941-975.
Newhouse, Joseph. 1992. “Medicare Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 6(3): 3-21.
Newhouse, Joseph. 2002. Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Oﬃce of Technology Assessment (OTA). 1984. “Medical Technology and the Costs of the
Medicare Program.” Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington DC.
43

Oﬃce of Technology Assessment (OTA). 1985. “Medicare’s Prospective Payment System:
Strategies for Evaluating Cost, Quality, and Medical Technology.” Government Printing Oﬃce:
Washington DC.
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission. 1988. “Medicare Prospective Payment and
the American Health Care System: Report to the Congress.” Washington DC
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission. 1990. “Medicare Prospective Payment and
the American Health Care System: Report to the Congress.” Washington DC
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission. 1992. “Medicare Prospective Payment and
the American Health Care System: Report to the Congress.” Washington DC
Sloan, Frank, Michael Morrissey and Joseph Valvona. 1988. “Medicare Prospective Payment and the Use of Medical Technologies in Hospitals.” Medical Care 26(9): 837-853.
Sloan, Frank. 2000. “Not-for-profit ownership and hospital behavior.” Handbook of Health
Economics, Volume 1B, Anthony Culyer and Joseph Newhouse (eds). Elsevier.
Staiger, Douglas and Gary Gaumer. 1990. “The Impact of Financial Pressure on Quality of
Care in Hospitals: Post-Admission Mortality Under Medicare’s Prospective Payment System”
Abt Associates Inc.
Staiger, Douglas, Joanne Spetz and Ciaran Phibbs. 1999. “Is there monopsony in the
labor market? Evidence from a natural experiment.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 7258.
Weisbrod. Burton. 1991. “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment.” Journal of Economic Literature
29(2): 523-552.
Westfall, Peter H. and Young, Stanley S. 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for P-value Adjustment. New York: Wiley.
Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Yin, Wesley. 2005. “Do Market Incentives Generate Innovation or Balkanization? Evidence
from the Market for Rare Disease Drugs.” University of Chicago mimeo.

44

Figure 1: Capital Labor Ratio

4

4.5

5

5.5

average (depreciation expenses / operating expenses)

1980

1982

1984

year

1986

Capital-labor ratio is shown in units per 100.

Figure 2: log Labor Inputs

17

17.1

17.2

17.3

17.4

(log real average operating expenses)

1980

1982

1984

year

Dollar amounts are measured in 2004 dollars.

45

1986

Figure 3: log Capital Inputs

13.8

14

14.2

14.4

(log real average depreciation expenses)

1980

1982

1984

year

1986

Dollar amounts are measured in 2004 dollars.

1029

Number of Hospitals in 1983
200
400
600
800

1000

Figure 4: Distrib’n of Hospitals by Medicare Share in 1983

732

577
489
356
253
248

289
220
213
174
128
106
6748
211210 3 2
1

1 1 1

0

160
121
95
76
73 87
5264 706857
30

346

0

.2

.4
.6
Medicare Share of Inpatient Days

46

.8

1

Figure 5: Technology Diffusion
0.10

0.15

Open Heart Surgery

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Cardiac Catheterization

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

1980

year

1984

1986

Diagnostic Radioisotope

0.40

0.50

0.10 0.30 0.50

0.60

ct scan

1982

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

year

1984

1986

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

0.20

0.25

Radioactive Implants

0.15

0.10

0.15

0.20

Megavoltage Radiation Therapy

1982

Organ Transplant

0.05 0.10 0.15

0.05

0.10

0.15

Neo Natal Intensive Care

1980

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

1982

year

1984

1986

0.15

0.20

X−ray Radiation

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

Therapeutic Radioisotope

1980

1980

1982

year

1984

1986

1980

1982

year

1984

Note: Figures show share of hospitals with given technology in each year.

47

1986

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Medicare Share of Inpatient Days in 1983
Real Operating Expenditures (’000)
Real Capital Expenditures (Interest plus Depreciation) (’000)
Real Depreciation Expenditures (’000)
Capital Share (Capital Expenditures / Operating Expenditures)
Depreciation Share (Depreciation / Operating)
Skill Ratio (Registered Nurses / Registered Nurses + Licensed Nurse Practitioners)

Average
0.38
$31,300
$2,156
$1,379
7.09%
4.50%
70%

Standard
Deviation
0.21
$44,500
$3,459
$2,224
4.90%
2.50%
16%

Note: Table reports averages for the various hospital characteristics. All dollar estimates are in thousands of 2004
dollars. All share estimates are multiplied by 100. N = 43,188, except for skill composition where N = 43,162. Data
consist of a total of 6,280 hospitals, of which 5,881 (94 percent) are in the data for all seven years, and all are in the
data for at least two years. All hospitals in the sample have information on Medicare share in 1983.

Table 2: The Impact of PPS on the Capital-Labor Ratio
(1)
(2)
(3)
POST*mi
1.129
1.122
(0.108)
(0.121)
POSTTREND*mi
d81*mi

0.153
(0.114)
-0.388
(0.131)
-0.109
(0.136)
0.601
(0.163)
1.068
(0.172)
1.474
(0.189)

d82*mi
d83*mi

-0.028
(0.098)

d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

(4)

(5)

0.538
(0.050)

0.532
(0.053)

-0.060
(0.088)

Notes: Dependent variable is depreciation share. Table reports results from estimating equations (24) - (27) by OLS.
All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Mean dependent variable is 4.5. POST is an indicator
variable for the years 1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984,
1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is an indicator variable for year t. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s
inpatient days in 1983. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary
covariance matrix within each hospital over time. N = 43,188. In column (3), omitted category is d80*mi. To interpret
the magnitudes, recall that the average Medicare share in 1983 is about two-fifths.

48

Table 3 The Impact of PPS on Log Labor Inputs
(1)
(2)
POST*mi
-0.141
-0.135
(0.016)
(0.018)
POSTTREND*mi
d81*mi
d82*mi
d83*mi

0.021
(0.015)

d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

(3)

0.003
(0.016)
0.034
(0.020)
0.034
(0.021)
-0.052
(0.023)
-0.138
(0.025)
-0.184
(0.026)

(4)

(5)

-0.070
(0.007)

-0.068
(0.008)

0.022
(0.013)

Notes: Dependent variable is log operating expenditures. Table reports results from estimating equations (24)- (27)
by OLS. All regressions hospital and year fixed effects. POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986.
POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is an
indicator variable for year t. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each
hospital over time. N = 43,188. In column (3), omitted category is d80*mi. To interpret the magnitudes, recall that the
average Medicare share in 1983 is about two-fifths.

49

Table 4 The Impact of PPS on Log Capital Inputs
(1)
(2)
POST*mi
-0.011
0.010
(0.035)
(0.040)
POSTTREND*mi
d81*mi
d82*mi
d83*mi

0.077
(0.043)

d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

(3)

0.011
(0.042)
-0.282
(0.048)
-0.016
(0.053)
0.012
(0.053)
-0.073
(0.055)
-0.192
(0.059)

(4)

(5)

-0.028
(0.015)

-0.023
(0.016)

0.049
(0.039)

Notes: Dependent variable is log depreciation expenditures. Table reports results from estimating equations (24) (27) by OLS. All regressions hospital and year fixed effects. POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 –
1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. dt
is an indicator variable for year t. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each
hospital over time. N = 40,888. In column (3), omitted category is d80*mi. To interpret the magnitudes, recall that the
average Medicare share in 1983 is about two-fifths.

50

Table 5: The Impact of PPS on the Medicare share
(1)
(2)
(3)
POST*mi
-0.064
-0.065
(0.006)
(0.007)
POSTTREND*mi
d82*mi
d83*mi

-0.004
(0.007)

d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

-0.009
(0.008)
-0.008
(0.008)
-0.034
(0.008)
-0.085
(0.009)
-0.092
(0.010)

(4)

(5)

-0.031
(0.003)

-0.032
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.006)

Notes: Dependent variable is Medicare share of inpatient days. Table reports results from estimating equations (24)
- (27) by OLS. All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Data from 1980 is excluded from the analysis
and for the cross-sectional variation, Medicare share of inpatient days mi is measured in 1980 (instead of in 1983 as
in other analyses). Mean dependent variable is 0.38. POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986.
POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is an
indicator variable for year t. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each
hospital over time. N = 36,611. In column (3), omitted category is d81*mi. Note that while we code the regressor mi
to be zero for the approximately 15 percent of hospitals that are exempt from PPS (see Figure 4), we allow the
dependent variable “Medicare share” to take its actual value for all hospitals. On average, the dependent variable is
0.09 (0.43) for exempt (non-exempt) hospitals.

51

Table 6: The Impact of PPS on Technology Adoption I: Number of Facilities

POST*mi

(1)
2.621
(0.357)

(2)
2.501
(0.401)

Panel A: OLS
(3)
(4)

1.156
(0.134)

POSTTREND*mi
d81*mi
d82*mi
d83*mi
d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

(5)

-0.467
(0.354)

(6)
0.120
(0.015)

Panel B: Conditional Fixed Effect Poisson
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.114
0.061
0.058
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.004)

1.093
(0.178)

-2.423
(0.526)
-2.965
(0.541)
-2.281
(0.517)
-0.496
(0.567)
1.894
(0.634)
0.696
(0.619)

-0.023
(0.017)
-0.631
(0.326)

-0.106
(0.020
-0.138
(0.023
-0.105
(0.022
-0.027
(0.023)
0.065
(0.025
0.067
(0.030

-0.025
(0.008)

Notes: Dependent variable is number of facilities. All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Mean dependent variable is 25. Left hand panel shows
results from estimating equations (24) – (27) by OLS. Right hand side panel shows results from estimating the conditional fixed effect Poisson model in equation (29)
with quasi maximum likelihood. POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984,
1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is an indicator variable for year t. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each hospital over time. N = 43,188. In column (3), omitted category is
d80*mi. To interpret the magnitudes, recall that the average Medicare share in 1983 is about two-fifths.

52

Table 7: The Impact of PPS on Technology Adoption II: Hazard models of technology adoption
Cardiac Technologies
Cardiac
Open
Catheter- Heart
ization
Surgery
Panel A: Exponential Proportional Hazard Model
2.61
1.23
POST*mi
(0.683)
(0.481)
[0.001]
[0.071]
d83*mi

0.24
(0.692)
[0.978]

1.48
(1.054)
[0.745]

Change in % adopt if change
0.025
0.004
POST* mi from 0 to mean
Panel B: Cox Proportional Hazard Model
2.48
1.13
POST*mi
(0.680)
(0.480)
[0.002]
[0.129]
d83*mi
Change in % adopt if change
POST* mi from 0 to mean
Mean adoption rate
N

Diagnostic Radiology

Other technologies

Radiation Therapy (Cancer Treatment)

CT
scan

Diagnostic
Radioisotope

Neo-natal
intensive
care

Organ
Transplant

Megavoltage
Radiation
Therapy

Radioactive
Implants

Therapeutic
Radioisotope
Facility

X-ray
Radiation

0.928
(0.259)
[0.003]

0.666
(0.265)
[0.072]

3.83
(0.663)
[<0.0001]

1.74
(0.785)
[0.116]

1.76
(0.782)
[0.116]

-0.74
(0.508)
[0.383]

-0.096
(0.490)
[0.975]

-0.081
(0.601)
[0.975]

0.769
(0.343)
[0.218]

-0.024
(0.312)
[0.996]

1.14
(0.843)
[0.745]

1.07
(1.30)
[0.885]

-1.397
(1.026)
[0.745]

-0.72
(0.769)
[0.883]

0.008
(0.738)
[0.996]

1.70
(1.01)
[0.584]

0.086

0.054

0.008

0.003

0.004

-0.021

-0.003

-0.001

0.783
(0.259)
[0.024]

0.577
(0.266)
[0.165]

3.69
(0.659)
[<0.0001]

1.61
(0.783)
[0.165]

1.69
(0.786)
[0.165]

-0.826
(0.511)
[0.281]

-0.183
(0.490)
[0.921]

-0.188
(0.601)
[0.921]

-0.795
(0.510)
[0.511]

-0.086
(0.657)
[0.984]

0.204
(0.300)
[0.932]

-0.659
(0.253)
[0.070]

0.205
(0.641)
[0.982]

0.023
(0.894)
[0.984]

-2.54
(0.725)
[0.003]

-1.598
(0.568)
[0.040]

-1.160
(0.513)
[0.145]

-0.562
(0.556)
[0.838]

0.053
0.066
4,861

0.053
0.033
5,130

0.090
0.41
4,739

0.088
0.36
2,758

0.12
0.066
5,301

0.016
0.040
5,437

0.061
0.036
4,950

-0.029
0.082
4,542

-0.002
0.092
4,485

-0.004
0.073
4,741

Notes: Tables show coefficients from proportional hazard models. Censoring occurs if have not adopted by 1986. All estimates include covariates for the following
hospital characteristics in 1983: Medicare share of patient days, Medicare share of patient days squared, number of beds, and indicator variables for state, whether in an
MSA, whether a general hospital, whether a short term hospital, and whether a federal hospital. Estimates using the exponential model also include year fixed effects.
POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986. d83 is an indicator variable for year 1983. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in
1983. “Change in % adopt if change POST*mi from mean to 0” denotes the difference in the average hospital adoption (by 1986) rate if all variables are set to their
mean except for POST*mi which is set to 0, relative to if all variables (including POST*mi) are set to their mean. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in
parentheses. Familywise adjusted p-values based on 10,000 iterations are in square brackets (see text for more details); these tend to be about 5 times larger than the
unadjusted per-technology p-values (not shown). N denotes the size of the at risk sample (i.e. the number of hospitals that have not adopted in 1980). Mean adoption rate
denotes the percent of the at-risk sample that adopted by 1986. This may differ slightly from the implied change in the proportion of hospitals that have the technology
between 1980 and 1986 in Figure 5 because Figure 5 is done in a cross-section while the estimates in the table are done in a panel, and hospitals occasionally change
their report from having to not having a technology; we have verified that the results in Table 7 are robust to alternative ways of treating this measurement error.

53

Table 8: The Impact of PPS on Log Length of Stay
(1)
(2)
(3)
POST*mi
-0.100
-0.102
(0.022)
(0.024)
POSTTREND*mi
d82*mi
d83*mi

0.049
(0.021)
0.019
(0.022)
-0.078
(0.028)
-0.120
(0.032)
-0.034
(0.035)

-0.006
(0.017)

d84*mi
d85*mi
d86*mi

(4)

(5)

-0.032
(0.010)

-0.030
(0.011)

0.019
(0.015)

Notes: Dependent variable is log length of stay; length of stay is defined as patient days / admissions. Table reports results
from estimating equations (24) – (27) by OLS. All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Data from 1980 is
excluded from the analysis and for the cross-sectional variation, Medicare share of inpatient days mi is measured in 1980
(instead of in 1983 as in other analyses). POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through
1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is an indicator variable for year t. Standard
errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each hospital over
time. N = 36,609. In column (3), omitted category is d81* mi

54

Table 9: The Impact of PPS on the Share of Nurse Employment that is Skilled Nurses
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
POST*mi
3.46
3.74
(0.578)
(0.647)
POSTTREND*mi
1.58
1.67
(0.254)
(0.272)
d81*mi
-0.280
(0.676)
-0.575
d82*mi
(0.775)
1.09
0.805
0.876
d83*mi
(0.612)
(0.819)
(0.567)
d84*mi
2.40
(0.899)
d85*mi
3.56
(0.917)
4.44
d86*mi
(0.942)
Notes: Dependent variable is RN/(RN+LPN). Table reports results from estimating equations (24) – (27) by OLS. All
regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Mean dependent variable is 70. POST is an indicator variable for the years
1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. dt is
an indicator variable for year t. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each hospital over time. N =
43,162. In column (3), omitted category is d80*mi. To interpret the magnitudes, recall that the average Medicare share in 1983
is about two-fifths.

55

Table 10: Robustness Analysis I: Alternative Specifications
Instrument
Add year
for mi with
First
Add linear dummies *
Base
trend * mi
dep var in 82 Differences past values
Case
(4)
(3)
(1)
(5)
(2)
Panel A: Dependent Variable is Capital Labor Ratio (depreciation share)
POSTTREND*mi 0.532
0.633
0.657
0.532
0.511
(0.053) (0.114)
(0.097)
(0.059)
(0.052)
d83*mi
-0.060
0.040
-0.068
0.064
-0.131
(0.088) (0.110)
(0.182)
(0.079)
(0.087)
N
43,188 43,188
43,041
36,900
42,428
Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log Labor Inputs (log operating expenses)
POSTTREND*mi -0.068
-0.084
-0.066
-0.067
-0.067
(0.008) (0.014)
(0.008)
(0.007)
(0.007)
d83*mi
0.022
0.006
0.023
0.007
0.034
(0.013) (0.013)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.012)
N
43,188 43,188
43,041
36,900
42,428
Panel C: Dependent Variable is Log Capital Inputs (log depreciation expenses)
POSTTREND*mi -0.023
0.040
-0.013
-0.019
-0.031
(0.016) (0.033)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.017)
d83*mi
0.049
0.111
0.057
0.096
0.028
(0.039) (0.042)
(0.039)
(0.034)
(0.039)
N
40,888 40,888
40,079
34,468
40,169
Panel D: Dependent Variable is Number of Facilities:
POST*mi
2.501
4.254
2.267
2.478
3.010
(0.401) (0.731)
(0.378)
(0.427)
(0.383)
d83*mi
-0.467
0.410
-0.566
0.688
-0.204
(0.354) (0.459)
(0.347)
(0.333)
(0.353)
N
43,188 43,188
43,041
36,900
42,428

Add year *
region
dummies
(6)

Exclude
small rural
hospitals
(7)

Weighted
(8)

Add POSTTREND*
birthshare and
d83*birthshare
(9)

0.532
(0.052)
-0.034
(0.088)
43,188

0.684
(0.054)
0.061
(0.010)
35,339

0.682
(0.057)
-0.015
(0.104)
41,024

0.531
(0.054)
-0.098
(0.092)
43,181

-0.061
(0.008)
0.024
(0.013)
43,188

-0.052
(0.008)
0.044
(0.014)
35,339

-0.030
(0.010)
0.054
(0.014)
41,024

-0.071
(0.008)
-0.021
(0.013)
43,181

-0.015
(0.016)
0.059
(0.040)
40,888

0.024
(0.018)
0.091
(0.042)
33,418

0.041
(0.022)
0.045
(0.044)
39,273

-0.028
(0.017)
0.035
(0.039)
40,883

2.041
(0.406)
-0.737
(0.360)
43,188

1.260
(0.463)
-1.521
(0.416)
35,339

1.560
(0.613)
-1.777
(0.507)
41,024

2.50
(0.411)
-0.453
(0.363)
43,181

Notes: Table reports results from estimating equations (25) and (27) by OLS. All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Dependent variable is given in
panel heading POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986
respectively. d83 is an indicator variable for year 1983. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Base case includes year and hospital
fixed effects. Column 2 adds linear time trend interacted with Mcrshare_83 to base case. Column 3 adds year dummies interacted with log total expenditures in 82 to
base case. Column 4 redoes base case in first differences instead of fixed effects. Column 5 instruments for Medicare share in 1983 with past values of the hospital’s
Medicare share (specifically, the values in 1980, 1981, and 1982). Column 6 adds year dummies interacted with census region dummies (nine) to base case. Column 7
excludes hospitals that are not in an MSA and that have less than 50 beds in 1983. Column 8 weights each hospital by its size (number of beds) in 1983 while
excluding the top ventile by size. Column 9 adds POSTTREND*birthshare and d83*birthshare, where birthshare is the share of non-Medicare patient days accounted
for by newborns in 1983. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance matrix within each hospital over time.

56

Table 11: Robustness Analysis II: Estimation using within vs. between variation
Base Case
Using only within
variation
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Dependent Variable is Capital Labor Ratio (depreciation share)
POSTTREND*mi
0.532
0.176
(0.053)
(0.092)
d83*mi
-0.060
0.041
(0.088)
(0.146)
N
43,188
43,188
Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log Labor Inputs (log operating expenses)
POSTTREND*mi
-0.068
-0.076
(0.008)
(0.010)
d83*mi
0.022
-0.059
(0.013)
(0.018)
N
43,188
43,188
Panel C: Dependent Variable is Log Capital Inputs (log depreciation expenses)
POSTTREND*mi
-0.023
-0.030
(0.016)
(0.022)
d83*mi
0.049
0.031
(0.039)
(0.050)
N
40,888
40,888
Panel D: Dependent Variable is Number of Facilities
POST*mi
2.501
2.418
(0.401)
(0.632)
d83*mi
-0.467
0.135
(0.354)
(0.553)
N
43,188
43,188

Using only between
variation
(3)
0.787
(0.044)
-0.129
(0.139)
43,188
-0.062
(0.005)
0.079
(0.014)
43,188
-0.015
(0.012)
0.067
(0.039)
40,888
2.561
(0.404)
-0.896
(0.561)
43,188

Notes: Table reports results from estimating equations (25) and (27) by OLS. All regressions include hospital and year fixed
effects. Dependent variable is given in panel heading POST is an indicator variable for the years 1984 – 1986. POSTTREND
is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. d83 is an indicator variable for
year 1983. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Base case includes year and hospital
fixed effects. Column 2 (“using only within variation”) adds a full set of year dummies interacted with each of the three
categorical variables that can make a hospital exempt from PPS (federal ownership, long-term stays, or specialty hospital) so
that the identification of the variables of interest comes only from within hospital type variation in Medicare share. Column 3
(“using only between variation”) instruments for the variables shown with a full set of year dummies interacted with the three
categorical variables that can make a hospital exempt from PPS, so that the identification of the variables of interest comes
only from between hospital type variation in Medicare share.

57

Table 12: Robustness Analysis III: Alternative Dependent Variables
Base Case

Alternative Dependent
Variable I

Alternative Dependent
Variable II

(3)
(2)
(1)
Panel A: Alternative Dependent Variables for Log Labor Inputs
Log Operating Log payroll expenses
Log non-payroll
Expenditures
operating expenses
-0.067
-0.098
POSTTREND*mi -0.068
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.009)
d83*mi
0.022
0.011
0.018
(0.013)
(0.017)
(0.016)
N
43,188
43,188
43,161
Panel B: Alternative Dependent Variables for Log Capital Inputs
Log
Log (interest +
Log interest
Depreciation
depreciation)
-0.020
0.016
POSTTREND*mi -0.023
(0.016)
(0.022)
(0.040)
d83*mi
0.049
0.451
-0.292
(0.039)
(0.071)
(0.092)
N
40,888
41,150
36,286
Panel C: Alternative Dependent Variables for Capital Labor Ratio
(Depreciation/ (Depreciation / Payroll) (Interest +
Operating)
Depreciation)/
Operating
0.532
0.546
0.921
POSTTREND*mi
(0.053)
(0.069)
(0.102)
d83*mi
-0.060
-0.272
-0.318
(0.088)
(0.137)
(0.184)
Mean dep var
4.50
6.91
7.12
N
43,188
43,188
43,188

Alternative Dependent
Variable III

Alternative Dependent
Variable IV

(4)

(5)

Log total employment

Log nurses

-0.095
(0.007)
-0.044
(0.013)
43,188

-0.068
(0.009)
0.040
(0.017)
43,162

Interest / Operating

0.389
(0.067)
-0.258
(0.133)
2.62
43,188

Notes: Table reports results from estimating equation (27) by OLS. All regressions include hospital and year fixed effects. Dependent variable is given in
column heading; first column always shows results for the dependent variable used in the main specifications above. POST is an indicator variable for the years
1984 – 1986. POSTTREND is 0 through 1983 and then takes the values 1, 2, and 3 in 1984, 1985, and 1986 respectively. d83 is an indicator variable for year
1983. mi measures the Medicare share of the hospital’s inpatient days in 1983. Base case includes year and hospital fixed effects. Other columns substitute
alternative measures of dependent variable, as indicated. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary covariance
matrix within each hospital over time.

58

Appendix Table A: Description of 113 Binary Facilities in data 1980 - 1986
Facility Description
Abortion Services (Inpatient or Outpatient)
Adult Day Care
Acquired Immune-Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Services
Alcoholism/Chemical Dependency Acute and Subacute Inpatient Care
Alcoholism/Chemical Dependency Services (Outpatient)
Ambulance Services
Anesthesia Service
Ambulatory Surgical Services
Autopsy Services
Hospital Auxiliary
Blood Bank
Burn Care
Birthing Room
Cancer Tumor Registry
Cardiac Intensive Care
Cardiac Catheterization
Chaplaincy Services
Clinical Psychology Services
Community Health Promotion
Continuing Care Case Management
Contraceptive Care
C.T. Scanner (Head or Body Unit)
Day Hospital
Dental Services
Diagnostic Radioisotope Facility
Diagnostic X-Ray
Electrocardiography
Electroencephalography
Emergency Department
Electromyography
Extracorporeal Shock-Wave Lithotripter
Family Planning
Pharmacy Service (Full or Part Time)
Pharmacy Unit Dose System
Fertility Counseling
Fitness Center
General Laboratory Services
Genetic Screening
Genetic Counseling
Geriatric Acute-Care Unit
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment Services
Satellite Geriatric Clinics
General Surgical Services
Hemodialysis (Home Care/Mobile Unit)
Histopathology Services
Hemodialysis Services (Inpatient or Outpatient)
Home Care Program

59

Years in Data
1980-85
1986
1986
1980-85
1981-86
1980-81
1980-81
1981-86
1980-81
1980-86
1980-86
1980-85
1985-86
1980-81
1980-85
1980-86
1980-85
1980-86
1986
1986
1986
1980-86
1981-86
1980-85
1980-86
1985-86
1980-85
1980-81
1981-86
1980-81
1985-86
1980-85
1980-85
1980-85
1986
1986
1980-81, 1984-85
1986
1980-86
1986
1982-86
1986
1980-81, 1983-85
1980-81
1980-86
1980-86
1980-86

Sample
Mean
0.22
0.05
0.28
0.26
0.17
0.17
0.72
0.80
0.47
0.75
0.64
0.09
0.44
0.30
0.67
0.16
0.55
0.33
0.54
0.15
0.09
0.34
0.17
0.48
0.56
0.89
0.91
0.50
0.85
0.27
0.02
0.10
0.91
0.71
0.09
0.09
0.88
0.06
0.06
0.12
0.13
0.02
0.87
0.04
0.56
0.21
0.18

Hospice
Health Promotion
Intermediate Care For Mentally Retarded
Intermediate Care, Other
Intravenous Admixture Services
Intravenous Therapy Team
Medical Library
Megavoltage Radiation Therapy
Medical/Surgical Acute Care
Medical/Surgical Intensive Care
Newborn Nursery
Neonatal Intensive Care
Neurosurgery
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Facility
Obstetrical Care
Occupational Health Services
Open-Heart Surgery
Organ Transplant (Including Kidney)
Organized Outpatient Department
Optometric Services
Organ Bank
Occupational Therapy
Patient Education
Patient Representative Services
Pediatric Acute Care
Pediatric Intensive Care
Percutaneous Lithotripsy
Pulmonary Function Laboratory
Podiatric Services (Inpatient or Outpatient)
Postoperative Recovery Room
Premature Nursery
Psychiatric Acute Care
Psychiatric Consultation And Education
Psychiatric Emergency Services
Psychiatric Foster An/Or Home Care Program
Psychiatric Intensive Care
Psychiatric Liason Services
Psychiatric Long-Term Care
Psychiatric Outpatient Services
Psychiatric Services, Pediatric
Psychiatric Partial Hospitalization Program
Physical Therapy
Radioactive Implants
Recreational Therapy
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation Services (Outpatient)
Residential Care
Respit Care
Respiratory Therapy
Sheltered Care

1980-86
1981-85
1980-85
1980-85
1980-85
1980
1980-81
1980-86
1980-85
1980-85
1980-85
1980-85
1980-81
1983-86
1980-85
1986
1980-86
1980-86
1981-86
1981-85
1980-81
1980-86
1986
1980-86
1980-85
1980-85
1985
1980-81
1980-85
1980-82
1980-85
1980-85
1980-86
1981-86
1980-86
1980-82
1983-86
1980-85
1981-86
1981-86
1980-86
1980-86
1980-86
1980-86
1980-85
1981-86
1980
1986
1980-86
1981-85

60

0.08
0.40
0.03
0.13
0.71
0.25
0.84
0.14
0.91
0.74
0.70
0.09
0.29
0.04
0.70
0.23
0.11
0.05
0.49
0.16
0.03
0.40
0.67
0.49
0.75
0.18
0.11
0.58
0.31
0.83
0.26
0.36
0.29
0.32
0.03
0.13
0.16
0.06
0.18
0.14
0.13
0.79
0.20
0.30
0.30
0.32
0.05
0.09
0.81
0.02

Self Care
Long Term-Skilled Nursing
Social Work Services
Speech Therapy
Other Special Care
Sports Medicine Clinic/Service
Sterilization
Toxicology/Antidote Information
Tuberculosis And Other Respiratory Diseases
Therapeutic Radioisotope Facility
Trauma Center
Ultrasound
Volunteer Services
Women's Center
Worksite Health Promotion
X-Ray Radiation Therapy

1980-85
1980-85
1980-85
1980-86
1981-85
1986
1986
1980-81
1980-86
1980-86
1984-86
1981-86
1980-86
1986
1986
1980-86

0.06
0.16
0.77
0.36
0.22
0.11
0.23
0.38
0.34
0.21
0.17
0.69
0.65
0.09
0.35
0.16

Note: All facilities are coded directly from a single variable in the data except for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
where we followed the coding procedure of Baker and Phibbs (2002), and the following seven variables which we
generated as a consistent series using combinations of different variables in different years:
1. “Abortion Services (Inpatient or Outpatient)”: coded 1 in 1980 and 1981 if the hospital reports having either
inpatient abortion services or outpatient abortion services or both; coded 1 in 1982 – 1985 if the hospital reports
having abortion services.
2. “Alcoholism/Chemical Dependency Acute and Subacute Inpatient Care”: coded 1 in 1984 if the hospital reports
having alcohol/chemical dependency acute inpatient care or alcohol/chemical dependency subacute inpatient
care or both; coded 1 in 1980-1983, 1985 if hospital reports having alcohol/chemical dependency inpatient care.
3. C.T. Scanner (Head or Body Unit): coded 1 in 1980 and 1981 if the hospital reports having either a C.T.
Scanner Head Unit or a C.T. Scanner Body Unit or both; coded 1 1982 – 1986 if the hospital reports having a
C.T. Scanner.
4. Pharmacy Service (Full or Part Time): coded 1 in 1980 or 1981 if the hospital reports having either a full time
or a part time pharmacist or both; coded 1 in 1982-1985 if the hospital reports having pharmacy services.
5. Hemodialysis Services (Inpatient or Outpatient): Coded 1 in 1980 and 1981 if the hospital reports having either
hemodialysis inpatient services or hemodialysis outpatient services or both; coded 1 in 1982 – 1986 if hospital
reports having hemodialysis services.
6. Organ Transplant (Including Kidney): coded 1 in 1980-1985 if the hospital reports having either organ
transplant capability (other than kidney) or kidney transplant capability or both; coded 1 in 1986 if hospital
reports having organ transplant capability (including kidney).
7. Podiatric Services (Inpatient or Outpatient): Coded 1 in 1981 if the hospital reports having inpatient or
outpatient podiatric services or both; coded 1 in 1980,1982-85 if hospital reports having podiatric services.

61

