NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE INVESTMENT AND GOVERNMENT PROTECTION
Carolyn Kousky
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 12255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12255
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Carolyn Kousky, Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Investment and Government Protection
Carolyn Kousky, Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 12255
May 2006
JEL No. D81, D92, H54, Q54, R10
ABSTRACT
Hurricane Katrina did massive damage because New Orleans and the Gulf Coast were not
appropriately protected. Wherever natural disasters threaten, the government -- in its traditional role
as public goods provider -- must decide what level of protection to provide to an area. It does so by
purchasing protective capital, such as levees for a low-lying city.
We show that if private capital is more likely to locate in better-protected areas, then the
marginal social value of protection will increase with the level of protection provided. That is, the
benefit function is convex, contrary to the normal assumption of concavity. When the government
protects and the private sector invests, due to the ill-behaved nature of the benefit function, there may
be multiple Nash equilibria. Policy makers must compare them, rather than merely follow local
optimality conditions, to find the equilibrium offering the highest social welfare.
There is usually considerable uncertainty about the amount of investment that will
accompany any level of protection, further complicating the government’s choice problem. We
show that when deciding on the current level of protection, the government must take account of the
option value of increasing the level of protection in the future.
Carolyn Kousky
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
carolyn_kousky@ksgphd.harvard.edu
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
The devastation wrought by Hurricane Katrina raised many difficult policy
questions, not least of which is the level of physical protection that should be afforded to
investments in flood-prone areas. This question is one that has been raised many times,
usually following a catastrophe, such as the Midwest floods of 1993, in which around 20
million acres in nine states were flooded.
Questions of the appropriate level of protection and investment are not limited to
flooding, but are also salient for other risks, such as terrorism and global warming, where
the respective protections might consist of bolstered intelligence services or lesser
emissions of greenhouse gases. Our model is general, and the analysis applies to
situations stretching from protecting against intentional dangers, such as crime and
terrorism; to dealing with risks that are the joint product of human and natural activity,
such as future coastal flooding from global warming.
Two events provide the immediate inspiration for our investigation of this class of
situations. First is the destruction of much of New Orleans and substantial portions of the
Gulf Coast by Hurricane Katrina. The second event is the ongoing effort to rebuild New
Orleans, with both public and private entities playing major roles. In all these cases, the
levels of protection and investment will be jointly determined: the models of this paper,
with slight adjustment, will apply.
The challenge in all of these cases is to determine what level of protection is
appropriate. Since such risks are low probability, and often unique, decision makers
rarely have experience to guide them. Not surprisingly, they sometimes turn to rules of
thumb. Thus for floods, our prime case study, they might propose protection from the
100-year flood, 500-year flood, or 1000-year flood. For example, the 100-year flood is
used as a trigger for many policies in the U.S. – the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) removes areas protected by 100 year levees from flood hazard maps and
the National Flood Insurance Program allows development in areas raised about the 100
year flood or protected by 100 year levees (Pinter 2005). Rules of thumb ignore both the
benefits and costs of providing flood protection. If the costs of protection were tenfold
higher for one area than another, or if one area had 100 times the assets of the other, the
“100-year flood” prescription would be the same. In addition, terms like “the 1000-year

2

flood” are often misinterpreted. A 1000-year flood has a 1 in 1000 chance of occurring
in any given year. It does not mean that an area is protected for 1000 years or that once a
big storm hits, another will not occur for 1000 years. Nor are these probabilities exact: in
many regions river gauge records do not stretch back far enough to calculate probabilities
based on frequency data, so these are estimated probabilities – although they could be
improved by incorporating geologic and archeological data (Sparks 2006). Furthermore,
climate change and natural climatic variability will surely alter the magnitude of a 1000year flood over time; the level of protection appropriate today will likely not be the level
of protection needed in a decade. Simple rules of thumb and unguided intuitions are
misleading and should be rejected in the risk-protection context, particularly since low
probabilities are involved, learning takes time, and there are complex interactions
between protection and investment decisions.
Our proposed methodology is to examine the costs and benefits of providing
protection from both natural and manmade disasters. We analyze investment and
protection decisions through an economic lens. This paper contributes to the growing
literature on the economics of hazards (see for example: (Kunreuther and Rose 2004)).
Our analysis proceeds as follows. In section 2, we provide for the theory
underlying the two basic relationships that we posit: (1) in risk-prone areas, the level of
private investment responds positively to the level of protection, and (2) the level of
protection in an area – as chosen or directed by the government – responds positively to
the value of private assets. We also develop a model of this observed interdependence of
investment and protection decisions. We show that independent optimization of
investment and protection can produce a poorly behaved benefit function. The result is
that society, following marginal conditions, can easily get stuck at an inferior
equilibrium.
In section 3, we briefly examine situations where human capital is at risk of a
disaster. Section 4 addresses protection as an imperfect public good. We examine
whether and when a shock that exogenously increases investment, e.g., an unexpected
jump in productivity, will decrease the equilibrium level of protection. Finally, in section
5, we examine the government’s choice problem when there is uncertainty regarding
investment levels, investigating both when there is no possibility for adjustment and the

3

highly relevant case where phased expansion of protection investments is costly,
considering situations without and with multiple equilibria. The sixth section concludes.
2. The Observed Interactive Determination of Investment and Protection
While private entities can protect themselves from some risks, for many risks the
government provides the primary protection. Government may or may not tax the
citizens of the protected area for the full expenses associated with the protection, but it is
reasonable to view the protection as provided by one unified decision-maker. Private
actors may sometimes supplement public protection efforts, such as raising their homes
on stilts when building in the floodplain or investing in alarm systems to cope with crime.
This paper does not address the complementarities or substitutability of private and
public investments in protection, but instead focuses on cases where private investments
will be minimal – as when the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers constructs levees or with
federal counter-terrorism efforts.1 The government decides how much protection to offer
citizens, for example, to reduce risk by a given increment, given increasing costs to
protection. Individuals and firms decide how much to invest in risk-prone locations.
Experience demonstrates that the government responds to investment levels, that is,
offers higher protection when there are more assets at risk, and similarly, investors
respond to protection, increasing the capital stock in areas with higher protection levels.
When government and investors optimize separately, choosing a protection level for a
given level of investment or vice versa, society attains a local optimum. However, this
may not be a global optimum.
Across the nation, there are many examples where higher levels of protection has
spurred higher levels of investment or development. Levees built to lower the risk of
flooding are a good example. When the Monarch levee in Missouri was raised to protect
against the five-hundred-year flood, for example, investment in Chesterfield Valley
skyrocketed. Similarly, completion of the Riverside Levee is expected, by Senator Kit
Bond’s office, to foster the creation of 11 million square feet of industrial, commercial,
and retail space in Kansas City. Conversely, when perceived risk levels rise, as in
1

Government may also regulate. In spring 2006, pending federal regulations required that in order to
qualify for aid or lower insurance premiums, homes in some areas of rebuilt New Orleans had to be placed
on three foot stilts.

4

vulnerable areas of several Florida counties that were just missed by Hurricane Andrew,
investment is depressed and property values fall (Hallstrom and Smith 2005). The
positive impact of protection on investment is clear in other contexts as well. An increase
in the number of police has been found to reduce crime (Levitt 1997; Klick and Tabarrok
2005), safer neighborhoods receive more investment (Lehrer 2000), and areas seeing
larger decreases in air pollution experience higher population growth (Kahn 2000).
There are also many examples of how protection responds to investment.
Increased development caused government to increase protection is Sacramento,
California and the surrounding Sacramento-San Joaquin Valley. The area is prone to the
regular flooding of the two rivers, yet development is continuing at a rapid pace, in part
due to housing pressures in the Bay Area. Many of the levees in the region need repair,
and they do not provide the level of protection demanded by other major cities in such a
risky location. The continued construction of new homes and businesses has forced state
lawmakers to consider plans to upgrade protection in the region. In fall 2005, the state’s
Congressional Delegation secured $39 million in federal funding to increase the level of
flood protection around Sacramento, and Senator Feinstein has pledged to seek further
funds (Feinstein 2005).
States and localities sometimes invest in their own flood protection, but more
often flood control projects are undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Local
governments approach the Corps when they feel their protection level is too low for the
capital and lives at risk in their jurisdiction. The Corps then studies the proposed project,
and assesses the support among possible non-federal sponsors (since 1986 there have
been cost-sharing requirements with local governments) (Carter and Cody 2005). If the
project is favorably reported, it will be submitted for Congress’ annual authorization and
appropriation of funds for construction. Thus, as investment increases in an area prone to
flooding, pressure is brought to bear on local officials, who lobby the Corps for a project
and lobby state lawmakers to fight for appropriations. While the level of investment can
trigger political action directly – as more people locate in the floodplain and demand
protection – it also enters the Corps cost-benefit analysis of the proposed flood project.
All Corps projects must have a cost-benefit ratio less than one. When more assets are at
risk, the benefits associated with protection are higher, increasing the likelihood that the

5

project will pass the analysis. For both of these reasons, higher investments in
floodplains usually lead to higher protection.
Decisions regarding investment and protection levels are currently being
discussed and made all along the Gulf, and particularly in New Orleans. As rebuilding is
contemplated and undertaken in the city, residents and businesses must make difficult
decisions about whether, where, and when to rebuild. The Louisiana Recovery Authority
created by Governor Kathleen Blanco is working to coordinate the enormous task of
rebuilding. The decisions of residents and businesses are dependent on the decisions of
others, including the local and federal government. Progress is being made, but it is not
yet clear whether some of the most damaged neighborhoods will be rebuilt or when
public services will resume in various areas. If many residents do not return, then
businesses that depend on the residents as customers are unlikely to return. Yet if
businesses return, residents are more likely to move back, as they will have access to
goods, services, and jobs. Similarly, there are mostly positive economic interactions
between businesses, and mostly positive social interactions among residents. Private
actors also must assess risk levels, determining the likelihood that protection will be
bolstered around New Orleans, or just returned to pre-Katrina levels. The Corps of
Engineers has planned and Congress has appropriated funding for levees to be returned to
pre-Katrina levels. The levees should be completed in June 2006, but money has not
been authorized yet for further increases in protection, although some residents are
lobbying for an increase to protection from Category 5 storms. If protection is not
increased, it is likely that fewer people will return to some of the most vulnerable
locations; yet if people do not rebuild in the most damaged neighborhoods, there is less
incentive to provide costly increases in protection. In effect, all the stakeholders in
rebuilding New Orleans are caught in a complicated coordination game. It does not seem
at all certain that they will find their way to an optimum.
2.1. A Model of the Joint Determination of Investment and Protection
We now construct a model of this joint determination problem. Consider the
usual model of public projects to protect private assets. At the outset, we assume a oneperiod model. The government can decide on the level of protection, p, for private assets.

6

In particular, if the level of protection is p, the probability that the private assets are lost
equals 1-p. The cost to the government of achieving a level of protection p is given by
c(p), which is an increasing and convex function. We assume (i) that risk aversion of
private asset holders is not a concern, e.g., because their assets are fully insured2 by
policies written by geographically diversified companies, (ii) that should the unprotected
risk occur there will be a complete loss of all assets, and (iii) that the government
functions on a cost-benefit basis.
In many cases, this last assumption is not heroic. Even when a cost-benefit
analysis is not required, policy makers likely weigh costs and benefits in some fashion.
And as stated earlier, projects of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers must pass a costbenefit analysis, so for flood protection decisions, at least, assumption (iii) is satisfied.
Yet, while the Corps is seen to be “the political godfather of cost-benefit analysis” (the
Flood Control Act of 1936 stated that the federal government would support flood
projects in which the benefits outweighed the costs), it has “also long been suspected of
an institutional bias in favor of projects that can add significantly to its own budget
allocations” (Persky 2001). Corps analyses often neglect many benefits and costs, such
as social disruption or public health problems (Carter 2005). They often also fail to
monetize environmental impacts, although that is changing. At times, this suspicion has
erupted into national controversy, such as when a whistle blower in February 2000
accused the Corps of deliberately altering a cost-benefit analysis to justify a $1.2 billion
lock expansion project on the Mississippi, prompting federal investigation that confirmed
the allegations. In this paper, we assume that costs and benefits are not manipulated for
political reasons.
2.1.1 Fixed Asset Base
Initially, we assume there is a fixed level of private assets, K. The assets should
be protected so as to minimize the sum of expected losses and the cost of protection,
namely:

2

Full insurance would require that both loss of services and the value of life disruption be covered.

7

(1)

min [(1 − p ) K + c( p )] .
p

Taking derivatives and setting them equal to zero, this leads to the traditional efficiency
condition that
(2)

c'(p) = K.

Thus, at the optimum, the cost of increasing by 1% the protection of $1 billion in assets
would be $10 million.
For most risks we consider, such as terrorism or flooding, we would expect the
marginal cost of reducing the probability of an adverse event to increase exceedingly
rapidly as p got close to 1. As Prospect Theory alerts us, people tend to put additional
weight on probabilities of 1 or 0 when it comes to risks (Kahneman and Tversky 1979),
but common sense suggests we have to live with some positive risk. Thus, we would
expect even highly valuable assets to sometimes be lost. As the risk analyst’s maxim
says, if your bridges are never falling down you are building them too strong.
2.1.2 Responsive asset base
In general, we would expect the asset base to respond to the level of protection
just as the level of protection responds to the asset base. That is, there should be some
form of interactive determination, with private investors responding to the level of
protection just as protection responds to the investment level. In reality, it is frequently
not possible for the asset base to change incrementally, down as well as up, because
investments in private capital are clearly lumpy: we do not build half a house or a quarter
of a retail establishment. Incremental changes may be even harder for public protection
efforts. Building a levee 10 feet high and then extending it to 15 feet is much more
expensive than building it at a 15-foot level initially, so it is unlikely we would observe
smooth marginal changes in protection investments.
Efficiency thus requires that society undertake some form of cost-benefit analysis
at the outset, deciding what level of protection to offer, and at least predicting the
consequent level of private capital. This issue is exceedingly live in New Orleans at the
8

moment, as both government and residents struggle with making rebuilding decisions.
New Orleans Mayor C. Ray Nagin appointed a Bring New Orleans Back (BNOB)
Committee to make recommendations. A proposal in which neighborhoods would have
to demonstrate that a “critical mass” of residents was returning for neighborhoods to be
rebuilt met with anger from many residents anxious to return regardless of what their
neighbors decide. Yet it demonstrates the difficulty in making decisions of where to
invest public money in rebuilding and increased protection when the level of private
investment in damaged areas is uncertain.
While government must estimate private investment levels, private actors must
predict government protection policies, and the decisions of other private parties, e.g., a
dry cleaner must predict whether competitors will locate nearby. This latter process is a
normal part of investment, quite apart from hurricanes and floods, fires and terrorist
attacks,3 and we shall assume that private investment decisions are a function of the usual
factors, plus the level of protection.
We also assume that government allows private entities to put assets in harm’s
way. In some contexts, the public sector may place restrictions on private investment. In
New Orleans, for example, the idea of not rebuilding the most devastated wards was
raised, but was met with stiff resistance. Due to that opposition, it now appears that New
Orleanians can rebuild as they wish. Similarly, some localities restrict development in
floodplains, but such restrictions are more the exception that the rule. Government
usually lets private investors put their assets at risk, though it knows that it will likely
spend substantial funds bailing them out when disasters occur. Many public policies,
such as California’s Fair Access to Insurance Requirements, which subsidize construction
in fire-prone areas (Kennedy 2006), actually encourage development in risk-prone areas.
Taxes on development in risky locations could prevent such inefficiencies, but they may
be politically infeasible. It might also be more efficient for the government to refrain
from implicitly subsidizing investment in risky locations by not providing disaster relief,
and only allowing building when private entities take on the full risk themselves.
However, there are many situations in which the government cannot credibility commit

3

Private investment decisions get compressed in recovery efforts, which makes the adjustment process
more difficult.

9

to non-intervention (Rodrik and Zeckhauser 1988). The government’s inability to
credibly commit to withholding disaster relief encourages excess development in hazard
prone locations. This is the moral hazard problem at the heart of the dilemma of the
Good Samaritan discussed by James Buchanan (1975).
2.2 Private Investment Decisions
Let f(K) be the profitability from a level of private capital that is fully protected
(so think of f(K) as max [ F ( K , L) − rK − wL] , where F(.,.) is a standard production
L

function, L is labor input, r is the rental rate of capital and w is the wage rate). The
investor’s net profit is:
(3)

π(K, p) = f(K) – (1-p)K.

Thus, through its effect on protection p, government spending indirectly enters the private
production function. Previous authors, including Kaizuka (1965), Arrow and Kurz
(1970), and Barro (1990), have analyzed general cases where government spending is an
input to private production. Our analysis, in contrast, focuses on government spending
on protection. By definition, protection enters the private production function in a
specific way (namely, the return to protection equals K) -- allowing us to make new
inferences.
Given that expected private profit is a function of the level of protection, firms
should have an understanding of the risks they face. Firms, however, may not have the
expertise to fully assess the risks of an area, may not have the time and resources to do
so, or may believe others have more information. In this case, they may take the
investment decisions of others as signals of risk levels. For example, when Wal-Mart
agreed to open a store in the floodplain of Chesterfield Valley, Missouri, others quickly
followed suit. One business owner who decided to follow Wal-Mart was quoted in the
St. Louis Post-Dispatch as saying, “‘Why were we not concerned?’...‘ I have a one-word
answer for that question: Wal-Mart. If the levee's good enough for…that crowd, then it's
good enough for us’” (Heisler 2003). While this attitude can increase efficiency if those
with correct information are followed by others, it can also lead to herd behavior
10

(Banerjee 1992), cascades (Kuran and Sunstein 1999), mutual reassurance, and other
suboptimal outcomes.
Even when private actors do independently assess risk, errors in assessment of
risk levels are common. For example, the findings of Prospect Theory suggest that
individuals homogenize both low and high probabilities, and attach extra value to
certainty (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). These biases, together with other well
documented heuristics and biases (Kahneman and Tversky 2000) are likely to distort risk
assessment, and lead to decisions that would not be chosen were expected benefits and
costs accurately assessed. Thus, due to low-probability homogenization, individuals
might distinguish little between risks of 1% and 0.1%, even though the former is 10 times
as large. More specifically, scholars have explored many reasons why our investment in
reducing the risks from natural disasters may be suboptimal, including the human
tendency toward myopia, neglect of low-probability events, and susceptibility to statusquo bias and recency bias (Kunreuther, Meyer et al. 2002). Our model, however,
assumes that probabilities are assessed correctly by private actors.
So, given a level of protection p, the firm will select a level of capital so that
(4)

f '(K) = 1-p.

Equation (4) says to invest until the marginal return equals the probability of loss. This
return is measured as the excess return over the opportunity cost of capital. Thus, a firm
that normally invests to get 15% returns at the margin facing a 5% probability of a
catastrophe loss would invest until its rate of return fell to 20%.
Our interest is in the returns to all firms, each of which engages in an equivalent
optimization. However, there is no loss of generality in talking about a single firm that
aggregates all the firms, since the firms have no collective action problem, and each
enjoys the same marginal condition. Any externalities from firm to firm are thus
included in the aggregate firm’s production function.
Assume that f(K) is increasing and concave. In this case, (4) has a unique
solution, which is given by:

11

(5)

K* = K(p).

Moreover, since f(K) is concave, f '(K) is a decreasing function and therefore K(p) is
increasing in p. Thus, private capital will increase in response to higher levels of
protection, as intuition would suggest, and as occurs in the real world, as our earlier
discussion showed. Thus, total private benefit from protection can be given by:
(6)

b(p) = π(K(p), p) = f(K(p)) – (1-p) K(p).

2.3 The Overall Optimization
Looking at the cost-benefit analysis, the overall optimization is choose K and p to
maximize expected total surplus:
(7)

max [ f ( K ) − (1 − p ) K − c( p )] .
K,p

The necessary conditions for maximizing total surplus are:
(8a)

c'(p) = K,

and
(8b)

f '(K) = 1-p.

Note that equation (2) defines the appropriate level of protection, and that equation (4)
defines the appropriate level of investment, and that they are identical respectively to (8a)
and (8b). We can also write the inverse function for (2) and (8a), namely,
(9)

p* = h(K).
In the wake of Katrina, there have been calls for New Orleans to emulate the

Netherlands, where people who have managed floods for over a thousand years, and twothirds of their country below sea level, by adopting higher levels of protection. Yet, flood
control in the Netherlands grew out of a cost-benefit analysis (which also considered
indirect benefits of flood control options, such as reducing salinity intrusion or increasing
12

recreational opportunities) undertaken following a devastating flood in 1953 (Gerritsen
2005). The most densely populated and economically important areas of the Netherlands
receive protection from a 10,000-year storm. Rural areas are only protected from a storm
with an occurrence probability of 1 in 1,250 years (The Royal Netherlands Embassy
2005). Instead of blindly copying the levels of protection of the Dutch, it is more
sensible to follow their example of basing protection levels on the costs and benefits of
protection, which vary across locations.
In the frictionless world where the firm and the public protector could adjust to
the other without cost, we could be confident that the necessary conditions listed above
would be satisfied. However, these conditions are not sufficient; even with costless
adjustment, we might not get to the efficient outcome.
We can imagine three pure ways the two parties might adjust to each other: (1)
the government and the private sector can engage in discussions, equivalent to what the
BNOB Committee is doing, and project the function K(p), and then conduct a costbenefit analysis to determine p; (2) the government can conjecture the K(p) function and
pick the optimal level of protection, p*; or (3) the private sector can build, implicitly
projecting the level of protection, h(K). Under (3), individual firms would have to project
how much other private sector players will invest, i.e., which will give the level of K, and
also equation (9), which tells how the government responds to K. In practice, we expect
that some combination of (1) and (2) will be employed. There will be public-private
discussions, but the government will commit first to a protection plan.
While this discussion posits a single period, the real world is dynamic: investment
takes place over time; some modes of protection take time to build, etc. Presumably,
investors would put some capital in place before protection is complete, reasonably
confident that there will not be a low probability catastrophe in the short period before
the protection gets in place, and that the gains from being in place during that period
would more than offset any expected losses. The precise timing of optimal investment in
such situations, particularly when we may be learning more about risk levels, is a worthy
subject for future study. Any dynamic formulation would require significant
complications. Many additional factors – such as wrong projections coupled with
indivisible investments or protection measures – could lead to an outcome well away

13

from the optimum. In the next subsection, we retain the single-period model, with
simultaneous adjustment of investment and protection until an equilibrium is reached.
2.4 Upward-Sloping Marginal Benefit
We have discussed that the cost function, c(p), should be expected to have rapidly
increasing costs as p is driven toward 1. Thus, we assume that c' > 0 and c" > 0. That is,
we posit a well-behaved cost function with upward sloping marginal costs: getting rid of
something undesirable is increasingly costly.
The total private returns from protection b(p) = π(K(p), p), however, does not
behave well, even if its individual components are well behaved. By the envelope
theorem, the slope of b(p) equals K(p), and the total benefit of protection increases with
the level of protection, as expected. However, the second derivative of b(p), the slope of
the marginal benefits, is not well behaved. To see this, recall that for each value of p, the
marginal benefit of protection is equal to K(p). We saw earlier that K(p) is an increasing
function. Thus, the marginal benefit of protection is upward sloping or, in other words,
the total private benefit of protection increases at an increasing rate. Such behavior is
poorly behaved in the classic sense that we usually assume decreasing returns to
something good.
Figure 1 plots the private return to protection π(K, p) for various levels of K.
Since b(p) is simply this return evaluated at the optimal choice of private assets, it is
equal to the upper envelope of the lines in the graph.4

4

The graph is based on f(K) = K1/2- K /10.

14

Total Benefit of Protection
2.5

Total Benefit

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Protection (probability safe)

0.9

1

Figure 1.
2.5 Possibility of Multiple Equilibria
Note that both the benefits and costs of protection have positive second
derivatives. Without further regularity conditions, these curves could cross many times.
Figure 2 depicts marginal cost and benefit curves, c'(p) and b'(p), to illustrate a possible
situation.5 Here, if the decision maker merely looked locally, he might choose to protect
at A, the point where further protection becomes not worthwhile. But it is better to
protect at C, since the gains in going to C, namely the area between the marginal benefit
and marginal cost curves between B and C, are greater than the losses entailed, namely
the area between the curves between A and B.

5

These curves were drawn for the functions f(K) = K1/2- K /10 and c(p) = 20 (0.5p2 – 0.7p – 0.01 log(1-p)).

15

Marginal Benefit and Marginal Cost
25
20
C

$

15
10
B

5
A

Marginal Benefit
0
0.5

0.6

Marginal Cost

p0

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Protection (probability safe)

Figure 2.
Imposing regularity conditions on c(p) and b(p), such as requiring that c'''(p)b'''(p)>0 for all p, can ensure that these curves cross at most twice, and that therefore
there is at most one local maximum. However, there is no compelling reason to assume
that such regularity conditions would be satisfied.
The intuition behind the multiple equilibria is that government protection and
private investment reinforce each other. The returns to protection increase as private
investment rises and the returns to private investment increase as protection rises. This
can create regions where there are increasing returns to an increase in either protection or
investment, which leads to multiple equilibria. A similar intuition underlies the findings
on multiple equilibria in Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989) and in Kunreuther and Heal
(2003). In these models investments of different private parties reinforce each other,
though Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny note that analogous complementarities between
private and government investment exist.

3. Human Capital as an Asset

16

Our analysis thus far has posited that only physical capital is at risk. However,
most threats to physical capital threaten human capital as well. Threats vary dramatically
on the ratio of human to physical capital at stake. Some risks are overwhelmingly risks
to human life or wellbeing – this includes crimes such as rape and murder, or threats such
as avian flu and germ warfare – while others are more exclusively risks to property, such
as terrorist attacks on infrastructure. The vast majority of risks, however, such as fires,
earthquakes, floods, and terrorism threaten both human life and wellbeing and physical
assets. In short, to consider protection and investment regarding individual threats
adequately, we also need to consider the risks to human capital, e.g., valuation of life and
limb.
The large literature on the valuation of a statistical life (VSL) contains a variety of
studies that estimate individuals’ willingness to pay for reductions in risk levels (Viscusi
and Aldy 2003). While willingness to pay for protection is clearly income-dependent,
this does not mean that it is always lower-income households that are exposed to greater
risks. For example, we would expect higher-income households to be exposed to more
amenity risks – risks that have associated with them a valuable amenity – such as beachfront houses vulnerable to hurricanes. We would expect to see more lower-income
households exposed to noxious risks – risks that have no benefit associated with them,
such as proximity to a toxic waste facility. Willingness to pay to avoid risk cannot be
uncoupled from ability to pay, which raises many equity questions.
Let us put aside equity concerns for the moment. The income dependent nature of
willingness to pay for protection suggests that following a reduction in risk, the income
distribution in an area will shift upward over time. Thus, as protection goes up,
additional gains in protection are worth more to the populace. Consider the implications
for a community that is riddled with crime, but must pay for its own police services.
Assume that given the current valuation of the citizens for crime protection, it is not
worthwhile to provide much protection. A substantial anti-crime campaign, however,
might attract individuals to the community who would value reduction in crime risk
much more highly, and raise house prices. Crime control is often part of the
gentrification process. The extent to which that would benefit the current citizens on net
would depend on how many rented their property, i.e., not benefit from the price rise and

17

forced to pay higher rents, as opposed to those owning their property, who would have a
more valuable asset to sell now or in the future. Given political realities, and the fact that
current residents vote, if there are mostly renters in a crime-afflicted area, it is unlikely
such jumps in protection would be made in practice.
Populations whose preferences change as the level of protection increases,
thereby creating multiple equilibria, might be found in a range of situations. Consider a
country afflicted with massive corruption, where eliminating corruption would be costly
enough that the present citizens might not find it worthwhile. However, if corruption
were addressed and completely eliminated, a capable business class might migrate to the
country, which would find the policy to eliminate corruption worthwhile and who would
bring economic growth to offset the costs.

4. Protection as an Imperfect Public Good
Up till now, we have assumed that protection only depends on the amount of
government investment in protective capital. In other words, we assumed that protection
is perfectly non-rival: the cost of achieving a certain level of protection p does not depend
on the amount of private capital protected and this cost can therefore be modeled as c(p).
We recognized that increases in private capital could increase protection through
increased government spending on protection, but ignored the possibility that, holding
government spending constant, the level of private capital can directly affect protection.
We now consider the case where protection is partially rival: the cost of protection now
also increases with the amount of capital protected. We model this cost as c(p, K), with
∂c/∂p>0 and ∂c/∂K>0. Stated differently, this section examines the case where holding
government spending on protection constant, the level of protection can fall as the stock
of protected capital increases.
There are several reasons why the cost of protection may rise with investment
levels. First, this could occur if increases in capital increase the likelihood that the
investment will be a target for crime. Larger homes may be more attractive targets for
burglary, for example. As Glaeser and Shapiro (2002) note, population concentrations
become attractive targets in terrorism and war. The World Trade Towers were targeted

18

in part due to their size and importance. Barns in Iowa, by contrast, are not targets for
terrorist attacks. Increases in capital can also increase the costs of providing protection
when the risk is from natural disasters, for two reasons. First, development may initially
occur in safe areas, but as private capital increases, assets may be placed in less safe
areas, so that marginal investments are less protected. In this situation, the later
developments do not change the safety level of the original investment, but they are less
protected than the earlier capital stock, raising the cost of achieving some average level
of protection. Second, increases in private capital can actually alter the protection of all
development in the region when natural protection is compromised, increasing the costs
to the government of maintaining that protection level. These two situations occur, for
example, as floodplains develop.
Consider a locality situated near a river prone to flooding. Initial investment may
occur outside of the floodplain, where the risk of flooding is low. As this area fills up,
further increases in the capital stock will dribble and then flow into the floodplain. This is
akin to the first situation discussed in the previous paragraph. Now assume that the
floodplain contains many acres of wetlands. Wetlands act as a natural sponge, absorbing
floodwaters and then slowly releasing them, thereby providing natural flood protection
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 1995). If the later investment fills these
wetlands, not only is this investment at a greater risk of flooding, but it has also increased
the risk to all the preceding capital stock by destroying the natural flood protection in the
locality. This will require costly construction, e.g., of a levee, to restore the level of
protection the original capital stock enjoyed, and such construction may not be justified
on a cost-benefit basis.
Some localities in the United States have found that permanently protecting
wetlands is more cost effective for two reasons: they provide flood protection, and they
prevent development in the most risky areas. Just such an approach was taken in the
1970s along the Charles River, which begins at Echo Lake in Hopkinton, flowing eighty
miles to empty into Boston Harbor. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers found that
wetland protection incurred one-tenth the estimated costs of a dam and levee project that
would store an equivalent amount of water (National Research Council 2004). Other

19

areas, such as Napa, California and Reno, Nevada, are also using wetlands to provide
flood protection.
4.1 Direct and Indirect Effects on Protection of an Increase in Private Capital
If protection is to some extent rival, the direct effect of an exogenous increase in
private capital is to reduce the level of protection. If expenditures were held fixed,
protection levels would fall due to the increase in the cost of protection from the increase
in capital. However, there is also an indirect effect: the exogenous increase in private
capital raises the marginal benefit of protection and may therefore induce the government
to spend more on protection. Here we examine the net effect of these two forces.
As before, we have the firm choosing its level of assets to maximize profits, but
we now multiply the production function by a productivity level α in order to introduce a
source of exogenous changes in the level of private assets:
(10)

π(K, p, α) = αf(K) – (1-p)K.

Given a level of protection p and productivity level α, the firm will select a level of
capital so that the net returns to capital are equal to the probability of losing the capital
due to imperfect protection:
(11)

αf '(K) = 1-p.

Assume, as before, that f(K) is increasing and concave. In this case, (11) has a unique
solution, which is given by K(p, α). Moreover, since f(K) is concave, f '(K) is a
decreasing function and therefore K(p, a) is increasing in p and in α. Thus, not
surprisingly, private capital will increase in response to higher levels of protection and in
response to positive productivity shocks.
As before, the marginal benefit of protection is equal to the stock of private
capital, thus:
(12) ∂b(p, α)/∂p = K(p, α).

20

So, the effect of the productivity shock α on the marginal benefit of protection is:
(13)

∂2b(p, α)/∂p∂α = ∂K/∂α > 0.

To determine the net effect of the productivity shock, we next examine its effect on the
marginal cost of protection. If it increases the marginal cost of protection more than the
marginal benefits of protection, the productivity shock (and the resulting exogenous
increase in capital) reduces the level of protection. Assume that the government takes the
level of private assets as given when determining the level of protection.6 The effect of
productivity shock α on the marginal cost of protection is given by:
(14)

d(∂c(p, K(p, α)/∂p)/dα = cpK ∂K/∂α,

where cpK denotes the cross-partial derivative of c(p, K).
Thus, whenever cpK > 1, the productivity shock increases marginal cost more than
marginal benefit (which equals ∂K/∂α), and the equilibrium amount of protection will fall
in any stable equilibrium. Moreover, if the marginal cost rises sufficiently, this may even
eliminate one of the equilibria, thereby causing a jump in protection associated with
switching to a new equilibrium. For example, in figure 2, a sufficiently large
productivity shock will eliminate equilibrium C. Thus, if equilibrium C initially were the
global optimum, a sufficient productivity increase would lead to a discrete downward
jump in protection from the level associated with C to the level associated with A.
To provide a better intuition for the condition cpK > 1, note that at any optimum
the marginal cost of protection must equal the capital stock cp = K. Thus, at any
equilibrium, the condition cpK = ∂cp/∂K > 1 is equivalent to ∂ln(cp)/∂ln(K). Thus cpK > 1
means that the elasticity of the marginal protection costs with respect to the size of the
assets protected is greater than one. This is akin to decreasing returns to scale in the size
of assets protected. This is most plausible in the situations discussed above, such as

6

Thus, we are assuming a Nash equilibrium in the game where government sets the level of protection and
private sector sets the level of private capital, rather than the government being a Stackelberg leader.

21

terrorism, where once assets reach a critical level they become an attractive target. In
most cases, however, such as investment in crime-ridden neighborhoods, the elasticity
should be smaller than one. Thus, even when protection is rival, we would expect the
level of protection to fall in response to an exogenous increase in private capital only in
very rare circumstances (namely, when cpK > 1).

5. Uncertainty and the Optimal Government Protection Decision
In practice, the government is likely to face considerable uncertainty about the
marginal benefit of protection. This section examines the optimal level of government
investment in protection given this uncertainty, in three cases. First, we examine a
decision under uncertainty when the level of protection can not be adjusted later. Second,
we investigate how the optimal level of first-period protection changes if the government
can purchase additional protection at a higher price in period two, after uncertainty about
the benefit of protection has been resolved. In this second case, we assume the benefit
function is sufficiently well-behaved that there is only one local maximum. The third
case is identical to the second case but allows for a poorly behaved benefit function, and
multiple local maxima. In all cases, we assume that the cost of protection depends on the
level of protection but not on the level of private capital; that is, we assume that
protection is a pure public good.
5.1 Decision under uncertainty without the possibility of adjustment
To explore the effects of uncertainty, we use a two-period model. In the first
period, the benefits of protection are still uncertain, since there is uncertainty about the
level of private productivity, which in turn affects the level of investment. Nevertheless,
the government must decide on a level of protection, p, which is achieved by purchasing
government capital. We normalize the price of government capital to one in the first
period. Government capital, G, provides protection as given by the function p(G) ≡ c1

(G). In the second period, uncertainty about the benefits of protection is resolved, and

firms decide on their level of investment.

22

The uncertainty in period 1 derives from uncertainty in the productivity parameter
α in the production functions for firms. This creates uncertainty in the value of
protection, as the government does not know how many firms will choose to locate in the
region. The rebuilding of New Orleans is a prime example of this type of uncertainty, as
the government struggles to determine protection plans without being sure of the extent
to which the city will be rebuilt and New Orleanians will return.
Let the cumulative distribution of α be given by Φ(α). When α is realized and p is
known, the firms choose the level of capital to maximize profits:
(15)

π(K, p, α) = αf(K) – (1-p)K.

The resulting level of private capital is given by K(p, α), which is both increasing in p and
α. The total private benefit from protection is given by:
(16)

b(p, α) = π(K(p, α), p).
The government, faced with uncertainty in this benefits function, selects the level

of protection by maximizing expected surplus
(17)

max Eα [ b( p, α ) − c( p )] .
p

Since the derivative of the benefit function with respect to protection is equal to the level
of private capital, the first order condition of this maximization is:
(18)

Eα[K(p, α)] = c'(p).

Thus, if the government has no opportunity to alter protection levels in the future, its
decision regarding the level of protection to provide should be based on the expected
quantity of private investment. This type of expectation is not uncommon. Consider, for
example, the case of the Riverside Levee in Kansas City mentioned earlier. Senator Kit
Bond’s office noted that the projections made before the levee was completed suggested
23

that it would result in the creation of 11 million square feet of development (Bond 2005).
This figure is the expected quantity of private investment.
Alternatively, we can rewrite optimization in terms of G:
∞

(19)

max
G

∫ b ( p(G ), α ) − G  d Φ(α ) ,

−∞

which yields the following first order condition:
(20)

Eα [K(p(G); α)] p'(G) = 1.

This equation is equivalent to our base equation, elaborated to allow for uncertainty in the
benefit function. The expected marginal benefit of protection times the marginal
protection per unit of G is the marginal benefit of G. This first-order condition simply
states that the expected marginal benefit of G should equal the price of G (which we
normalized to one).
5.2. Possibility of adjustment in the case without multiple equilibria
In reality, there is usually some scope for the government to later provide more
protection.7 Protection may be increased if new technology makes protection cheaper, if
risk levels are re-estimated upwards, or if the level of investment at risk unexpectedly
increases. An example of the first case is the creation of vaccines for many diseases, like
polio and TB, which once killed many, but now, due to affordable vaccines, are no longer
a health threat. An example of the second is the huge increase in federal spending on
airport security following 9/11. The Sacramento and San Joaquin Valley expenditure
allocations for protection, mentioned earlier, illustrate the third. The focus of this paper
is on case three.
In many cases, retrofitting to increase protection levels is more expensive than
providing a higher level of protection initially. For example, increasing protective
7

Downward adjustment is unlikely to be relevant. In most cases, it would cost money to reduce the level
of protective capital once the capital has been installed. That is, the resale price is negative (e.g., it costs
more in terms of labor costs to reduce the height of a levy than it yields in terms of the value of sand, rocks
and scrap metal).

24

structural works, such as levees, requires mobilizing designers, planners, and construction
crews twice. More important, there are significant technological costs to building
increments to levees, or other infrastructure that protects. For example, taller levees
require deeper underpinnings, which are exceedingly expensive to create once the shorter
first levee is in place. Levee expansions also require additional land, and nearby property
values generally increase once a levee is built. This penalty for later increases in
protection may not hold for recurrent protective expenditures, such as services. For
example, hiring an extra police officer later is not more expensive than hiring him or her
earlier.
We follow Abel, Dixit, Eberly, and Pindyck’s (1996) flexible specification for
these adjustment costs but modify their analysis for the case of government investment in
protection. We assume that additional capital bought in period 2 costs z2 ≥ 1. If z2 equals
one, expansion entails no adjustment costs (as with hiring more guards to protect a plant
when assets in the plant increase). By contrast, when z2 tends to infinity, expansion is
prohibitively expensive.
As before, at the beginning of period 2, the productivity shock α is realized. The
government now has the option to adjust its level of protection. Firms know their
productivity level, and through a simultaneous adjustment process, firm investment levels
and government protection are determined.
In this section, we assume that the marginal benefit function mb(G,α) ≡
db(p(G), α)/dG = K(p(G); α) p'(G) is a decreasing function of G for all values of α. This
assumption ensures that the first-order condition mb(G,α) = z2 yields one solution that
corresponds to the globally optimal level of government investment. We have seen that
once we allow private investment to respond to the level of protection, this assumption
rules out important cases. In section 5.3 below, we relax this restrictive assumption.
For a given level of government investment in the first period, G1, there is a
critical value α(G1) of the productivity parameter α such that for any α > α(G1) it is
optimal to purchase additional protection in the second period. Note that this does not
imply any lack of planning or anticipation in the first period. The uncertainty to
productivity was well recognized at the time of the first protection decision, and society

25

got an unusually favorable draw. The critical value α(G1) is defined as the value of α that
solves:
(21)

mb(G1,α) = z2.
Since mb(G1,α) is monotonically increasing in α and monotonically decreasing in

G, equation (21) has a unique solution for α. Only for productivity realizations beyond
α(G1) does the marginal benefit of purchasing additional government protective capital
exceed the higher second-period price of these goods, and it is therefore optimal to
expand protection. In this case, the optimal level of protective government capital is
denoted by G2(α), which is the solution to mb(G2,α) = z2. Thus, G2, the amount of
second-period government capital, is given by:
G2 = G1

for α ≤ α(G1), and

G2 = G2(α)

for α(G1) < α.

Taking into account the option of expanding in the second period, the government
in the first period sets G1 to maximize:

(22) max − G 1 +
G1

α ( G1 )

∫

b ( p (G1 ), α )d Φ (α ) +

−∞

∞

( b ( p(G (α ), α ) − (G (α ) − G ) z ) d Φ (α ) .
∫
α
2

2

1

2

( G1 )

Alternatively, we can re-write this expression as:
∞

(23)

max
G1

∫ b ( p(G ), α ) − G
1

−∞

1

 d Φ (α ) + C (G 1 ) ,

where
∞

(24)

C (G1 ) =

∫ ( b ( p(G (α ), α ) − b ( p(G ), α ) − (G (α ) − G ) z )d Φ(α ) .
2

1

2

1

2

α H ( G1 )

26

The expression C(G1) is the value of the call option of being able to purchase additional
capital. The optimal level of first-period government capital is found by differentiating
expression (23) with respect to G1:
(25)

E[mb(G,α)] + C '(G1) = E[K(p(G1), α)] p'(G1) + C '(G1) = 1.

Thus, the expected marginal benefit of government investment plus its marginal effect on
the value of the implicit call option must equal unity. The marginal effect on the call
option is given by:
∞

(26)

C '(G1 ) =

∫ (z

2

− mb(G1 , α ) )d Φ (α ) ≤ 0 .

α ( G1 )

Increasing the level of first-period investment reduces the marginal value of the
option of future expansions. Thus, the value of the call option decreases with G1.
Because C' is negative, first-period investment will be at a level where the expected
marginal benefit strictly exceeds unity. In other words, the government will invest less in
the first period when it has an option to expand than it would if it had to choose its level
of government capital once and for all. Since ∂C'(G1)/∂z2 = 1-Φ(α(G1)) > 0, first-period
government investment is rising in the price of second-period protective capital: the
option of future expansion becomes less attractive when future investment becomes more
expensive. These results are consistent with Pindyck’s (2000) analysis of the role of
option value in the one-time and irreversible decision of adopting a policy that reduces
emissions of a pollutant.
5.3. Possibility of adjustment in the case with multiple equilibria
Now we relax the assumption that mb(G,α), the marginal benefit of more
protective capital, is monotonically decreasing in the amount of protective capital for any
level of productivity shock α. Instead, we allow for any shape of the marginal benefit
function such that for sufficiently high or low values of G the marginal benefit function is

27

downward sloping. For intermediate values of G, the marginal benefit function may have
upward sloping regions as long as the equation
(27)

mb(G, α) = z2

has at most three solutions for G for any value of α. The canonical case is thus a waveshaped marginal benefit function, as depicted in figure 3. This benefit function has
government protective capital G as an argument, unlike in section 2.5, where the parallel
argument was protection, p.
Marginal benefit functions of this nature are empirically quite plausible, and they
occur because the level of private investment responds to the level of protection, as
discussed in section 2.5. For example, at low levels of spending it is only possible to
build a small levee, suitable for protecting agricultural fields but not more capitalintensive development. As marginal spending increases, net benefits fall, and possibly
even become negative. At some level of spending, however, a levee can be built that will
provide enough protection for more extensive development. At this point, the marginal
benefit function begins to increase. Finally, at some very high level of spending, the
marginal benefits function once again falls.

28

Marginal
benefit mb
GH(αHmin)
GH(α*)

z2

mb(G,αLmax)
GL(α*)

mb(G,α*)
mb(G,αHmin)

Government capital G
Figure 3: Wave-shaped marginal benefit functions for different levels of productivity α
As a result of our assumptions, equation (27) has only one real root for
sufficiently low or sufficiently high values of α, but three real roots (of which two are
stable) for intermediate values of α. The stable roots define the locally optimal levels of
government investment in protective capital. Call the smallest root of equation (27)
GL(α), which is defined on the interval (-∞, α Lmax ]. Similarly, let the largest root be
defined by GH(α) on the interval [ α Hmin , ∞). Thus, on the interval [ α Hmin , α Lmax ], equation
(27) has two distinct stable roots.
Define α* as the value of α for which it is just cost-effective to move from the low
equilibrium to the high equilibrium at the second-period price of protective capital. That
is, α* solves:

29

GH ( α )

8
∫ ( mb(G, α ) − z ) dG = 0 .

(28)

2

GL ( α )

Thus at α*, moving from the low local equilibrium to the high local equilibrium just
breaks even. Thus for any value of α above α*, it will never be optimal to select the low
equilibrium. This means that for first-period levels of government investment G >
GL(α*), the government will never end up at the low equilibrium in the second period.
Now we are ready to define αH(G), which is the critical value of α for every level
of first-period government capital such that for any α > αH(G) the government will
purchase sufficient additional protective capital to achieve the high equilibrium:
αH(G) = α*

for G ≤ GL(α*),
GH ( α )

αH(G) solves

∫ ( mb(G, α ) − z ) dG = 0
2

for GL(α*) < G ≤ GH( α Hmin ), and

G1

αH(G) solves GH(α) = G

for GH( α Hmin ) < G.

Similarly, define αL(G) as the minimum value of α for every level of current
investment such that for any α > αL(G) the government will purchase additional
protective capital:
αL(G) solves GL(α) = G

for G ≤ GL(α*), and

αL(G) = αH(G)

for GL(α*) < G.

Thus G2(G1, α), the optimal period-two level of government capital for every combination
of productivity shock α and first-period government capital, is given by:
G2 = G1

for

α ≤ αL(G1),

G2 = GL(α)

for

αL(G1) < α ≤ αH(G1), and

G2 = GH(α)

for

αH(G1) < α.

8

Equivalently, α* solves b(GH(α*), α*) – b(GL(α*), α*) – z2 (GH(α*)- GL(α*)) = 0.

30

Note that the second condition, αL(G1) < α ≤ αH(G1), leads to the empty set for α for any
GL(α*) < G1 because αL(G1) = αH(G1) for G1 > GL(α*). The set of parameters for which
the government chooses a second-period investment level of G1 (downward diagonals),
GL(α) (grid), or GH(α) (upward diagonals) is depicted in figure 4:

αH(G), long dashes

Productivity α
αLmax

•
αL(G), dots

GH(α)

*

α

GL(α)

αHmin

•

G1
GL(α*)

GH(αHmin)

GL(αLmax)

Government capital G1

Figure 4: Optimal level of second-period protective capital as a function of α and G1.
The government sets the first-period level of protective capital to maximize the expected
net benefit taking into account the possibility of future expansion:
∞

(29) max
G1

∫ ( b ( p(G ), α ) − G ) d Φ(α ) + C
1

1

L

( G 1 ) + C H (G 1 ) ,

−∞

where
C L (G 1 ) =

α H ( G1 )

∫ ( b ( p (G
α

*
L

)

(α )), α ) − b ( p(G1 ), α ) − (GL* (α ) − G1 ) z2 d Φ (α ) , and

L ( G1 )

31

∞

C H (G 1 ) =

∫ ( b ( p (G
α

*
H

)

(α )), α ) − b ( p(G1 ), α ) − (GH* (α ) − G1 ) z2 d Φ (α ) .

H ( G1 )

The function CL(G1) is the value of the call option to purchase the additional
capital needed to achieve the low equilibrium, while CH(G1) is the value of the call option
to purchase the additional capital needed to achieve the high equilibrium. The optimal
level of first-period government capital is found by differentiating expression (29) with
respect to G1:
(30) Eα[mb(G,α)] + CL'(G1) + CH'(G1) = Eα[K*(p(G1); α)] p'(G1) + CL'(G1) + CH'(G1) = 1.
Thus, as in the previous section, the expected marginal benefit of government
investment plus its marginal effect on the call options must equal unity. However, when
the benefit function is wave-shaped, the option to expand later does not always reduce the
first-period level of government capital. Instead, there may be multiple equilibria, so that
the option to increase the level of protection in the future has two potential effects on the
optimal level of protective capital in the first period. First, holding the choice of
equilibrium for G1 constant (high or low), the option to expand may increase the level of
G1. As explained below, this surprising result is driven by the existence of multiple
equilibria. Second, the option to expand may tip the balance of which equilibrium for G1
to select. The direction in which it tips the balance depends on the exact shape of the
marginal benefit function and the distribution of α. Thus, the option to expand the
amount of protection later may increase the optimal current level of protection.
To better understand how call options affect the optimal choice of first-period
government investment, it is useful to first analyze the derivatives of the call options.
The marginal effect of first-period government investment on the low call option is given
by:
(31)

CL '(G1 ) =

α H ( G1 )

∫ (z

2

− mb(G1 , α ) )d Φ (α ) .

α L ( G1 )

This marginal effect is negative; the government will only purchase additional protective
capital to reach the low equilibrium if the marginal benefit at the current level of
32

protection exceeds the price (because the low equilibrium is preceded by a downward
sloping marginal benefit curve). Intuitively, purchasing more first-period capital
extinguishes the option of purchasing additional capital in the future and the value of the
call option therefore decreases. Thus, CL '(G1 ) ≤ 0 for all values of G1.. Moreover, for

values of G1 > GL(α*), the government would only expand to the high equilibrium and
therefore CL'(G1) = 0.
The marginal effect of first-period government investment on the high call option
is given by:
∞

(32)

CH '(G1 ) =

∫ (z

2

− mb(G1 , α ) )d Φ (α ) .

α H ( G1 )

The derivative of the high call option could conceivably be positive because the marginal
benefit function preceding the high equilibrium is not monotonically downward sloping.
To facilitate determining the sign of this effect, it is useful to define mb*(G1) ≡
mb(G1,αH(G1)). Thus, the critical marginal benefit, mb*(G1), is the lowest marginal
benefit at the current level of protective capital for which it would make sense to
purchase the additional capital to attain the high equilibrium in the second period. We
can then rewrite the derivative of the high option as:
(33)

CH '(G1 ) = Eα  z2 − mb(G1 , α ) | mb(G1 , α ) > mb* (G1 )  .
The critical marginal benefit is plotted as the dashed line in figure 5.

33

Marginal
benefit mb

GH(α*)
GH(αHmin)

GL(α*)

B

z2

A

C
*

mb (G) = mb(G,αH(G))

1
mb(G,α*)

D

mb(G,αHmin)
Eα[mb(G,α)]
B
GA G

GC GD

Government capital G1

Figure 5. Effect of the option to expand on the optimal first-period level of protection
As we saw above, for values of G1 below GL(α*), it only makes sense to go to the
high equilibrium if productivity exceeds α*: αH = α*. Thus, on this segment, mb*(G1) =
mb(G1, α*) and the critical marginal benefit is decreasing in G1. Moreover, since
mb*(GL(α*)) = mb(GL(α*), α*) = z2, it follows that mb*(G1) > z2 for G1 < GL(α*). Hence,
the derivative of the high call option is negative in this range.
For values of G1 above GL(α*) but below GH( α Hmin ), the critical value αH, which
productivity must exceed to go to the high equilibrium, is decreasing (recall figure 4).
Thus, in this range, the critical marginal benefit shifts gradually from a relatively high
marginal benefit curve mb(G,α*) to the relatively low marginal benefit curve mb(G,

α Hmin ). As a result, mb*(G1) < z2 for GL(α*) < G1 < GH( α Hmin ). In this range, the
expectation Eα  z2 − mb(G1 , α ) | mb(G1 , α ) > mb* (G1 )  may therefore be positive.
Whether it is positive depends on the distribution of α. If the distribution of α makes it
sufficiently likely that marginal benefit levels will be close to the critical benefit level as
opposed to higher benefit levels (e.g., if Φ has a very thin right tail), then the expectation

34

is positive. If marginal benefit levels above z2 are sufficiently likely (e.g., if Φ is very
spread out or has a thick right tail), then this derivative is negative in this range.
For values of G1 above GH( α Hmin ), we found the critical value, αH, as the value of
α that solves mb(G1,α) = z2. Thus, mb*(G1) equals z2 and the derivative of the high call
option is negative. Thus to summarize:
CH '(G1 ) ≤ 0

for G1 ≤ GL (α * ) ,

>0
CH '(G1 ) <

for GL (α * ) < G1 ≤ GH (α Hmin ) , and

CH '(G1 ) ≤ 0

for GH (α Hmin ) < G1 .

We can now analyze the effect of an option to expand on the optimal choice of
first-period investment in protective capital. Consider figure 5. In the absence of the
option to expand, the government would find the optimal level of G1 by equating the
expected marginal benefit Eα[mb(G,α)] to the marginal cost (normalized to 1). This
yields two local maxima, GA and GD. To determine which of these two is the global
maximum, the government must calculate the net benefit of going from GA and GD,
which is given by area D minus area C. Thus, if D-C > 0, the government selects GD and
otherwise picks GA.
Now consider the effect of the option to expand on each local equilibrium. As
drawn, the low local equilibrium, GA, falls in the range where the derivative of the low
call option is zero and where the derivative of the high call option can be positive. If the
latter derivative is positive (which happens, for example, if the probability that α>α* is
zero), then the option to expand increases the optimal amount of government investment,
for example to GB. The intuition behind this surprising result is the following. If the
initial investment level G1 is between GL (α * ) and GH (α Hmin ) , and if α is sufficiently high
that it is worthwhile to increase the level of protection, then the first units of additional
investment cost more than their marginal benefit. (This is made up for by the later units
of investment, whose marginal benefit exceeds their marginal cost.) Thus, increasing the
level of first-period investment reduces the number of units of additional investment
undertaken at a marginal loss and therefore increases the option value of expanding. As
35

drawn, the high local equilibrium has a level of government investment GD that exceeds
GH (α Hmin ) , and the derivative of the high call option is therefore negative. As a result, the
option to expand lowers the optimal level of first-period investment, for example to GC,
for the usual reasons.
Next consider the effect of the option to expand on the selection of one of the two
local equilibria. Suppose that the two local equilibria, GB and GC, have the same level of
expected net benefits when ignoring the option to expand. Thus, whichever local
maximum has the higher option value is the global maximum. The difference in the total
value of the high call option is, by definition, the integral of the derivative of the high call
option evaluated between GB and GC. Because this derivative may be positive over much
of this range, the total option value at GC can be higher than GB, in which case the option
to expand leads to the selection of the higher equilibrium. As we saw above, the
derivative of the high call option is more likely to be positive if α has a thin right tail.
Take, for example, an extreme case of a thin tail, namely that α is distributed on some
interval with α* as the upper bound. In that case, the government would expand
investment only if the marginal benefit falls in the areas A or B. The derivative of the
high call option equals z2 - mb and is therefore positive for marginal benefits in area A
while it is negative for marginal benefits in area B. If the probability of the marginal
benefit falling in area A rather than B is sufficiently high, then the value of the call option
is higher for GC than for GB, and the higher local maximum is selected. Intuitively, the
option to expand is less valuable at GB because the government first has to incur a loss
(buying some additional capital at a marginal cost exceeding the marginal benefit) before
reaping the benefit of expansion. On the other hand, if α has sufficient mass in the far
right tail, then the probability of having to incur losses before expanding is much lower,
and the lower equilibrium becomes relatively more attractive.

6. Conclusion
The devastation wrought by hurricane Katrina along the Gulf Coast has once
again reminded citizens, policymakers, and academics of the difficulties of making
decisions regarding development in risk-prone locations. This paper has highlighted that

36

government does not face a simple decision of how much protection to offer investments,
nor do private entities face a simple decision of how much to invest in an area with a
given risk level. Instead, government and investors respond to each other, with
investment increasing when protection levels are raised, and government raising
protection when investment in a risky location grows. When the marginal value of
protection increases with the level of protection provided, the game may have multiple
equilibria. Thus, given an ill-behaved benefits function, a local optimum may not be the
global optimum, which complicates policy decisions, as does the uncertainty regarding
the level of investment that will follow a given level of protection. The difficulty in these
decision problems probably helps to explain why countries with stronger institutions
suffer lower losses from natural disasters (Kahn 2005). The policy challenges are also
evident in the recent discussions on rebuilding New Orleans, and in the debates on the
level of protection that should be provided to the city. When uncertainty prevails, the
government should weigh the option values of being able to adjust protection levels in the
future. Despite these complexities in determining protection levels, or perhaps because
of them, governments often blindly follow rules of thumb such as providing protection
from the 100-year flood or 1000-year flood. Society may make more optimal levels of
investment if instead we critically examine the costs and benefits of spending on
protection, basing our decisions on the level (or expected level) of investments that will
be at risk.

37

References
Abel, A. B., A. K. Dixit, J. C. Eberly and R. S. Pindyck (1996). "Options, the Value of
Capital, and Investment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics August: 753-777.
Arrow, K. and M. Kurz (1970). Public investment, the rate of return, and optimal fiscal
policy. Baltimore, MD, The Johns Hopkins Press.
Banerjee, A. V. (1992). "A Simple Model of Herd Behavior." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107(3): 797-817.
Barro, R. J. (1990). "Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth."
Journal of Political Economy 98(5): S103-26.
Bond, K. (2005). "Bond Celebrates Riverside Levee Comletion: New Levee to Protect
Kansas City from Flood & Boost Economic Growth." Retrieved March 15, 2006
from http://bond.senate.gov/press_section/record.cfm?id=238023.
Buchanan, J. M. (1975). The Samaritan's Dilemma. Altruism, Morality, and Economic
Theory. E. Phelps. New York, Russell Sage: 71-85.
Carter, N. T. (2005). Flood Risk Management: Federal Role in Infrastructure.
Washington, D.C., Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress.
Carter, N. T. and B. A. Cody (2005). CRS Report for Congress, The Civil Works
Program of the Army Corps of Engineers: A Primer. Washington, D.C.,
Congressional Research Service, The Library of Congress. February 3.
Feinstein, D. (2005). "Floor Statement by Senator Dianne Feinstein." Retrieved March
15, 2006 from http://feinstein.senate.gov/05releases/r-energy1114.htm.
Gerritsen, H. (2005). "What happened in 1953? The Big Flood in the Netherlands in
retrospect." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 363: 1271–1291.
Glaeser, E. L. and J. M. Shapiro (2002). "Cities and Warfare: The Impact of Terrorism on
Urban Form." Journal of Urban Economics 51: 205-224.
Hallstrom, D. G. and K. V. Smith (2005). "Market Responses to Hurricanes." Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 50(3): 541-61.
Heisler, E. (2003). Investment of $400 million flows into Chesterfield Valley. St. Louis
Post-Dispatch. St. Louis, July 7,
Kahn, M. E. (2000). "Smog Reductions Impact on California County Growth." Journal of
Regional Science 40(3): 565-82.
Kahn, M. E. (2005). "The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income,
Geography, and Institutions." Review of Economics and Statistics 87(2): 271-84.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky (1979). "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
Risk." Econometrica 47(2): 263-292.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky, Eds. (2000). Choice, Values, and Frames. Cambridge,
England, Cambridge University Press.
Kaizuka, K. (1965). "Public Goods and the Decentralization of Production." Review of
Economics and Statistics 47: 118-120.
Kennedy, R. G. (2006). Wildfire and Americans: How to Save Lives, Property, and Your
Tax Dollars. New York, Hill and Wang.
Klick, J. and A. Tabarrok (2005). "Using Terror Alert Levels to Estimate the Effect of
Police on Crime." The Journal of Law and Economics 48: 267-279.

38

Kunreuther, H. and G. Heal (2003). "Interdependent Security." Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 26(2/3): 231-249.
Kunreuther, H., R. Meyer, R. Zeckhauser, P. Slovic, B. Schwartz, C. Schade, M. F. Luce,
S. Lippman, D. Krantz, B. Kahn and R. Hogarth (2002). "High Stakes Decision
Making: Normative, Descriptive and Prescriptive Considerations." Marketing
Letters 13(3): 259.
Kunreuther, H. and A. Rose, Eds. (2004). The Economics of Natural Hazards.
Northamption, MA, Edward Elgar Publishing.
Kuran, T. and C. R. Sunstein (1999). "Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation."
Stanford Law Review April.
Lehrer, E. (2000). "Crime Fighting and Urban Renewal." The Public Interest 141(Fall):
91-103.
Levitt, S. D. (1997). "Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of
Police on Crime." American Economic Review 87(3).
Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny (1989). "Industrialization and the Big
Push." Journal of Political Economy 97(5): 1003-1026.
National Research Council Committee on Assessing and Valuing the Services of Aquatic
and Related Terrestrial Ecosystems (2004). Valuing Ecosystem Services: Toward
Better Environmental Decision-Making. Washington, D.C., National Academies
Press.
Persky, J. (2001). "Retrospectives: Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Classical Creed."
Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(4): 199-208.
Pindyck, R. S. (2000). "Irreversibilities and the timing of environmental policy."
Resource and Energy Economics 22(3): 233-259.
Pinter, N. (2005). "One Step Forward, Two Steps Back on U.S. Floodplains." Science
308(8 April): 207-208.
Rodrik, D. and R. Zeckhauser (1988). "The Dilemma of Government Responsiveness."
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 7(4): 601-620.
Sparks, R. E. (2006). "Rethinking, Then Rebuilding New Orleans." Issues in Science and
Technology Winter.
The Royal Netherlands Embassy. (2005). "Dutch Ambassador Visits New Orleans."
Retrieved February 20, 2006 from http://www.netherlandsembassy.org/article.asp?articleref=AR00001808EN.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1995). America's wetlands: Our vital link
between land and water, EPA843-K-95-001. Washington, D.C., Office of Water,
Office of Wetlands, Oceans and Watersheds.
Viscusi, W. K. and J. E. Aldy (2003). "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
of Market Estimates Throughout the World." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
27(1): 5.

39

