                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   JUDICIAL RISK AND CREDIT MARKET PERFORMANCE:
                   MICRO EVIDENCE FROM BRAZILIAN PAYROLL LOANS

                                           Ana Carla A. Costa
                                           Joao M.P. De Mello

                                          Working Paper 12252
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12252


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2006




Forthcoming: Strengthening Global Financial Markets, Sebastian Edwards and Márcio G. P. Gracia, editors.
Costa: ana.costa@bcb.gov.br. De Mello: jmpm@econ.puc-rio.br. Mrs Costa would like to stress that opinions
expressed here are solely hers, and do not reflect any official position of the Brazilian Central Bank. Authors
would like to thank Cornélio Pimentel, Daniel Sanchez and Plinio Romanini from DESIG/BCB for sharing
the data. Johan Albino shared important informations about judicial disputes over payroll lending. We would
also like to thank Tony Takeda, Marcelo de Paiva Abreu, Renato Flôres, Benny Parnes, and participants at
the IASE-NBER conference for comments and suggestions. Usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2006 by Ana Carla A. Costa and Joao M.P. De Mello. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Judicial Risk and Credit Market Performance: Micro Evidence from Brazilian Payroll Loans
Ana Carla A. Costa and Joao M.P. De Mello
NBER Working Paper No. 12252
May 2006
JEL No. L19, G21, D86, O16

                                            ABSTRACT

A large body of literature has stressed the institution-development nexus as critical in explaining
differences in countries’ economic performance. The empirical evidence, however, has been mainly
at the aggregate level, associating macro performance with measures of quality of institutions. This
paper, by relating a judicial decision on the legality of payroll loans in Brazil to bank-level decision
variables, provides micro evidence on how creditor legal protection affects market performance.
Payroll loans are personal loans with principal and interests payments directly deducted from the
borrowers’ payroll check, which, in practice, makes a collateral out of future income. In June 2004,
a high-level federal court upheld a regional court ruling that had declared payroll deduction illegal.
Using personal loans without payroll deduction as a control group, we assess whether the ruling had
an impact on market performance. Evidence indicates that it had an adverse impact on risk
perception, interest rates, and amount lent.

Joao M.P. De Mello
Departamento de Economia
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro
Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225
Rio de Janeiro RJ BRAZIL 22453-900
jmpm@econ.puc-rio.br
1       Introduction
In recent years, the literature has built a near consensus that "sound" insti-
tutions are congenial to good economic performance (North [1994]). Institu-
tions, insofar as they determine the economic environment agents operate in,
should be important for explaining economic outcomes. Quite often, the spe-
cific mechanism through which institutions influence economic performance
is protection from expropriation. In environments in which expropriation is
likely, agents underinvest (from a social perspective) relative to more secure
ones. In the end, a plethora of sub-optimal microeconomic decisions amount
to a poorer aggregate economic performance.
    Indeed, most of the empirical eﬀort in associating institutional "sound-
ness", however defined, and economic performance has been on the aggregate
level. An observation on a typical study is a country (La Porta et al. [1998A]
is a seminal example). Institutional measures are then linked to economic
performance on various dimensions. La Porta et al. [1998A], for example,
document that the origin of the legal system is associated with the degree of
creditor protection. La Porta et al. [1997] find that a lower degree of creditor
protection implies smaller debt and equity markets.1 Another set of articles
study the financial deepening-economic growth link (King and Levine [1993],
Levine and Zervos [1998]), finding a positive relationship. Taken all together,
these papers seem to imply the following chain of causality. At the basic
level, legal origin (institution) cause creditor protection (protection from ex-
propriation). At the second stage, better creditor protection cause financial
deepening. Finally, financial deepening causes economic growth.
    This chain of causality would be more convincing were microeconomic
evidence available. The missing link is due to the level of analysis, much
broader than the relevant locus of economic decisions. There is, for example,
an implicit assumption that agents do invest less if creditors protection is
lower. For several reasons, it is hard to be completely convincing with such
an aggregate level of analysis. One such reason is reverse causality. The
    1
     Pinheiro and Cabral [1998] follow this tradition for the Brazilian credit market. Using
state-level data on outstanding volumes of credit, and an index of judicial eﬃciency (based
on the results of a survey conducted with businessmen on each state where they rate the
quality of the local judiciary), they relate variation in judicial ineﬃciency to diﬀerences in
outstanding volumes of credit across the states. The authors conclude, corroborating the
institution-development hypothesis, that improving the eﬃciency of judicial enforcement
is important for credit markets development.



                                              2
following example, however farfetched, is illustrative. Assume investment is
completely inelastic, and creditor protection is a superior good. Creditor
protection, in this setting, has only distributive, not allocative, eﬀects. For
demand reasons, there is, however, a reverse causality running from income
to creditor protection. Evidently, investment is not completely inelastic but
the demand driven story is still conceivable. Most of the studies do recognize
this possibility, and try to find suﬃciently exogenous variation to relate insti-
tutions and economic performance. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson [2001]
and Levine [1998] are good examples of careful searches for such variation.
    Another problem stems from the fact that legal procedures are "chosen"
by society, and hence may be endogenously designed to tackle the issues often
put as the dependent variables in the regressions. La Porta et al [2003] face
this diﬃculty. They argue that legal formalism reduces the quality of the
judicial system. But formalism, as they recognize it, could also be a response
to "weaker law and order environment". Their strategy is to use the fact
that most countries inherit their legal tradition (and that French civil law is
more "formalistic"), which makes the legal tradition a source of exogenous
variation. Again, the story is compelling insofar as it is prohibitively costly
for countries to "change" their legal tradition, since otherwise "maintenance"
of tradition would itself be endogenous.
    However well argued (as it is the case in all papers cited), identification is
mostly a rethorical issue, since one can only test for overidentification. With
micro level evidence, these issues can be bypassed, and one can directly as-
sess how market participants respond to varying institutional environments.
Creditor protection and financial deepening is an example. If there is evi-
dence that creditors price judicial risk, or restrain quantities in face of weak
protection, then it becomes much more compelling that legal protection in-
duces financial deepening. In this case, one could be much more confident
that the causality from creditor protection to income is of first-order, as op-
posed to demand driven explanations, such as protection being a superior
good.
    A third reason is omitted factors. Several other countries’ character-
istics might determine both institutional setting (such as legal origin and
level of creditor protection, the usual explanatory variables) and economic
performance (the usual regressand). Consider again the Acemoglu-Johnson-
Robinson strategy for finding exogenous variation in institutional soundness



                                        3
to estimate the institution-economic performance link.2 For former colonies,
one conceivable alternative story is the type of colonization. Suppose that,
for sheer coincidence, while countries with a French civil law tradition (usu-
ally interpreted as “unsound” institutions) occupied lands that had valuables
goods for the European market (silver in Peru and sugar in Brazil, for in-
stance), countries with common law tradition (“sound” institutions) arrived
at places that had few "tradable" goods with Europe (early English colo-
nization of the US). Suppose as well that this trade feature determined how
exploitative colonization was, and that exploitation had long lasting eﬀects.
In this case, the (omitted) driving force is whether there were comparative
advantages to be explored. However, “sound” institutions and (later) eco-
nomic performance would still relate empirically, although causal interpreta-
tion would not be warranted. We do not claim the institutional settings do
not matter, and that the legal tradition only enters the picture through trade
"causing" both institutional settings and economic performance. The crucial
point is that, with micro level evidence, it is unnecessary to be concerned
about such alternative explanations.
    Finally, measurement is intrinsically more problematic with aggregate
data. In La Porta et al. [1998], (country-level) creditor protection is mea-
sured by characteristics of the countries´ corporate laws, and by several in-
dices.3 Besides the inherent arbitrariness in constructing such indices, theory
not always provides clear guidance in interpreting the results. For example,
is it theoretically clear that restricting the behavior of managers always in-
creases the amount of finance in equilibrium? It is conceivable that, if you
suﬃciently restrict managers´ behavior, the size of debt and equity market
will be small, for reasons pertaining to the supply of securities? Without
a clear theoretical support, an empirical finding that restricting managers´
behavior is associated with "larger" equity and debt markets is subject to
criticisms that micro-evidence is not. One such criticism is the presence of
non-linearities in the creditor protection-market performance relation.4
   2
     Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson [2001] document that “better institutions" arose in
countries where mortality rates due to native diseases were low when colonizers originally
arrived. This, according to the authors, shift the equation that determines institutions
but not the equation that determines current economic performance.
   3
     They have indices for, among others, eﬃciency of the judicial system, risk of expro-
priation, and risk of repudiation of contracts by government.
   4
     Dubey, Geanakoplos and Shubik [2003] show that, with incomplete markets, that in-
termediate levels of debtor punishment can induce a larger quantity of credit that extreme



                                            4
    It might seem puzzling the relative lack of micro evidence on the institution-
development nexus. We conjecture that this is due to the scarcity of a
fortunate coincidence: data on both the relevant economic decision locus
(firms, consumers) linked to variation on institutional settings. La Porta et
al. [2003] study on the formality of legal procedures and the quality of
the legal system is somewhat an exception.5 They do not, however, directly
associate market level performance with diﬀerent institutional settings.
    In this work, we take advantage of a particular set of events that provide
variation on a relevant institutional setting and we are able to associate this
variation with data on the relevant economic decision locus. The empirical
setting is the market for Payroll Debit Loans in Brazil. Payroll Debit Loans
are personal loans with principal and interests payments directly deducted
from the borrowers’ payroll check, which, in practice, makes a collateral out
of future income. In June 2004, a high-level federal court upheld a regional
court ruling that had declared payroll deduction illegal.6 The decision by
the federal court has a case specific nature, i.e. only applies to this particu-
lar dispute. There is, however, evidence from market practioners that there
was an increase in the perceived probability that the decision could estab-
lish precedent, and turn useless the future income collateral. Using personal
loans without payroll deduction as a control group, a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
procedure assess whether the judicial decision had an impact on market per-
formance. As a preview, the data on bank level suggest that the decision
had an adverse impact on banks’ risk perception, on interest rates, and on
the amount lent. In this sense, this is direct evidence of market participants’
reaction to institutional risk.
    Our theory is simple to the point of trivial: an increase in the chance of
expropriating the collateral should shift the supply of loans inward, worsening
market performance. Whether the empirical consequences are first order is
far from trivial. This is, indeed, the goal of the paper: investigate whether a
clear-cut shift in the institutional setting has microeconomic consequences.
Evidence from market pratictioners is ambiguous. While some important
levels of debtor punishment.
   5
     In this paper, the authors study the link between formality of the legal system and
the time elapsed to evict non-paying tenants, and to recover a bounced check. Further-
more, they associate formality with other measures of judicial system performance, such
as corruption, and access to justice.
   6
     The court ruled at the very end of June (28th). However, the press release was on
July 1st.


                                           5
players had the perception that the decision could have strong adverse eﬀects,
equally important players thought the eﬀect would be second order.
    The market level evidence is a complement, not a substitute, to the aggre-
gate level evidence. Indeed, our results in no way contradict the literature.
On the contrary, they corroborate it. While aggregate evidence indicates
that institutional diﬀerences are of first-order importance in explaining vari-
ation in countries’ performances, micro and market level evidence evaluates
directly the implicit assumption necessary to interpret the aggregate evidence
as indeed causal.
    The result has an additional interest given the empirical application. Pay-
roll Lending is one of the workhorses of the recent Brazilian credit market
expansion. Brazil, in La Porta-Lopez-Silanes-Shleifer-Vishny tradition, is a
French civil law country, with low creditor protection. Credit markets are
relatively underdeveloped. Recently, however, it has make several eﬀorts to-
wards a more creditor friendly institutional environment. Courts may be par-
ticularly important in an environment with weak creditor protection, where
other protective institutions, such as laws, are weak or inexistent.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the recent evolution
of credit market in Brazil and the chronology of Payroll lending, emphasizing
the relevant events, such as the approval in congress of the law regulating
Payroll Lending for retirees and the judicial decision on the legality of payroll
deductions. Section 3 presents the data, and Section 4 the empirical strategy.
We argue that the presence of an identical product, except for deduction in
payroll, provides a good control for associating changes in the institutional
environment to market changes in Payroll Lending. Results are presented
and discussed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2     Credit Market in Brazil: Recent Evolution
      and Payroll Lending
In recent years, bank lending experienced a pronounced increase in Brazil,
specially in lending out of banks’ "free lending funds" (those not earmarked
by mandatory programs). Between July 1999 and September 2005, the free
loans/GDP ratio went from 8.3% to 17.1% (Figure 1). This free loan segment
now represents 67% of total banking credit, changing positions with directed



                                       6
credit operations- that now stands at 33%.7

                 18



                 16



                 14



                 12



                 10
 (P.p.(%))




                  8



                  6



                  4



                  2



                  0
                                                 dez/99




                                                                                                       dez/00




                                                                                                                                                             dez/01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dez/02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dez/03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               dez/04
                               ago/99
                                        out/99


                                                          fev/00
                                                                   abr/00


                                                                                     ago/00
                                                                                              out/00


                                                                                                                fev/01
                                                                                                                         abr/01


                                                                                                                                           ago/01
                                                                                                                                                    out/01


                                                                                                                                                                      fev/02
                                                                                                                                                                               abr/02


                                                                                                                                                                                                 ago/02
                                                                                                                                                                                                          out/02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fev/03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     abr/03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ago/03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                out/03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fev/04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           abr/04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ago/04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      out/04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fev/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 abr/05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ago/05
                      jun/99




                                                                            jun/00




                                                                                                                                  jun/01




                                                                                                                                                                                        jun/02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              jun/03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jun/04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jun/05
                                                                                                                                                                                   month/year



             Figure 1: Private Banking Credit/GDP, 1999 to 2005 (Free Loans)

    Interestingly, this tendency of financial deepening took place during a
period of tight monetary policy 8 . Despite this fact, free market lending
expanded remarkably. Several factors help explain this trend.
    These specific factors are all linked to institutional reforms that took
place in Brazil since the end of 1999. Measures included: eﬀorts to reduce
information asymmetries in credit markets (such as the new credit ranking
and provisioning regulation, through Resolution 2.682/99, and the Central
Bank Credit Information System (SCR), implemented in 1999 and improved
in 2000 and 2004); more eﬃcient instruments of collateral recognition and
contract enforcement (as the so-called "Cédula de Crédito Bancário", a claim
             7
     Numbers for December, 2005. Banking credit portfolios in Brazil have two types
of loans: free market operations, where banks can set quantity and prices according to
their profit maximizing behaviour; and compulsory directed credit operations - mostly
channeled to housing and rural sectors at subsidized interest rates.
   8
     Brazil adopted Inflation Target and Floating Exchange Rate regimes in 1999 during a
liquidity crisis, exchange rate devaluation and inflation pressure. Interest rates where the
main instrument used to stabilize the economy. Inflation targets are set by Nacional Mon-
etary Council and basic interest rates are monthly defined by Central Bank in Monetary
Policy Comittee (COPOM) meetings.


                                                                                                                                                                                           7
with faster execution procedures, in 2001 and 2004)9 ; a better insolvency
resolution system (through a new bankruptcy law, approved by Congress in
the end of 2004); and regulation of creative credit instruments, such as payroll
lending. They provided an improved institutional environment and possibly
led to the observed higher volumes of credit concessions by the Brazilian
banking sector. As suggested in the previous cited literature, the evolution
towards a more creditor friendly environment might have engendered this
initial movement of financial deepening in Brazil.
    Nevertheless, this rapid expansion path — more pronounced during the last
two years — is not observed in all credit market segments. On the contrary,
this acceleration is mainly explained by growing volumes of consumer loans.
Credit to this segment, which in 1999 represented 3.6% of GDP (or 9% of
total private bank credit portfolio), reached in 2005 outstanding volumes
that amount 8.7% of GDP (or 31% of total private bank credit portfolio).
Consequently, since December 2004, personal loans respond for the biggest
part of total bank loans, with an even higher participation than industrial
credit, that has been stable around 6.9% of GDP (Figure 2).

                       10
                                                                                                                         STJ
                       9                                                                                                 ruling

                       8


                       7


                       6
           (P.p.(%))




                       5


                       4


                       3


                       2


                       1


                       0
                        36312 36434 36557 36678 36800 36923 37043 37165 37288 37408 37530 37653 37773 37895 38018 38139 38261 38384 38504
                                                                               mês/ano

                                                     Industry   Rural Sector   Commerce     Services   Personal Credit



Figure 2: Private Banking Credit/GDP - Evolution by Economic Segment (1999 to 2005)
  9
    The SCR brings detailed information on borrower´s credit contracts of over
R$5,000.00. (roughly U$2,200.00).



                                                                  8
    Consumer credit loans in Brazil can be divided into three main types
of loans. The personal loan, for consumption purposes; loans for vehicle
acquisition; and Cheque Especial, a consumer overdraft facility. It is, however,
in the personal loan category — the largest category, that a major growth is
observed (52% during the last twelve months),as showed in Figure 3.


               70



               60



               50



               40
 R$ billions




               30



               20



               10



                0
                          03




                                                                                        04
                                                                         4

                                                                        04




                                                                                                                                               5
                         04


                                         4




                                         4




                                                  04


                                                               4

                                                              04


                                                               4




                                                                                       05

                                                                                                    05




                                                                                                      5




                                                                                                                         05


                                                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                                                     05


                                                                                                                                      5
                                        4




                                                                                                     5
                                        4




                                                                                                     5
                                                                      t/0




                                                                                                                                            t/0
                                    r/ 0




                                                            l/0




                                                                                                 r/ 0




                                                                                                                                   l/0
                                      /0




                                      /0




                                                           t/0




                                                                                                   /0




                                                                                                                                  t/0
                                     /0




                                                                                                  /0
                  z/




                                                                                  z/
                                                          o/




                                                                     v/




                                                                                                                                 o/
                       n/




                                                n/




                                                                                     n/

                                                                                                 v/




                                                                                                                       n/
                                  v




                                   ai




                                                                                                ai
                                  ar




                                                                                               ar
                                                         ju




                                                                                                                                ju
                                                                   ou




                                                                                                                                          ou
                                                        se




                                                                                                                               se
                                 ab




                                                                                              ab
                de




                                                                                de
                                                                   no
                               fe




                                                                                              fe
                                                       ag




                                                                                                                              ag
                    ja




                                             ju




                                                                                  ja




                                                                                                                    ju
                                 m




                                                                                              m
                                 m




                                                                                              m




                                                                        month/year

                                             Overdraft Loans   Personal Loans          Vehicle Acquisition   "Credit Cards"


                  Figure 3: Personal Lending in Brazil
    This paper is concerned with personal loans, which are further divided
into two sub-categories: the standard loan contract (hereafter standard loan),
and a special type of personal loan contract that has an automatic monthly
payment deducted from the borrower’s salary. This is the payroll lending
operation (Crédito Consignado em Folha de Pagamento, hereafter payroll
loan), which represents over 35% of all consumer credit in Brazil, and whose
growth path has shown a particularly noticeable increase. Figure 4 shows the
evolution of payroll lending operations, and its increasing participation on
total personal loans, for the thirteen largest active banks in this segment.10
     10
    Brazilian Central Bank collects this data for this small - but representative - sample
of banks since January 2004. It now aims to expand it to all banks operating with this
specific type of credit.




                                                                           9
               25                                                                                                                                     50


                                                                                                                                                      45


               20                                                                                                                                     40


                                                                                                                                                      35


               15                                                                                                                                     30
 R$ billions




                                                                                                                                                           (P.p (%))
                                                                                                                                                      25


               10                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                      15


                5                                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                                                                      5


                0                                                                                                                                     0
                    Jan   Fev   Mar   Abr   Mai   Jun   Jul   Ago   Set   Out   Nov   Dez   Jan   Fev      Mar   Abr   Mai   Jun   Jul*   Ago* Set*
                                                                            month/year

                                                                Payroll Loans     Payroll/Personal Loans



                 Figure 4: Personal Lending in Brazil
    Payroll lending exists in Brazil since the beginning of the 1990s. It was
restricted to government personnel and was originally operated by peculium
institutions, which had the possibility to act as trusts before public adminis-
tration agencies.11 But since the second half of the 1990s some financial insti-
tutions identified in this type of loan a good business opportunity, with low
credit risk and high return. Those banks entered this credit market through
the acquisition of peculium institutions already registered as trustees.

2.1                       Payroll Loans: Description of the Product, Chronol-
                          ogy of Events, and Pratictioners’ Opinions
The decisive expansion of payroll lending operations occurred in Septem-
ber 2003, when the government sent to Congress a provisory law (Medida
Provisória (MP) 130), subsequently turned into Law 10.820/03.12 The law
regulated the possibility of salary consignation for private sector formal work-
ers, and for retired workers from private sector and pensionaries covered by
      11
     Law 8.112/90 admits the possibility of payroll consignation for government personnel.
      12
     Medida provisória is a legislative device in which the executive sends a bill to congress
that is eﬀective immediatly, pending approval. It has an urgency status that forces the
legislator to appreciate its merit. For practical purposes, it is almost equivalent to a
full-blown law.



                                                                                         10
the National Institution of Social Security (INSS).13
    In practice, payroll deduction turns future income into collateral. Evi-
dently, future income is valuable as a collateral insofar as it is not too volatile.
This is precisely why payroll lending is mainly used for the following three
types of borrowers. Before the 2003 law extended regulation to private sec-
tor retirees, banks lent to public servants, which have employment stability.
Banks then started operating with private sector workers, but in associa-
tion with the labor unions and employers. Contracts are collective, which
mitigates idiosyncractic income risk. Finally, after the December 2003 law,
banks started operations with retirees from the private sector, which also
have a constant income flow. The main risk lenders face is death, which is
diversifiable and insurable.
    Lenders, however, face another peril: judicial risk. Collateral has value
only if courts recognize it as such. Payroll lending in Brazil provides an ex-
cellent empirical setting to assess judicial risk. In 2002, a public servant of
the city of Porto Alegre (the capital of the state of Rio Grande do Sul) sued
Banco Sudameris claiming the payroll deduction on his salary was illegal.14
A state-level court (Tribunal de Justiça do Rio Grande do Sul) ruled for the
plaintiﬀ. The decision did not draw much attention for two reasons. First,
by that time, payroll lending was not such an important credit instrument.
Second, the decision did not set a precedent, once it was related to a claim
that started before the 2003 law, and had been ruled by a state-level court.
Sudameris appealed to the second highest ranking federal court in the coun-
try, the Superior Tribunal de Justiça (STJ).15 In late June 2004, the STJ
upheld the regional court ruling. Although technically this decision also did
not set precedent on the issue, it could signal the direction of future rul-
ings.16 In this case, the future income collateral could become useless. At
the time, Minister Edson Vidigal, from the STJ, declared that "...[when] an-
  13
     The Brazilian pension system, a pay-as-you-go scheme, is publicly managed by this
governmental agency, INSS.
  14
     The deduction was R$58.66 (roughly U$22 by then), to cover amortization and interest
expenses on a R$1.015 loan. The precise claim was that wages are essential for subsistence,
and therefore cannot be pawned. Furthermore, the monthly nominal interest rate of 3.8%
was ruled "abusive". See Valor Econômico 07/02/2004. For the actual decision, see the
STJ website, http://www.stj.gov.br.
  15
     Hierarchically, the STJ stands between the STF (Supremo Tribunal Federal), the
equivalent of the American Supreme Court, and the TFJs (Tribunais Federais de Justiça),
equivalent to the American Federal Circuit Courts.
  16
     STJ rulings are case specific, and do not set precedent.


                                            11
alyzed through the salary perspective, the consignation can be suspended,"
and "[banks] might have to search for alternative forms of guarantees."17
    Statements by some key pratictioners suggest that banks perceived this
as a hazard to their payroll loans operations. Right after the decision, the
Chief of Judicial Operations of Federação Brasileira de Bancos (FEBRA-
BAN, the main bankers’s association), Johan Albino Ribeiro, declared to the
press that "... undoubtedly there will be a repercussion in terms of higher
interest rates" since "...[one] of the elements that sustain the low interest
rates is the low risk on these loans. If the legality of the contract is con-
tested, the risk increases".18 Luís Marinho, then the head of Central Única
dos Trabalhadores (CUT), the main workers’s union, reported that he had
received phone calls from several bankers informing "...[that] banks would
hit the break on new loans, at least temporarily, until they have a better
understanding of the extension of the STJ decision." 1920
    However, whether banks indeed reacted to the decision in an economically
meaningful way is not obvious. Indeed, it was not even clear whether, legally,
the court ruling would have a lasting eﬀect. As it was noted, the decision
only applied to one specific claim, related to a public servant and which
took place before the December 2003 formal regulation. Therefore the STJ
decision could not, technically set precedent for future lawsuits. Several
banking lawyers thought the law regulating payroll loans (Law 10.820/03)
was crystal clear.21 In this sense, all the decision could signal was the courts’
mood toward payroll loans. Furthermore, banks could have simply ignored
it. Indeed, Gabriel Jorge Ferreira (a former head of FEBRABAN), from
UNIBANCO (the third largest private bank in Brazil), declared that "...[the
program] is still intact, and I do not think there will be an upward pressure
in interest rates."22 Indeed, this is precisely our object of study: whether
there is evidence that this judicial hazard had a first-order impact on market
performance. In our application, an aﬃrmative answer would be even more
meaningful given the ambiguity of both the (practical) legal consequences
of the ruling, and the bankers’ reactions. As figure 4 shows, it is clear that
the court ruling has not prevented the recent growth of payroll loans. There
 17
    See Gazeta Mercantil, 16/07/2004.
 18
    See Valor Econômico, 07/02/2004.
 19
    Mr. Marinho would later be appointed Minister of Labor.
 20
    See Universo Online, 07/04/2004, http://an.uol.com.br/2004/jul/04/0eco.htm
 21
    See Valor Econômico, 07/02/2004, 08/13/2004.
 22
    See Universo Online, 07/04/2004, http://an.uol.com.br/2004/jul/04/0eco.htm


                                        12
is, nonetheless, a couple of interesting contrafactual questions left to ask.
Absent the decision, would this growth have been more pronounced? Would
terms be better (i.e. lower interest rates)?


3      Data
Using original data from Central Bank Credit Information System (SCR), we
constructed a data set on payroll and standard loans. For both types of credit
contracts we have bank level monthly data over a period starting on January
2003 and ending on May 2005. There is, initially, data for 109 active banks
on outstanding volumes of payroll and standard personal lending operations.
We have bank-level information on: the total amount of loans; average risk
rating; average interest rate; number of credit contracts; and average size of
the credit contract 23
    The data has information on loan contracts above R$ 5,000 (U$2,270).
An average sized contract is R$84,719 (U$38,508) This strongly indicates
that contracts in the data are mainly indirect, i.e., with entities such as
labor unions and governmental agencies, which intermediate the negotiation,
and afterwards refer the bank to their employees or members. Contracting
directly with individuals began mostly after the December-2003 law, which
regulated payroll lending to private sector retirees. Since it took at least
another 5 months for a significant group of banks to be chartered by National
Institution of Social Security (INSS), the fact that these loans do not show
in our data is relatively immaterial.24
    In order to keep consistency among observations, banks had to satisfy
several criteria to be part of the final sample used. First, only banks that
consistently operated in both credit products were included. This avoids pick-
ing up unrelated (to the court ruling) entry and exit decisions, which are but
noise for our purposes. Only banks that supplied both standard and payroll
loans for the whole Jan/04-Dec/04 period were included. Second, banks that
had inconsistent pricing behavior were excluded. For example, several banks
  23
      Interest rate is weighted by the volume of new concessions at each risk category. Credit
risk rating goes from 1 (or AA operations: less risk) to 10 (or HH operations: maximum
risk), following provisioning and classification criteria set by Nacional Monetary Council
regulation.
   24
      The December-2003 law required the bank to be chartered by the INSS in order to
supply payoll lending to private sector employees. The first bank to be charted was the
Caixa Econômica Federal (a federal government bank), in May 2004.

                                             13
had annual nominal interest rates at 12%, which are clearly out of line with
the rest of the market. 12% operations are either reporting errors, or special
loans such as those to own employees, which we conjecture to have a diﬀerent
risk assessment nature. Other banks had inconsistent structural breaks on
the interest rate series25 . Finally, it is not clear whether government-owned
banks (both state and federal) have the same objective function as their pri-
vate counterparts. The literature is ambiguous with this respect. Although
some works suggest that there is no evidence that public owned banks are
less eﬃcient than private counterparts (Altubas et al. [2001]), there is little
controversy over their diﬀerent lending behavior (Sapienza [2002]). And, for
Brazil, even if government-owned banks had the same objective function as
private banks, payroll loans is an important piece of policy for the current
federal government, and federally owned banks might be responding to pub-
lic policy rather than maximizing profits regarding payroll loans.26 For these
reasons, government-owned banks.were excluded.
    After these adjustments, the sample consists of 40 banks, representing
67.8% of total payroll lending volumes as of May 2005. The sample includes
4 out the 5 major private Brazilian banks.


4      Empirical Strategy
The opinions voiced by market participants in the press suggest the three
economic variables that might have been aﬀected by the June 2004 STJ
ruling: risk assessment, the pricing of loans, and the amount lent. The
empirical strategy consists in comparing the evolution, over a period of time
that contains the ruling, of two products: payroll and standard loans. The
  25
     It is important to emphasize that we identified some problems with the interest rate
variable in SCR data set. For this reason we are less confident about the interest rate
results than the other results presented in Section 5. The SCR regulation states that
interest rates must be reported on a yearly basis. Nevertheless, not only inconsistent
numbers such as zero or very low rates abound, but also rates that seem to be monthly or
contract period based systematically appear. Those observations were discarded.
  26
     Non-profit maximizing behavior should not come as a surprise in Brazil when analysing
public banks portfolio. Banco do Brasil (BB) and Caixa Econômica Federal (CEF), the two
largest government-owned banks are, respectively, the major players in rural and housing
subsidized credit. BB outstanding rural credit portfolio represents 52% of all directed -
and subsidized rural credit in Brazil. CEF, as of January 2005, accounted for 42% of total
subsidized housing finance operations in Brazil.



                                           14
diﬀerence in their evolution over the period is interpreted as the causal eﬀect
of the STJ decision, as in a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence model.

4.1     The Control Group
As mentioned in Section 2, although payroll lending exists since 1990, only in
December 2003, legislation regulating its application to private sector formal
workers and retirees and pensionaries of social security system was passed.
Moreover, only since January 2003 we have available - and good quality -
split data on payroll and standard personal loans.
    The object of interest is a supply eﬀect: has the court decision shifted the
supply of payroll loans? We do not, however, pursue the strategy of searching
for exogenous variation to estimate the supply directly. As it will become
clear below, a reduced-form object is estimated for price, risk, and quantity.
The strategy consists of using standard loans as a control group. This way,
one can gauge the eﬀect of the court decision above and beyond unobserved
concurrent factors that might have aﬀected both the demand and supply of
payroll loans.27
    Standard loans are a reasonable control group for payroll loans. The
two products are the same, with the exception of the payroll deduction28 .
That is, both products are personal lending operations, consumption oriented
and have no formal collateral or real guarantee attached to. Finally, since
standard loans do not have payroll deduction, they were not directly aﬀected
by the June 2004 court ruling.
    A fair question is why standard loans exist at all given the presence
of an apparently superior very similar credit instrument. As a matter of
regulation, payroll loans were confined to special classes of borrowers up until
the December 2003 law, and the subsequent chartering of banks to provide
these loans on a more general basis.29 In particular, it could be the case that
public sector employees were significantly more present in payroll vis-à-vis
standard loans. This, however, does not seem to be the case, especially for
  27
     We do not have overall demand shifters, that is, exogenous variation to estimate the
supply. Let alone, product specific (to payroll loans, for instance) demand shifters. For
example, there is no compelling economic reason why seasonality (a candidate) would
aﬀect payroll loans diﬀerently than standard loans.
  28
     As a matter of regulatory taxonomy, standard and payroll loans are two subcategories
of personal loans.
  29
     See section 2.


                                           15
our specific sample: payroll lending with the observed average size consists of
both private sector employees (through agreements with private companies
or professional associations) and public servents.
    While diﬀerences in the composition of the pool of borrowers is not a
threat to our identification strategy, whether these two pools of borrowers
changed diﬀerently over the sample period is. There are two reasons why
this does not seem to be the case. First, the main change in composition
of the pool of borrowers occurred during 2005, when banks started getting
chartered by the Social Security Agency to lend to private sector retirees.
Therefore there were no significant changes in the compositions of the pool
of borrowers in the two groups. Second, economic conditions could have
changed diﬀerently for the two groups, holding constant the composition
of both pools. This would happen if, for instance, the public sector was
downsizing at the time, or if the private formal sector was experiencing a
particularly turbulent period. Neither were the case.

Summary Statistics
                                                                                            Mean                              Standard Deviation

                                                                                                      Sub-                                      Sub-
                                                                            Whole Period         Sample:month          Whole Period        Sample:month
                                                                                                  >12 and < 18                              >12 and < 18
                                                  Treatment: Payroll            45.07                 46.08                 12.21                 8.80
    Average Interest Rate (% points)
                                                  Control: Standard             56.67                 53.93                 24.62                26.05
                                                  Treatment: Payroll          6.83E+07              5.93E+07              1.38E+08             1.13E+08
       Total Amount of Loans (R$)
                                                  Control: Standard           6.54E+07              5.90E+07              1.43E+08             1.19E+08
                                                  Treatment: Payroll             2.51                  2.63                  0.55                 0.66
 Average Risk (from categories 1 to 10)
                                                  Control: Standard              3.17                  3.31                  0.99                 1.13
TABLE 1: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. Sub-sample of 40 banks included in the regression analysis. Market averages, weighted by bank size of operations,
except for total amount of loans.


    Table 1 presents summary statistics on the variables that are used as
regressands in the analysis below. As expected, the average interest rate is
lower in payroll than in standard loans: the instruments are very similar and
the former has wages as collateral. Similarly, standard loans are riskier, which
is consistent with a higher voluntary - and involuntary - default probability.
The amount lent in payroll loans is higher than in standard loans, and has
increased more pronouncedly over the sample period.30
  30
    For the thirteen banks of the sample mentioned in section 2, granting of payroll loans
increased by 66,7% during the last 12 months. Outstanding volumes more than doubled
during the same period, while total personal loans increased by 50,1% (NEI, BCB 2005).

                                                                 16
    When one compares the summary statistics for the control and treatment
groups, a few points emerge. First, for payroll loans, both interest rate and
risk were slightly higher than average on the sub-period before the court
ruling. For standard loans, the interest rate was below average, and risk was
slightly above average. This is important for our purposes, since the diﬀerent
types of loans could be, on the months before the ruling, on diﬀerent parts
of a mean-reversing process. This does not appear to be the case, and,
if anything, interest rates should tend to increase more (decrease less) for
standard loans, vis-à-vis payroll loans, if a mean-reversing force is operative.
Similarly for risk perception.
    As for amount lent, one can see, from both table 1 and figure 4, an in-
crease in both categories over the period, with a more pronounced increase
for payroll loans. The two categories are following, over time, diﬀerent paths,
which could lower the value of standard loans as a control group. However, if
anything, the pronounced upward trend in payroll loans would make it par-
ticularly diﬃcult to document a decrease in payroll loans relative to standard
loans.

4.2      The Specifications
The interest rate and the quantity models are quite similar. An observation
is a product i, oﬀered by a bank b, at a month t. There are two products,
personal credit with and without payroll automatic debit. Let DECISION
be a categorical variables that assumes the value 1 for July 2004 and all
months later. It denotes the treatment period. 31 P AY ROLL is a categorical
variable that assumes the value 1 if the product is personal loan with payroll
deduction. It identifies the treatment group. The estimated model for the
interest rate is:

       ∆ log(INT EREST )itb = β 0 + β 1 P AY ROLLitb + β 2 DECISIONt
       +β 3 DECISIONt × P AY ROLLit + ΩMONT Ht + Controls + εitb

    INT ERESTibtr is the average interest rate on all loans given by bank b
on product i, at month t. The panel unit is a pair bank-product. We are
interested in the level of log eﬀect, but the data is first-diﬀerenced to eliminate
  31
    Rigorously, the decision took place in June 2004. It was, however, at the very end
of the month (the 28th), so banks only had time to react to it in July. Therefore, all
estimated models consider the treatment period to start in July 2004.


                                         17
fixed eﬀects of the pair bank-product. Controls include the log of the average
risk on the banks’ portfolios, the (lagged) total number of loan operations and
the (lagged) average size of the loan operations. Risk is included for obvious
reasons, since it should determine interest and is aﬀected by the decision.
Total number of loans is included because, as we have seen, payroll and non-
payroll loans have diﬀerent rates of expansion over the sample period. Since
expansion might aﬀect the quality of the loan portfolio, the total number
of operations should be controlled for. The average size of operations is
included since it is conceivable that banks reacted to the judicial decision by
decreasing exposure on operations by decreasing their size.
    The main parameter of interest is β 3 , the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence coeﬃ-
cient. If the judicial decision had an impact on banks’ pricing of payroll
loans, then β 3 should be positive. We run a OLS procedure on this equa-
tion, with the two modifications. First, we weight observations by the size
of banks’ operations on payroll and standard loans, to arrive at an average
market response. Second we correct for between panel correlation and within
panel autocorrelation.
    The model can be viewed as a reduced form, in which prices (in this case
interest rates) are regressed on exogenous variables. As in any reduced form,
there could be supply (which is of interest) and demand eﬀects (not of inter-
est) on the parameters. After controlling for period specific eﬀects, estimates
should be clean of most demand eﬀects, and β 3 , the main coeﬃcient of in-
terest, should capture a supply response to the ruling. Note that, precisely
to mitigate capturing demand eﬀects, we lag variables such total operations
and average operations.
    The quantity model is similar except that we do not control for the total
number of operations and the average size of operations. We conjecture that
these variables aﬀect primarily the interest rate:32


       ∆ log(T otal Loans)itb = β 0 + β 1 P AY ROLLitb + β 1 DECISIONt +
       β 3 DECISIONt × P AY ROLLit + ΩMONT Ht + Controls + εitb
    The main control now is the first-diﬀerence in the log of average risk
on the banks’ portfolio. Again, the main parameter of interest is β 3 , the
diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence coeﬃcient. If banks reacted to the judicial decision by
restricting quantity, then β 3 should be negative. We estimate the parameters
 32
      Results are similar whether total loans and average size of loans are included or not.

                                             18
by an OLS and an IV procedure. Diﬀerently from the interest rate equation,
there is empirical reason to believe the lag of the dependent variable belongs
to the right-hand side, and there is also reason to believe that there is serial
correlation on the error term. In this case, OLS could produce inconsistent
estimates (see Arellano and Bond [1991]).33 Similarly to the interest model,
we weight observations by the size of banks’ operations in personal lending,
and standard errors are corrected for between correlation and within panel
autocorrelation.
    For the risk perception model, an observation is a product i, oﬀered by
a bank b, at a month t. In the first specification, the dependent variable,
RISKibt , is a dummy variable, that assumes the value 1 if the average risk
on product i loans given by bank b at month t is above the median risk
for that bank over the period considered. In the second specification, yibt is
the average risk on product i’s loans given the bank b’s at month t. The
estimated model is:


            RISKitb = β 0 + β 1 P AY ROLLibt + β 2 DECISIONt +
                   +β 3 DECISIONt × P AY ROLLibt +
                      Controls + ΩMONT Ht + εibt

    CONT ROLSbit are variables that aﬀect risk (such as average size of loans
and total number of loans). In this case it is unnatural to first-diﬀerence
the data to eliminate fixed-eﬀects, we include bank dummies. Again, the
main coeﬃcient of interest is β 3 , the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence coeﬃcient. If
the judicial decision had an impact on banks’ risk perception on Payroll
Loans, then β 3 should be positive: risk assessment on payroll loans increased
compared to standard loans We run a Logit procedure on this equation, again
weighting observations by the size of banks’ operations in personal lending.
    Notice that in all models, variation among banks is used. This is crucial,
since the main economic decision unit is a bank. Although the judicial deci-
sion hit banks at the same time (DECISIONt does not vary over b), banks
potentially diﬀer in their response to the decision, and this provides variation
  33
    Several economic stories could be told to justify the lag of ∆ log (T otal Loans) to
belong, or not, to the right-hand side of both the interest and the quantity equations.
Since this is not our variable of interest, we take an agnostic empirical approach, and
evaluate whether empirically it belongs to the equation and take proper econometric steps
to correct (i.e., look for exogenous variation) if it does.


                                           19
to estimate the coeﬃcient of interest. In the end, the response of an average
bank is estimated, with larger banks counting more than smaller ones.


5     Results and Discussion
5.1    The Risk Equation
We start by the risk equation. In table 2 the dependent variable is a dummy
for whether bank b’s average risk on the product operation (standard and
payroll loans) is above the median risk for the whole sample (January 2003
to June 2005) The main hypothesis is tested in column (1). The sample is
restricted to 5 months before the decision and 5 months after the decision
The coeﬃcient associated with the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence regressor (β 3 ) is
0.357, and it is quite precisely estimated (it is significant at the 1% level).
This means that, relative to standard loans, the probability that the oper-
ation on payroll loans was above the median risk increased. The model is
non-linear and there is no immediate way to interpret "above the median
risk" is an economically meaningful way, so it is diﬃcult to evaluate this
coeﬃcient quantitatively. One can, however, state that, qualitatively, risk
perception on payroll loans increases in period following the court decision.
The probability of the average risk on the banks’ portfolio being above the
the median decreases over the sub-sample period, for both loan (coeﬃcient
on Judicial Decision, −0.391). However, it decreases much less for payroll
deduction loans, only −0.184. Expansion in the number of operations is as-
sociated with less risk (a 1% increase in the number of operations decreases
the probability of being above the median in roughly 15.4%), which is likely
to indicate that a larger number of operations (and probably a lower aver-
age size) provide better diversification, although this result is not robust to
diﬀerent sub-samples.




                                      20
    Dependent Variable: dummy for average risk above median
                                    Sub-Sample: month >                     Sub-Sample: Sub-Sample: month > Sub-Sample:
                                        13 and < 23                          month > 13   8 and month <18   month > 18‡
                                             (1)                                  (2)            (3)              (4)
                                           - 0.184                             -0.220*        -0.386**          0.153
              Payroll Loan
                                           (0.137)                             (0.120)         (0.176)         (0.116)
                                          -0.391**                           -0.590***             -               -
            Judicial Decision
                                           (0.172)                             (0.154)             -               -
                                         0.357***                               0.166              -               -
     Payroll LoanxJudicial Decision
                                           (0.078)                             (0.128)             -               -
                                          -0.154**                              -0.017         -0.309*          0.068
      Log(Number of Operations)
                                           (0.071)                             (0.050)         (0.181)         (0.060)
                                            0.071                             -0.056**          0.102           -0.020
      Log(Average Size Operation)
                                           (0.061)                             (0.026)         (0.157)         (0.026)
                                               -                                   -         -0.607***        -0.296*
             Dummy Robust
                                               -                                   -           (0.175)          -0.184
                                               -                                   -         -0.455***       -0.563***
     Payroll LoanxDummy Robust
                                               -                                   -           (0.122)         (0.181)
        Number of Observations               543                                 993             626             667
    TABLE 2: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. Logit marginal effects estimates. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Control Group:
    Loans without Payroll Deduction. Weighted by Size of Banks operation. *** = Difference between sub-samples in estimated coefficient
    statatistically significant at the 1% level, ** = 5% level, *= 10% level. Bank and month dummies included. Judicial decision taking effect
    on July/2004 (month 12). † Dummy if month > 13, ‡ Dummy if month > 24



    Although month specific dummies are included, it can always be the case
that, for some unaccounted reason, risk perception was decreasing less for
payroll deduction loans relative to plain personal loans, and this had nothing
to do with the court ruling. For this reason, we first expand the period un-
der consideration to all months after the law regulating payroll loans passed
through congress. If the estimated diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence had nothing to do
with the judicial decision, one would expect that the estimated coeﬃcient
on the interaction term to remain somewhat constant. As one can see in
column (2), this is not case. Expanding the sample makes the "eﬀect" of the
judicial decision decrease by half, and it is no longer statistically significant,
although the sample is almost twice the size. Additionally, faux treatment
dummies are specified, to check whether the same pattern occurs if we con-
sider artificial "treatment" dates. In column (4), the fake treatment is month
25, and the sample is restricted on purpose to exclude the months before the
judicial decision The estimated fake "diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence" coeﬃcient has
a reverse sign, and it is well estimated. If anything, the discrepancy between
standard and payroll loans was the opposite for this sub-sample. Finally,

                                                         21
the fake treatment period is put on month 14, and the sample is restricted
to months before the judicial decision (column (3)). Again, the coeﬃcient
has the opposite sign, i.e., risk increases in standard loans relative to payroll
loans in this sub-sample with a fake treatment period at 14. Most likely,
this captures the eﬀect of the bill regulating payroll loans passing through
congress.
    Results are similar when risk is measured by the average risk rating on
the banks’ portfolio (see table 3). There are two diﬀerences though. First,
we diﬀerence the log of the data to eliminate for fixed-eﬀects.34 Second, with
average risk rating as the dependent variable one has to account for the possi-
bility that the dependent variable has persistence over time. For this reason,
several diﬀerent specifications are applied. First, an OLS model is used in
which the first and the second lags of the dependent variable are included
as explanatory variables. The standard errors of the estimated coeﬃcients
are corrected for between panel correlation and within panel autocorrelation.
Again, banks’ risk perception on payroll loans increased relative to standard
loans: the estimated coeﬃcient on the diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence parameters is
0.014, and it is significant at the 1% level (column (1)). Economically, risk
perception increased in payroll loans by roughly 1.4 percentage points. In
column (2), a model for the dynamics of the errors term is imposed, and the
parameters are estimated by a Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS)
procedure. The results for the parameter of interest (β 3 ) are exactly the
same.
  34
    This is tantamount to controlling for fixed eﬀects, and should be the prefered pro-
cedure. When the dummy for risk above median is used as a dependent variable, it is
not natural to first-diﬀerence the data, and therefore bank dummies are included. See
Woodridge [2002].




                                          22
Dependent Variable: Δlog(Average Risk)
                                         Sub-Sample: Sub-Sample: Sub-Sample:                                 Sub-Sample:
                                                                                                 Sub-Sample:               Sub-Sample:
                                          month > 13  month > 13  month > 13                                 month > 8 and
                                                                                                 month >13 ‡               month > 18‡•
                                          and < 23†   and < 23‡   and < 23 +                                   < 18‡ %
                                               (1)        (2)          (3)                             (4)         (5)           (6)
            Payroll Loan                   -0.010**    -0.006**    -0.012**                         -0.013*      0.002         0.002
                                            (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.005)                         (0.007)     (0.004)       (0.006)
          Judicial Decision                 0.009*       0.007       -0.001                          0.001          -             -
                                            (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)                         (0.009)         -             -
 Payroll LoanxJudicial Decision            0.014***    0.014***      0.009                           0.006          -             -
                                            (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.006)                         (0.008)         -             -
       Δlog(Average Risk) t- 1             0.544***    0.499***    0.497***                        0.493***    0.460***     0.505***
                                            (0.101)     (0.030)     (0.030)                         (0.009)     (0.016)       (0.012)
       Δlog(Average Risk) t- 2               0.008       0.002          -                               -           -             -
                                            (0.101)     (0.024)         -                               -           -             -
  ΔLog(Number of Operations)                 0.073     0.065***    0.073***                        0.025***    0.037***     0.022***
                                            (0.090)     (0.010)     (0.010)                         (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.007)
 ΔLog(Average Size Operation)               0.103**    0.008***    0.018***                         0.002**      -0.000       0.002**
                                            (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.004)                         (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
          Dummy Robust                          -          -            -                               -        0.002        -0.015*
                                                -          -            -                               -       (0.005)       (0.009)
 Payroll LoanxDummy Robust                      -          -            -                               -        -0.006      -0.017**
                                                -          -            -                               -       (0.004)       (0.008)
       Number of Observations                 543         543         543                             993         626           667
TABLE 3: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Control Group: Loans without Payroll Deduction. Weighted by Size of
Banks operation. *** = Difference between sub-samples in estimated coefficient statatistically significant at the 1% level, ** = 5% level, *= 10% level.
Month dummies included. Judicial decision taking effect on July/2004 (month 12). † = OLS estimates, with standard error of estimated coefficients
corrected for between panel correlation and within panel autocorrelation using the Praiss-Winsten procedure. % = Dummy if month > 13. • = dummy if
month >24. ‡ = Feasible Generalized Least Squares with AR(1) model for within panel auto-correlation. + = IV estimates with Deltalog(Average Risk) t -
2 as instrument for DeltaLog(Average Risk) t -1



    There is, however, the possibility that there is persistence both in the
process of the dependent variable and the unobserved factors that aﬀect
risk (the error term). Columns (1) and (2) suggest the second lag of the
∆ log (Average Risk) does not belong to the equation. Therefore, it arises
as a natural instrument for ∆ log (Average Risk)t−1 under the identifying as-
sumption the error term has only one period persistence.3536 Now, there
  35
      Exactly because the second lag does not appear to be a explanatory variable, using
further lags as instrument would not be awarranted since they do not arise naturally as
shifts to the endogenous variable that are not related to the unobserved determinants of
risk perception (the error term).
   36
      As with any identifying assumption it is impossible to verify it empirically. Since the
data is in the first-diﬀerence of logs, there is no compelling reason why adjustments to
unobserved shocks to risk would take more than a month to be incorporated to the banks’
credit rating decision.


                                                             23
is not enough independent variation to estimate the parameter of interest:
the p-value of estimation is roughly 13%. The diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence coeﬃ-
cient is, nonetheless, still positive, although with a lower magnitude (0.009).
Columns (4) to (6) present the same robustness checks as in table 3. Results,
and corresponding interpretations, are qualitatively similar.
    Results could be driven by two factors unrelated to the STJ ruling, but
implied by heterogeneity in the dynamics of the treatment and control groups.
First, as table 1 shows, standard loans are, as expected, riskier than payroll
loans. If there are general institutional advances in credit markets during
the period, and if there are decreasing returns in risk improvement, then
one should observe a decrease in riskiness of standard vis-à-vis payroll loans
because the former started at a higher level of risk. However, if this was
the case, one would expect that the same pattern would emerge for all sub-
samples of whole period. As columns (3) and (4) in table 2 indicate, risk
perception on payroll loans decreases vis-à-vis standard loans in the periods
before and after the STJ ruling. Same is true in table 3 (columns (5) and
(6)).
    Second, as Figure 4 shows, payroll loans boomed during the period, pos-
sibly due to the approval of the December 2003 law. Expansions might be
risk-increasing, i.e., the marginal borrower may be worse than the infra-
marginal ones. If this is the case, the pool of borrowers on payroll lending
would be changing, compared to standard lending, in such a way that would
produce the result regardless of the court ruling. There are, however, at least
two reasons why this story cannot rationalize the results. First, the number
of operations is controlled for. In table 3, for example, changes in the log of
average risk are explained by the court ruling with variation above and be-
yond changes in log of number and average size of operations. Indeed, since
the model is in first diﬀerences, results are not only controlled for the fact
that larger banks might have lower risk borrowers, but also for within bank
expansions of payroll vis-à-vis standard operations. Second, the same argu-
ment as in the last paragraph applies. Figure 4 shows that payroll operations
rose, relative to standard ones, throughout the period. Hence, if the changing
pool of borrowers argument would apply, one should verify the same increase
in riskiness of payroll vis-à-vis standard operations throughout the period. As
columns (3) and (4) in table 2 and (5) and (6) in table 3 show, this does not
seem to be the case.



                                      24
5.2         The Quantity Equation
The results for the quantity equation are presented in tables 4 and 5.
Dependent Variable: ΔLog(Amount of Loans)
                                 Sub-Sample:    Sub-Sample:      Sub-Sample:     Sub-Sample: month Sub-Sample: month
                                month > 13 and month > 13 and < month > 13 and < > 13 and < 23 (IV  > 13 and < 23 (IV
                                      < 23             23              23            estimates)†       estimates)†
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)               (5)
  ΔLog(Amount of Loans) t - 1
                                        -               -          0.346***           0.580***           0.586**
                                        -               -           (0.105)            (0.225)           (0.237)
          Payroll Loan             0.065***        0.065***        0.044***             0.033*            0.032*
                                    (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.014)            (0.019)           (0.019)
        Judicial Decision           0.038**           0.026         0.035**            0.034**            0.077*
                                    (0.016)         (0.018)         (0.015)            (0.016)           (0.041)
 Payroll LoanxJudicial Decision    -0.058**       -0.058**         -0.045**           -0.038**           -0.037*
                                    (0.024)         (0.025)         (0.021)            (0.022)           (0.022)
      ΔLog(Average Risk)             0.077            0.026           0.072              0.079             0.029
                                    (0.468)         (0.446)         (0.437)            (0.420)           (0.404)
   ΔLog(Average Risk) t - 1         -0.308*          -0.287          -0.289             -0.225            -0.183
                                    (0.180)         (0.202)         (0.187)            (0.218)           (0.240)
         Date Dummy?                   no              yes              no                no                yes
    Number of Observations            507              507             507                507               507
TABLE 4: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. OLS estimates. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Control Group: Loans without Payroll Deduction. Weighted
by Size of Banks operation. *** = Difference between sub-samples in estimated coefficient statatistically significant at the 1% level, ** = 5% level, *= 10% level.
Bank dummies included. Judicial decision taking effect on July/2004 (month 18). † Instrument: second lag of ΔLog(Amount of Loans)




    Column (1) presents the simplest possible model: OLS omitting ∆Log(Amount
of Loans)t -1 as an explanatory variable and no period dummies. As expected,
operations of payroll loans are larger (6.5% more), and quantities of both
standard and payroll loans appear to be increasing over time (coeﬃcient on
Judicial Decision, 3.8% on average in the sub-period between February 2004
and October 2004), as figure 4 suggested. Despite the markedly diﬀerent
slopes of standard and payroll loans, the judicial decision did have a nega-
tive eﬀect on payroll loans: relative to standard loans, payroll loans decrease
when one compares before and after the court ruling. Indeed, after control-
ling for average risk, payroll loan quantities decreased 5.8%, between the 5
month sub-period before the court ruling and the 5-month sub-period after
the ruling. Inclusion of period dummies hardly changes the results (column
(2)). Results are, however, slightly diﬀerent when the lag of the dependent
variable in included: one can see (column (3)) that part of the diﬀerence-in-
diﬀerence coeﬃcient was capturing some variation of the ∆Log(Amount of
Loans)t -1 . Results, however, remain considerably similar.


                                                                   25
    The presence of the lag of the dependent variable poses again the challenge
of searching for exogenous variation to estimate the coeﬃcient associated with
∆Log(Amount of Loans)t -1 since there could also be persistence on the error
term. Again, we follow the strategy of using the second lag (∆Log(Amount
of Loans)t -1 ) as an instrument. Columns (4) and (5) present the results. It
does appear that part of the estimated coeﬃcient in columns (1) to (3) are
unduly capturing variation due to omission of explanatory variables (which
are in the dynamics of the error term). The eﬀect, however, still survives:
in the most unfavorable specification, there is 3.7% diﬀerence in the trends
of standard and payroll loans when periods before and after the court ruling
is considered. This result is not terribly well estimated, but one could reject
the null that it is zero at the 5.8% level. (column (5)).
    Table 5 presents diﬀerent specifications. In column (1) and (3), standard
error estimates are corrected for between panel correlation and within panel
auto-correlation. Notice that the estimates of the diﬀ-in-diﬀ parameters are
even more precisely estimated. When a FGLS procedure is used, results are
similar (column (2)). These results do not account for the possible omitted
variable bias due to the presence of ∆Log(Amount of Loans)t -2 , but do sug-
gest that the statistical significance in table 4 is not due to under-estimation
of standard errors. Column (4) checks the robustness of the results in the
same spirit as in tables 2 and 3: it appears that the estimated diﬀ-in-diﬀ
coeﬃcient is not due to a long term pattern over the whole sample period.
When the fake treatment period 25 is used, and the sample is restricted to
after the court ruling, the result disappear. Similar robustness results hold
for the whole period and for only the period before the court ruling.




                                      26
Dependent Variable:ΔLog(Amount of Loans)

                                              Sub-Sample: Sub-Sample:                 Sub-Sample:
                                                                                                           Sub-Sample:
                                             month > 13 and month > 13                 month > 13
                                                                                                           month > 18 %
                                                 < 23†      and < 23 ‡                 and < 23†

                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)
                                                    0.222            0.150***              0.189                   -
    ΔLog(Amount of Loans) t - 1
                                                   (0.118)             (0.054)            (0.182)                  -
                                                  0.052***            0.057***           0.053***               0.036*
              Payroll Loan
                                                   (0.017)             (0.019)            (0.017)              (0.021)
                                                  0.035**             0.057***          0.057***                   -
           Judicial Decision
                                                   (0.017)             (0.022)            (0.019)                  -
                                                 -0.051***            -0.053**          -0.052***                  -
   Payroll LoanxJudicial Decision
                                                   (0.018)             (0.024)            (0.018)                  -
                                                    0.033               0.067              0.003                -0.082
         ΔLog(Average Risk)
                                                   (0.144)             (0.093)            (0.151)               (0103)
                                                  -0.280**           -0.273***           -0.278*               -0.161*
       ΔLog(Average Risk) t - 1
                                                   (0.141)             (0.093)            (0.154)              (0.098)
                                                       -                  -                  -                   0.020
            Dummy Robust
                                                       -                  -                  -                 (0.021)
                                                       -                  -                  -                   0.015
    Payroll LoanxDummy Robust
                                                       -                  -                  -                 (0.034)
          Date Dummy?                                 no                 yes                yes                   yes
       Number of Observations                        507                 507                507                   665
TABLE 5: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. OLS estimates. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Control Group: Loans
without Payroll Deduction. Probability-weighted by Size of Bank operation. *** = Difference between sub-samples in
estimated coefficient statatistically significant at the 1% level, ** = 5% level, *= 10% level. Bank dummies included. Judicial
decision taking effect on July/2004 (month 18). † Standard Error of Estimated Coefficients corrected for between panel
correlation and within panel autocorrelation using the Praiss-Winsten procedure. ‡: Feasible Generalized Least Squares
assuming errors within panels follow an AR(1) process. % = Dummy Robust = 1, if month > 18, most favorable model: FGLS
assuming errors within panels follow an AR(1) process.




5.3       The Pricing Equation
The eﬀect of the court ruling on the interest rates of payroll loans can be
found in table 6. A couple of comments are necessary. Diﬀerently from the
quantity regression, the number of operations and the average size of the
operation are included. We do so because there might be (dis)economies
of scale involved in granting loans. Both variables are lagged one period
to mitigate the possibility of capturing demand side eﬀects. Second, it is
important once again to emphasize that the data on prices is problematic,
specially for interpretation on levels. Taking the log and first-diﬀerencing
the data ameliorate somehow the problems with levels but do not solve it.

                                                          27
Interpretation on changes, however, is less troublesome and we proceed by
doing so, specially since the results with interest rates are consistent with
the results on quantities and risk perception.

Dependent Variable: ΔLog(interest rate)
                                                  Sub-Sample:    Sub-Sample:                  Sub-Sample: Sub-Sample:
                                                                                                                          Sub-Sample:
                                                 month > 13 and month > 13 and                 month > 13 month > 13 and
                                                                                                                         month > 18†%
                                                      < 23†          < 23†                      and < 23        < 23†
                                                       (1)            (2)                           (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                      0.019          0.008                        0.008           -             -
         ΔLog(interest rate) t - 1
                                                     (0.193)        (0.193)                      (0.039)          -             -
                                                   -0.063***      -0.061***                       -0.061    - 0.062***       -0.019
                Payroll Loan
                                                     (0.020)        (0.020)                      (0.047)       (0.021)      (0.025)
                                                   -0.075***      -0.143***                     -0.143**    -0.095***           -
             Judicial Decision
                                                     (0.028)        (0.035)                      (0.063)       (0.031)          -
                                                   0.073***        0.071***                       0.071      0.071***           -
     Payroll LoanxJudicial Decision
                                                     (0.024)        (0.024)                      (0.060)       (0.026)          -
                                                     -0.464         -0.475                        -0.475       -0.480        0.408
           ΔLog(Average Risk)
                                                     (0.315)        (0.334)                      (0.273)      (-0.325)      (0.570)
                                                    0.430**         0.410*                       0.410*       0.423**        0.363
         ΔLog(Average Risk) t -1
                                                     (0.221)        (0.239)                      (0.379)       (0.179)      (0.582)
                                                     -0.004         -0.016                        -0.016       -0.011        -0.134
 Log(Average Size of Operation t - 1)
                                                     (0.098)        (0.103)                      (0.182)       (0.101)      (0.087)
                                                      0.049          0.045                        0.045         0.045      -0.036***
    Log(Number of Operations t - 1)
                                                     (0.024)        (0.052)                      (0.044)       (0.053)      (0.013)
                                                         -             -                             -            -          0.080*
              Dummy Robust
                                                         -             -                             -            -          (0.47)
                                                         -             -                             -            -          0.057
      Payroll LoanxDummy Robust
                                                         -             -                             -            -         (0.058)
            Date Dummy?                                 no            yes                           yes          yes           no
         Number of Observations                        507            507                          507           507           665
TABLE 6: Source: Banco Central do Brasil. OLS estimates. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Control Group: Loans without Payroll Deduction.
Weighted by Size of Banks operation. *** = Difference between sub-samples in estimated coefficient statatistically significant at the 1% level, ** = 5%
level, *= 10% level. Bank dummies included. Judicial decision taking effect on July/2004 (month 18). † Standard Error of Estimated Coefficients
corrected for between panel correlation and within panel autocorrelation using the Praiss-Winsten procedure. % = dummy = 1 if month > 24.




    Column (1) shows the OLS results when the lag of the dependent variable
is included, but not the period dummies. Consistent with the quantity and
risk perception results, and with the perception of important market partic-
ipants, the court ruling appears to have induced an increase in the interest
rate charged on payroll loans. After controlling for number of operations,
average size of operations and risk, there is a marked diﬀerence (7.3%) be-
tween the trends of interest rates on payroll and standard loans before and
after the court ruling. Consistent with the general perception in the mar-
ket, interest rates on payroll loans are lower than those on standard loans

                                                                 28
(6.3%). Estimates suggest risk perception does indeed aﬀect interest rate as
expected: while one cannot reject the null hypothesis that contemporaneous
changes in risk perception aﬀect interest rates, one period lagged increases
in risk perception does induce an increase in prices of loans. After standard
errors of estimation are corrected for between panel correlation and within
panel serial correlation, the lag of the dependent variable does not appear
to belong to the equation. This renders results less vulnerable to dynamic
panel bias.
    Columns (2), (3) and (4) present slightly diﬀerent specifications. Most
noteworthy is column (3), in which the OLS standard errors of estimation
are not corrected. Here, one cannot reject the null hypothesis that there are
not diﬀerence between standard and payroll loans with respect to the court
ruling. The estimates suggest that correction on the standard deviation pro-
vides better (more precisely) estimates for the diﬀ-in-diﬀ parameter. Column
(5) presents the same robustness check as in all other tables, and it is again
consistent with the previous results.


6    Conclusion
The results in this paper suggest the conjecture, of some market participants,
that the June 2004 court ruling had an adverse eﬀect on the market perfor-
mance of payroll loans. Results arise, and are consistent among each other,
for risk perception, quantity of loans, and interest rates, with the data caveat
for the latter. Data suggests that the ruling increase risk perception on pay-
roll loans, which in turn led banks to restrict quantity and increase interest
rates.
    These results are far from obvious. Several key market players anticipated
them, but not all. It could have been that lenders had ignored the ruling.
As Figure 4 eloquently suggests, the court ruling did not prevent the boom
of payroll loans. It did, however, abate it, and made it such that terms to
borrowers were worse.
    This paper provides some evidence on the missing link of the institutions-
economic performance nexus literature: the micro evidence. Far from contra-
dicting the literature, our results corroborate it with evidence drawn from the
unit of decision making: lenders in this case. It reinforces the policy recipes
already implied by the literature. Better protection from expropriation most
likely increases general welfare, as it improves market performance in infor-

                                      29
mationally and incentive problematic markets, such as the credit market.


7     References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, 2001, "The Colo-
nial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," The
American Economic Review, December, pp. 1369-1401.

   Altunbas, Yener, Lynne Evans and Philip Molyneux, 2001, "Bank Own-
ership and Eﬃciency" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 33, No.4,
926-954.

    Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, "Some Tests of Specification
for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment
Equations," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58, pp. 277-297.

   Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and An-
drei Shleifer, 2003, “Courts,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, pp.
453-507.

   Dubey, Martin, John Geanakoplos, and Pradeep Shubik, 2005, “Default
and Punishment in General Equilibrium,” Econometrica, Vol. 73, No.1, pp.
1-37.

    Jornal Valor Econômico, edition 07/02/2004, 08/13/2004

   King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter
Might be Right," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, pp. 717-737.

   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
Vishny, 1997, "Legal Determinants of External Finance," The Journal of
Finance, July, pp. 1131-1150.

   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
Vishny, 1998, "Law and Finance," The Journal of Political Economy, Decem-
ber, pp. 1113-1155.

   Levine, Ross, 1998, "The Legal Enviroment, Banks, and Long-Run Eco-
nomic Growth,", The Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, August.

                                    30
   Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos, 1998, "Stock Markets, Banks, and Eco-
nomic Growth," The American Economic Review, June, pp. 537-558.

   North, Douglas, 1994, "Economic Performance Through Time" American
Economic Review, vol. 84(3), pages 359-68.

   Pinheiro, Armando Castelar and Célia Cabral, 1998, "Credit Markets in
Brazil: The Role of Judicial Enforcement and Other Institutions" Ensaios
BNDES, nr. 9.

   Sapienza, Paola, 2002, "The Eﬀects of Government Ownership on Bank
Lending" Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 72(2), pages 357-384.

   Universo on Line, edition 07/04/2004, http://an.uol.com.br/2004/jul/04/0eco.htm.

   Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey, 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and
Panel Data, Cambridge: The MIT Press.




                                   31
