                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              A CENTURY OF WORK AND LEISURE

                                            Valerie A. Ramey
                                             Neville Francis

                                          Working Paper 12264
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12264


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




We thank participants in seminars at UCSD, UNC, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, NBER Summer
Institute, the University of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, UC Irvine, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for helpful comments, and Kathryn Ramey
for insight into trends in the length of the school day. We are particularly indebted to Mark Aguiar and Erik
Hurst for their very helpful discussions and the use of their time use data. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Valerie A. Ramey and Neville Francis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Century of Work and Leisure
Valerie A. Ramey and Neville Francis
NBER Working Paper No. 12264
May 2006
JEL No. E2, N1, N3

                                            ABSTRACT

Has leisure increased over the last century? Standard measures of hours worked suggest that it has.
In this paper, we develop a comprehensive measure of non-leisure hours that includes market work,
home production, commuting and schooling for the last 105 years. We also present empirical and
theoretical arguments for a definition of “per capita” that encompasses the entire population. The
new measures reveal a number of interesting 20th Century trends. First, 70 percent of the decline in
hours worked has been offset by an increase in hours spent in school. Second, contrary to
conventional wisdom, average hours spent in home production are actually slightly higher now than
they were in the early part of the 20th Century. Finally, leisure per capita is approximately the same
now as it was in 1900.

Valerie Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
vramey@ucsd.edu

Neville Francis
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Gardener Hall #3305
Chapel Hill, NC 24599
nrfranci@email.unc.edu
I.     Introduction

       In his 1930 essay “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” John Maynard Keynes

predicted that a rise in productivity would result in a large increase in leisure during the next 100

years. He speculated that the central problem for humanity would be using its abundant leisure

time in a meaningful way. According to a number of observers, Keynes’ prediction about leisure

is coming true. For example, Lebergott (1993) and Greenwood and Vandenbroucke (2005)

argue that leisure has increased dramatically over the last century.

       In contrast, modern growth and business cycle theories accept the long-run stability of

leisure per capita as a stylized fact.     For example, Prescott (1986) states: “A key growth

observation which restricts the utility function is that leisure per capita, lt, has shown virtually no

secular trend while, again, the real wage has increased steadily.” This type of statement has been

repeated countless times in the RBC literature. In a representative agent model, leisure can be

stationary in the face of dramatic rises in the real wage only if the income and substitution effects

of real wage changes exactly cancel.

       The standard measure of leisure is the difference between the endowment of time and the

hours of market work.      By this measure, the stability of leisure per capita implies stability of

market work per capita. Has market work per capita been stable over the long-run? Maddison’s

(1982, 1995) data show that hours worked per employed person in the U.S. have fallen from

around 2,700 hours a year to almost 1,600 hours a year. This number is misleading, however,

because it does not take into account changes in labor force participation rates or the high rate of

absenteeism among some workers in the early part of the century (e.g. Slichter (1919)). As an

alternative, Figure 1 shows the behavior of the most widely used measure of hours per capita




                                                  1
from the real business cycle literature. This series divides total hours worked in business by the

civilian noninstitutional population ages 16 and over.        The standard post-WWII series is

extended back to 1900 using Kendrick’s estimates and Census data. (The data appendix gives

details of all data construction.)    By this measure, hours worked per capita have fallen

substantially over the last 105 years, from almost 1600 hours a year to below 1000 hours a year.

       On its face, Figure 1 suggests that leisure per capita has increased significantly, by almost

550 hours per year. It therefore casts doubt on the types of utility functions used in most DGE

models and raises questions about the existence of a balanced growth path.

       In this paper, we present evidence that per capita leisure, when properly measured, has

not increased at all. We offer a new measure that counts the entire population and takes into

account other major non-leisure uses of time. In particular, we develop comprehensive “time

accounts” showing the importance of including government employment, time spent in formal

schooling, and time spent on housework. Our earlier work on the effects of technology shocks

on historical fluctuations adjusted the potential labor force for government employment, school

enrollment, and older population to form a new hours per capita measure (Francis and Ramey

(2004)). In this paper we develop more comprehensive and better measurements of hours of

non-leisure time and the potential workforce.

       The new measures reveal a number of interesting 20th Century trends. First, a more

comprehensive measure of “per capita” suggests a less dramatic decline in hours worked.

Second, most of the decline in hours worked per capita has been offset by an increase in hours

spent in school.    Third, contrary to conventional wisdom, average hours spent in home

production are actually higher now than they were in the early part of the 20th Century. Finally,

leisure per capita is approximately the same now as it was in 1900.




                                                2
II.     Rethinking Measures of Per Capita

       Most macroeconomic researchers use a measure of the “working age” population to

construct their per capita variables. The most widely used “working age” population variable is

the civilian non-institutional population ages 16 and over. This is the series reported by the BLS

for the post-WWII period.      Presumably, the goal is to measure the potential labor force.

Children are omitted because their potential to work is severely limited by labor laws,

particularly in the post-WWII period. Inmates of institutions are omitted because their status

could prohibit market work. Persons in the armed forces are omitted because they are not

available for civilian work.

       It is not clear, though, why working age population is a better measure than the total

population for most applications. To see this, consider the following three arguments.

       First, consider the measurement of standards of living. When comparing consumption

per capita across countries or time, one always includes the consumption of children in the

numerator and the population of children in the denominator. Thus, to be consistent one should

do the same when measuring leisure per capita.

       The second argument is practical in nature. A problem with focusing on “the working

age population” is changing norms about what constitutes “the working age population.”         The

exclusion of all children ages 0 to 15 from the potential workforce is not necessarily suitable for

the entire 20th century since the restrictions on child labor have changed so much over the last

100 years. For example, children were considered an important labor input on family farms.

Indeed, the current school schedule owes to the historic demand for children’s farm labor during

the summer. According to the 1910 Census, 25 percent of male children ages 10 to 15 were




                                                 3
employed.1 By 1900 standards, children ages 10 and up were certainly part of the potential

workforce.        This issue also arises for older people.               The standard RBC measure includes

everyone ages 65 and older in the working-age population. On the other hand, many studies

exclude those ages 65 and older (e.g. Prescott (2004)). Thus, there is no clear argument for

particular age-cutoffs.

           The third argument is theoretical in nature.                  To the extent that the representative

household cares about all of its members, interactions between different age groups may be

important for understanding trends in adult leisure. Rather than completely ignoring the time of

children the way most RBC models do, we propose a new baseline utility function in which the

consumption and leisure of adults and children are perfectly substitutable in household utility.

While one might argue for alternative weighting schemes for child versus adult consumption and

leisure, our baseline model has the advantage that it does not require separate data on

consumption and leisure by demographic group.

           Consider the following simple static model of household maximization.                           The

representative household maximizes:



           U = ln[θ c1 + (1 − θ )c 2 ] + φ ln[T − θ h1 − (1 − θ ) h2 ]



subject to: w1θ h1 + w2 (1 − θ )h2 = θ c1 + (1 − θ ) c 2          and      h1, h2, c1, and c2    0

where the subscript 1 denotes children and 2 denotes adults,                            c represents per capita

consumption, and h represents per capita hours worked. Hours worked could represent both




1
    These numbers are based on the fraction that are “gainfully employed” from the Statistical Abstract.



                                                            4
market work and home production. T is the per capita time endowment and                         is the fraction of

the household that is children.2

          It is easy to see that if w1         w2, meaning that children are less productive than adults in

                                                                          T
their work, then it is optimal to set h1 = 0 and h2 =                               . Thus, an increase in the
                                                                   (1 + φ )(1 − θ )

fraction of children ( ) leads to an increase in per capita hours worked by adults. This prediction

is consistent with cross-section evidence. For example, time use data from the BLS in 2004

shows that an additional child in the household raises hours spent in market work plus home

production by 3.2 hours per week.3                Hence, the increase in leisure per capita of adults since

1965 documented by researchers such as Robinson and Godbey (1999) and Aguiar and Hurst

(2006) might be explained at least in part by the decline in the fraction of children in the

population. Adults do not have to work so hard because they are supporting fewer children.

                                                                                                  T
Average per capita hours of work for the entire population is given by: h =                             , which is
                                                                                               (1 + φ )

independent of the fraction of children or the wage. Thus, an increase in the fraction of children

raises adult per capita hours but leaves total per capita hours unchanged.

          One can readily embed this simple illustrative model in a dynamic general equilibrium

model and obtain qualitatively similar results. For example, suppose output is produced with a

Cobb-Douglas production function with exponents on child labor, adult labor, and capital equal

to   1,     2,   and 1-   1   -   2,   respectively. Assume also that the exponent for child labor is much

smaller than the exponent for adult labor. Then per capita hours worked of adults will be higher


2
  Children’s wage does not include allowances from parents. It reflects earnings from the market and/or returns from
home production.
3
  According to the data, an increase in the number of household children raises the hours spent in home production
for both men and women. An increase in the number of children raises market work for men, but lowers it for
women.



                                                          5
than for children in steady-state, and the steady-state adult hours worked per capita rises when

the fraction of children in the household rises. One could further embellish the model to include

schooling, along the lines of Rios-Rull (1993) and Caselli and Coleman (2001), or to include

endogenous fertility choices.    Such a model would be necessary to explain the trends in

schooling and demographics that we document later in the paper. The current model is not

intended to explain those trends but rather to motivate our basic point: when child and adult

hours are closer substitutes in utility than in production, the demographic composition of the

household affects hours worked per adult.

        In practice, omitting or including the young and the old can have significant effects on

per capita measures. Figure 2 shows the ratio of population ages 0 to 15 divided by the entire

population.   This ratio falls from 36 percent to 22 percent over the period under study, with a

bulge during the 1950s and 1960s resulting from the baby boom. Thus, part of the measured

decline in hours worked per capita may owe to the use of the restricted population measure in

denominator. Figure 3 shows the fraction of the population that is 65 and over. This ratio rises

from four percent in 1900 to over twelve percent in 2000. Thus, including or excluding this

group can also have a significant effect on long-term trends in hours.

        In sum, we have given three arguments for why the entire population should be included

when studying work and leisure per capita. Thus, we include the entire population in our

measures of per capita.



III. Comprehensive Measures of Non-Leisure Time

        Standard models assume that there are only two uses of time: leisure and private market

work.   Understanding the trends in leisure and hours of work demands a more complete




                                                6
accounting of time use. We focus on four uses of time: a more comprehensive measure of paid

work, including government hours; time spent commuting; time in formal education; and time

spent in home production.       Lucas (1988), Rios-Rull (1993), Perli and Sakellaris (1998), and

Caselli and Coleman (2001) all consider models with human capital accumulation where one of

the costs is the time cost. We will explicitly estimate the amount of time spent in school work

over the last century.    Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991), Greenwood and Hercowitz

(1991), Rios-Rull (1993), among others, consider time spent in home production and how its

addition can improve the ability of the DGE model to explain cyclical fluctuations. We will

develop estimates of hours spent in home production for the past 100 years.

       Before proceeding, it is important to define what we mean by “leisure.” Hawrylshyn

(1971) distinguishes leisure from household work by defining household work activities as

“those economic services produced in the household and outside the market, but which could be

produced by a third person hired on the market without changing the utility to members of the

household.” This definition is a useful starting point, but it can be limiting in some cases. For

example, some activities, such as cooking, would not generally be considered leisure although

for some people the sense of accomplishment of having done it themselves generates additional

utility. We define leisure hours as those activities that give direct enjoyment. To categorize

activities as leisure or non-leisure, we use a survey reported in Robinson and Godbey (1999) as a

general guideline. As part of the 1985 Time Use Survey, individuals were asked to rate their

enjoyment of various activities, with 10 being the highest and 0 being the lowest. Table 1

summarizes some of the key activities listed in Robinson and Godbey’s Table 0. The activities

with the highest enjoyment scores (sex, playing sports, etc.) are ones that one would generally

classify as leisure. The activities shown in bold face are activities that we classify as non-leisure.




                                                  7
These include market work, basic childcare, housework, care of other adults, commute time,

attending classes and doing homework. Most of the sociology literature classifies any interaction

with children as a non-leisure activity. Based on this table, however, we concur with Aguiar and

Hurst (2006) that activities such as talking to, playing with, and reading to children are high

enjoyment activities, and thus classify them as leisure.



A. Paid Work

         Most macroeconomic studies use private hours or nonfarm private hours as the measure

of paid work. One reason for this choice is the absence of quarterly frequency data on total

hours worked.4 Another reason is that the RBC model assumes that workers and capital are

hired based on market incentives, assumptions that may not hold for the government sector.

         Omitting the hours of government workers, however, induces significant low frequency

movements in hours per capita. Figure 4 shows hours worked in government (both civilian and

military) as a percent of total hours worked.5 Other than the two spikes during the two world

wars, the most noticeable movement is the upward trend in government hours as a fraction of

total work hours. It is clear that the failure to account for this movement will bias the estimates

of hours per capita down in the second half of the century. Moreover, this series has an inverted

U-shape in the post-WWII period, matching the U-shape of the standard series that uses only

private hours. Government hours as a percent of total hours has a post-WWII peak in 1968.

Increased employment of teachers, resulting from the educational demands of the baby boomers,

accounts for a third of the increase in government employment from 1948 to 1968.



4
 The BLS quarterly hours index does not include government workers.
5
 Hours worked in government enterprises, such as the post office, are included in private hours, both in the
Kendrick series before 1947 and the BLS series from 1947 to the present.


                                                          8
        In order to characterize accurately trends in hours per capita and in leisure, measured

hours should include both private and government hours. We therefore create a measure of total

market hours. The data from 1900 to 1946 are from Kendrick.6 Forming this series for the post-

WWII period is more difficult. The BLS reports an index of total hours worked in private

business, including establishments, sole proprietors, and unpaid family workers. It does not,

however, report hours worked in government. On the other hand, the BEA reports total hours

worked in both private and government establishments, but does not include hours worked by

sole proprietors or unpaid family workers. The BEA does offer another series of full-time

equivalent persons engaged in private and government industry, including sole proprietors, but

excluding unpaid family workers. Separately, the BLS has series on the number of unpaid

family workers. Therefore, for 1947-2003, we use the ratio of full-time equivalent persons plus

unpaid family workers engaged in total industries relative to private industries to up-weight the

BLS private hours index. We then splice this series to Kendrick’s series. See the data appendix

for more details. This forms our measure of “market hours.”

        In order to compare this hours series to other series in the literature, we study the implied

hours per worker. The worker series from 1900 to 1947 is Kendrick’s person’s engaged series

from Table A-V, which includes full-time equivalent employees, proprietors and unpaid family

workers. Kendrick’s 1900 number is very close to the Census number for persons who said they

were part of the labor force (Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) variable labforce

= 2), 27.295 million from Kendrick versus 27.483 million from the Census. The worker series




6
 Siu (2004) argues that Kendrick undercounts government hours during WWII because he assumes that military
personnel work the same number of hours as civilians. We had not corrected for this problem. This undercounting
during WWII does not affect the long-term trends which are the focus of our analysis.



                                                       9
from 1948 to the present consists of persons engaged from the BEA, which includes employees

and the self-employed, plus the BLS series on unpaid family workers.

        Figure 5 shows the implied hours per worker. Kendrick’s numbers show average annual

hours of work per employee of 2,765 in 1900, which is about two percent higher than

Maddison’s (1982) numbers. This amounts to 55 hours a week if workers are employed 50

weeks per year.       Hours worked per worker declined fairly steadily over the next one hundred

years, so that by 2004, annual hours per worker was 1,861 hours per year, translating into 37

hours per week, 50 weeks a year.

        Our hours series in the latter years is close to an alternative number derived from the

IPUMs Census in 2000. To create this number, we estimated hours by multiplying the weeks

worked by the usual hours of work. For those individuals who were employed (IPUMs variable

empstatg=1), annual hours were 1,868.9. Our hours per worker series in 2000 was 1,920 hours.

Thus, our hours of work series is just 2.7 percent higher than the series derived from the Census.7



B. Commute Time

        The time diary method for accounting for time spent usually adds travel time to the

activity in question. In our estimates of home production, we include travel time as home

production. To be consistent, we also account for travel time to work.

        The only time diary studies that measure commute time, however, begin in 1965. Time

diary data summarized in Robinson and Godbey (1999), Juster and Stafford (1991) and the 2003

and 2004 BLS Time Use Survey suggest that the average time spent commuting has been a

relatively constant ten percent of hours of work from 1965 to 1985, falling slightly to eight


7
  It should be noted that Census estimates of hours are not available before 1940, so we cannot make a comparison
to the Census for the beginning of our sample.


                                                        10
percent in 2003 and 2004. There is little systematic evidence on commute times in the first half

of the 20th Century. For urban workers, average commute distances were much lower but modes

of transportation (walking and public transit) were slower than during the second half of the 20th

Century. By some estimates, the time spent commuting for urban workers remained relatively

constant over the 20th Century (Rodrigue (2004)), about 1.2 hours per day. In the early part of

the century, though, a significant fraction of the workers lived in small towns rural areas and

were self-employed or unpaid family workers in agriculture. Most of these workers lived at their

place of work and spent no time commuting. Thus, the average commute time for all workers

would have been somewhat lower in the early part of the 20th Century. In the absence of firm

evidence, we assume that commute times in the early part of the sample were also ten percent of

total hours worked, just as they were in the last 40 years of the sample. This assumption implies

commute times per employed person were higher in the early part of the 20th Century than in the

last part, since hours worked per employed person were higher.           This implication is not

unreasonable since part of the increase in hours per employed person was accomplished by

working a sixth day, which required an extra day of commuting.



C. Schooling

       One of the most striking trends of the last 100 years is the amount of schooling attained

in the United States. Goldin (1999) chronicles the rise in schooling overall, and Goldin and Katz

(1998) describe the rise of secondary education in particular. These trends are important for

understanding the changes in hours of work and the implications for leisure.

       Figure 6 shows the high school enrollment rate, the number of days of school attended

per enrolled student in grades K-12, and the college enrollment rate. All three series show




                                               11
significant increases over time. The percent of children ages 14 to 17 enrolled in high school

rose from 10 percent in 1900 to 95 percent in 2003. Moreover, for all children enrolled in grades

K-12, the number of school days attended rose from under 100 days a year to over 160 days a

year. Part of this increase was an increase in scheduled school days and part was a decrease in

days absent. Finally, college enrollment rates (relative to the 18-22 age group) rose significantly,

particularly after WWII.

       These trends translate into a large increase in hours spent in school. We estimate annual

school hours as follows:



Annual school hours = (enrollment in grades K – 8 ) (avg. days attended by enrollee) 5.5 hours

                       + (enrollment in grades 9 - 12 ) (avg. days attended by enrollee) 7 hours

                       + {(enrollment in college) [(fraction full-time)

                       + 0.3 (fraction part-time)] 165 days 8 hours}



       The enrollment data, average days attended by enrolled student (grades K-12), and

fraction enrolled in college that are full-time are available from Goldin (1999), the Digest of

Education Statistics, and Mini Historical Statistics. We do not have measures of days attended

for college. We assume that annual days spent in college are a constant 165, calculated from 33

weeks times 5 days a week. Our estimates of hours spent on school work per day attended come

from various sources, including the Lynd’s (1929) classic study of Muncie, Indiana, interviews

with Kathryn Ramey about the length of the school day in California from the 1930s to the

present, and time use data. According to those estimates, the length of the school day plus

homework time has been relatively constant, about five and one-half hours for kindergarten




                                                12
through eighth grade, seven hours for high school, and eight hours for college, per day attended.

See the data appendix for the details. We did not have information on how much time part-time

college students spent. We assumed that they spend one-third of the time that full-time students

spend.

         Figure 7a shows our estimate of annual school hours per person ages 5 to 22. Hours per

person spent in schoolwork for this part of the population rose dramatically over the century

from 330 hours per year to almost 900 hours per year. The combined effects of increases in

enrollments and an increase in days attended by those enrolled led hours spent in school to

increase significantly over the last century. Figure 7b shows total school hours divided by total

market hours. Hours spent on schoolwork as a fraction of total (non-school) work hours hit

peaks above 35 percent in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Thus, this allocation of time is

important on an aggregate basis. The large effect of the post-WWII baby boom is also evident.

         When calculating leisure later in the paper, we also subtract out the travel times to school.

Evidence from the later time use surveys suggest that these are roughly ten percent of hours

spent on school. Thus, we estimate travel times to school as a constant ten percent of hours spent

on school.



C. Home Production

         A complete accounting of non-leisure time must include time spent in home production.

Xenophon (4th century BC) believed that home production was as important as market

production, and devoted half of his work Oeconomicus to issues of household management

(Leeds (1917)). More recently, Becker’s (1965) article made modern economists aware of the

importance of measuring and modeling home production. To this end, we combine results from




                                                  13
various studies to construct a series showing trends in the average number of hours spent on

home production.

       A number of cross-validation studies show time use diaries to be the most accurate source

of estimates for housework (and market work for that matter) (Juster and Stafford (1985, 1991)).

Thus, we use estimates based on time diary data to the extent possible.

       The historical studies generally including the following activities in home production:

planning, purchasing, care of family members, general cleaning, care of the house and grounds,

preparing and clearing away food, making, mending, and laundry of clothing and other

household textiles (Vanek (1973), page 57). Activities such as playing and talking with and

reading to children are usually included in childcare in the time use studies from 1965 on. We

exclude them for two reasons. First, these activities rank high on the enjoyment index and hence

are more properly classified as leisure. Second, while little time was devoted to these activities

in the studies from 1900 to 1965, they have become an increasingly important in terms of time

expenditures.   Thus, including them in home production would lead to noticeably higher

estimates at the end of the sample. Our measure of childcare included in home production is

basic child care plus time spent in homework help, teaching, and meeting with teachers. See the

data appendix for more details.

       Our studies of the time diary literature indicate that the most important distinctions are

for age, gender and employment status. Our strategy for constructing total hours spent in home

production is as follows. For each of the relevant age, gender and employment status cells, we

first gather as much information as possible on hours of housework for that category. We then

interpolate values between years of the time diary studies. Finally, we weight the estimated

hours of housework of each cell by the fraction of the population that falls in that cell.




                                                 14
Non-employed Women Ages 18-64

        Contrary to the claims of Lebergott (1993) and Greenwood, Seshadri and Yorukoglu

(2005), most of the evidence does not suggest a decline in housework by full-time housewives

during the time of rapid diffusion of appliances. We will begin our analysis by reviewing the

various studies.

        Vanek (1973, 1974) surveyed a large number of time diary studies, with samples totaling

3,414 households from the 1920s to the 1950s, and concluded that full-time housewives spent as

much time on housework in 1965 as they did in the 1920s. Why, then, does Lebergott (1993, p.

58) argue that the average time spent on housework by women fell from 70 in 1900 to 30 by

1981? His conclusion is based on a faulty extrapolation from the working hours of servants, an

incorrect reading of Leed’s (1917) dissertation, and reliance on a social commentator who

gathered no data. Lebergott cites a 1900 survey of the working hours of domestic servants, as

reported by their employers in Boston. It is fallacious to assume that housewives worked the

same hours. First, the hours of servants reported were mostly likely the hours they were on call,

not how many hours they were actually working. Second, half of the domestic servants in

Boston were Irish immigrants, which, because of their large numbers, did not have much

bargaining power on wages and hours. Thus, there is little similarity between the average

housewife and domestic servant in Boston at that time.8 Lebergott’s second mistake is his claim

that Leeds’ study shows housewives spend 44 hours a week on kitchen work alone (pages 51 and

59). He mistakenly uses the hours spent by all people in the household, including hired help.

We will discuss below why it does not make sense to assume that a housewife in a family too


8
 See Hotten-Somers (2001) for a description of the working conditions of Irish domestic servants from 1860 to
1920.


                                                       15
poor to afford domestic help worked as many hours as a middle or upper class housewife and her

servants.

       Figure 8 shows various estimates of time spent on housework by housewives and all non-

employed women. The two estimates from 1912 are based on Leed’s (1917) study of sixty

American-born families in Pennsylvania. All of the families were earning enough to reach a

level of “decency” which was generally defined as earning at least $1,000 a year. The average of

the sixty housewives’ estimates of time spent on housework was 55.8 hours per week. This may

be an overestimate, though. For the twelve families that kept time diaries, the estimates of total

time spent (by the housewife and her assistants) were on average 18 percent above the actual

time spent according to the diaries.

       The estimates from the 1920s through 1968 were taken from Vanek’s (1973) Table 3.2,

summarizing fourteen different studies, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (1944), and Walker

(1969). Vanek’s table shows the estimates from a number of time diary studies of full-time

housewives, typically between the ages of 22 and 64. Some estimates were for farm wives, some

for rural nonfarm, and some for town and urban. In the figure, we do not distinguish the wives’

locations because the estimates are surprisingly similar across these three categories of women.

Estimates for 1965, 1975, 1985, 1993, 2003, and 2004 are based on our definitions of home

production using Aguiar and Hurst’s (2006) database, which links time use studies, and are

generally consistent with those discussed by Robinson and Godbey (1999). They apply to non-

employed women ages 18-64. The circles represent estimates for women who call themselves

“housewives” and the triangles are all non-employed women.

       What is clear from this graph is the constancy of the weekly hours of housework of full-

time housewives from 1912 to the mid-1960s. With the exception of two high estimates that




                                               16
both come from one small study of Idaho families (Crawford (1927)), the estimates from 1912,

the 1920s and 1930s all hover between 51 and 56 hours per week.9 The same is true for the

estimates from the 1940s through the 1960s.

        Some have argued that estimates from the earlier studies are biased because most of the

studies were convenience samples, and were not nationally representative (e.g. Cain (1984)). In

response to this issue, Bryant (1996) restricted his analysis to time use studies that asked almost

identical questions and adjusted the estimates for women’s education, place of residence and

family size to make them nationally representative. According to his weighted estimates, the

average married, nonemployed women in the mid-1920s spent 7.35 hours per day on housework,

or 51.5 hours a week (Table 4, page 368). In 1968, she spent 6.84 hours per day, or 47.9 hours

per week (Table 5, page 370). The estimates we use are generally consistent with Bryant’s

estimates because, although our data shows no decline before 1965, they do show a steep decline

between 1965 and 1975.

        One might worry, though, that the estimates from 1912 are not typical of the average full-

time housewife. Leeds’ families were certainly better off than the low income families living in

the tenements in big cities at that time. It is not clear, though, that more housework was done by

wives in lower income families. Hartmann (1974) argues that the estimates from the farm

families in the 1920s are indicative of the housework routines of an earlier age because farm

families in the 1920s lacked modern conveniences and had little access to paid household help or

market-produced goods. For example, in Wilson’s (1929) study of families in the early 1920s,

only 28 percent of the farm households had electricity, only 38 percent had modern plumbing

and only 25 percent had a power washing machine. Wilson found that a higher fraction of non-

9
  The Crawford (1927) study is also suspect because the estimated time spent in personal care is 10 hours per week
less than reported in all of the other studies shown in Vanek’s Table 3.1. One suspects that some personal care



                                                        17
farm households had more modern conveniences, yet they spent equivalent times in home

production as farm households. Thus, it is entirely reasonable that the estimates from the first

decade of the century should be similar to those we have from the 1920s.

        How could the poor maintain a household with no hired help and no modern appliances?

A home economist noted during that time “if one is poor it follows as a matter of course that one

is dirty” (Hansen (1913)). Having clean clothes, clean dishes, a clean house, and well-cared for

children was just another luxury the poor could not afford. Consistent with this observation,

Maud Pember Reeves (1913) described the simplicity of the meals of working-class families in

London. Many meals consisted of simple, unheated foods because families could not afford the

fuel to cook. According to the Lynds’ (1929) study, in the late 1890s buying baker’s bread

rather than baking one’s own bread was considered “poor-folksy.” Only the working class

bought their bread instead of making it themselves. Thus, it appears that home production output

was substantially higher in middle and upper class households.

        It is surprising that housework did not fall between 1912 and the 1960s, a time of

significant diffusion of household appliances. One would think that the introduction of

mechanical washing machines alone would have reduced the amount of housework. According

to time use studies, it took 4 hours to do a load of laundry by hand and 4.5 hours to iron it. Using

electric appliances, it took 41 minutes to wash the load of laundry and under 2 hours to iron it

(Greenwood et al (2005)). However, a large number of time diary studies that compared women

who had electric appliances to those who did not found that there was no difference in the time

spent on housework (Vanek (1973), Bittman et al (2004)). As Ruth Schwartz Cowan points out

in her 1983 book More Work for Mother, in the pre-appliance era many families hired

laundresses or sent out their laundry to commercial facilities. Because of the large waves of


activities were misclassified as housework.

                                                18
immigration during the early part of the century, the real price of hiring full-time or part-time

help was relatively low. At the same time that appliances diffused, immigration restrictions were

imposed and the number of domestics employed fell precipitously. These two factors led to a

shift from the market to the home in the production of a number of commodities.

       In The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan (1963) explained the constancy of time spent on

housework with the law that “housewifery expands to fill the time available.” Mokyr (2000)

argues that the failure of labor-saving appliances to save labor during this period was the result

of a different type of technological progress: the revolution in sanitation and cleanliness, the

germ theory of disease, and knowledge about the consequences of nutrition for health. Mokyr

presents evidence and a model suggesting that at the very time electric appliances were diffusing,

the public became aware of the importance of cleanliness and nutrition for families’ health.

Thus, the demand for housework rose just as the appliances were introduced. Many have noted

that the diffusion of washing machines appeared to cause women to do the laundry much more

often. For example, Friedan talks about the 1950s housewife whose family demanded that she

launder their sheets twice a week.

       A similar phenomenon occurred with time spent on childcare. According to Bryant and

Zick (1996), the amount of time married women spent on childcare in 1981 was slightly greater

than in 1924, even though family size decreased significantly over that time period. Total time

did not decrease because the time spent per child increased. One source of the increase per child

was the increase in the education of the population – educated parents tend to spend more time

with their children. Another source of the increase may have been the widely-publicized studies

on the effects of parental interaction on children’s development.




                                                19
       Although all of the evidence suggests no significant decrease in hours spent in home

production by nonemployed housewives between 1900 and 1965, the estimates of housework fall

significantly between 1965 and 1975. Housewives’ hours fell from 52 hours a week in 1965 to

45 hours a week in 1975 and stayed relatively constant after that.

       Based on the estimates presented above we therefore assume that the average hours of

housework of non-employed women between ages 18 and 64 were 56 in 1912 and before, fell

gradually to 52 hours a week in the early 1920s where they stayed until after 1965. Assuming

that all non-employed women spent as many hours in home production as those who were

identified as “housewives” may be an over-estimate, though. According to the IPUMs, in 1900

18 percent of nonemployed women between the ages of 18 and 64 lived in a household in which

they were neither the head of the household or the spouse of the head and they did not have

children. 88% of these women were not currently married. This fraction had fallen to 7.6

percent by 1960. It is likely that these “maiden aunts” or “unmarried daughters” assisted the

primary housewife in home production. It is not clear, though, whether these women were

spending as much time on home production as the housewives.

       For 1965 and after, we use the actual time use data estimates for all nonemployed women

from the Aguiar and Hurst (2006) and BLS data bases in 1965, 1975, 1985, 2003, and 2004 and

linearly interpolate for the intervening years. We do not use the estimates from 1993 because of

the problems with those estimates discussed by Robinson and Godbey (1999, pages 323-324).



Employed Women Ages 18-64

       Vanek (1973, p. 140) reports that a small study found that rural employed women spent

26.8 hours on housework and urban employed women spent 23.6 hours on housework in 1936.




                                                20
More recent estimates Robinson and Godbey’s estimates show that housework hours of

employed women fell from 27.7 to 24.5 between 1965 and 1975, and then rose slightly to a

relatively constant 25 hours from 1985 to 2004. Thus, the available estimates for housework by

employed women from the pre-WWII period are very similar to those in the post-WWII period.

We use the average of the two earlier estimates of 25 hours a week for 1936 and interpolate

between 1936 and 1965. We assume that hours were equal to 25 a week before 1936.

        Figure 9 shows the average of the available estimates by gender and employment status

for individuals ages 18 to 64. The second line from the top shows the average estimates for

employed women.



Non-employed Men Ages 18-64

        The only estimates for housework hours of non-employed men are from 1965 and later.

They are shown in the second line from the bottom in Figure 9.10 Hours of non-employed men

rose by about 7 hours a week between 1965 and 1985, and remained relatively constant between

1985 and 2004.

        In the absence of early estimates for this group, we assume that they did as many hours of

housework in the early part of the century as they did in 1965. In particular, we use the 1965

value of 15 hours for the earlier years as well. The potential biases from the lack of data should

have very little impact on long-run trends because non-employed men represent a very small

segment of the population in the early part of the sample. There are, however, potential biases in

the implications for the cyclical behavior of housework by this category. Our estimates are

based in part on the amount of time non-employed men spent on housework in 1965. It is


10
  For 1965 only, we use Robinson and Godbey’s (1999) estimate because they had a larger sample. The estimates
from the Aguiar-Hurst data base seem unusually large in 1965 and are based on only 23 observations.


                                                      21
possible that men unemployed for business cycle reasons may do more home production than

men not working for other reasons. According to the 1965 survey, unemployed men did more

housework than men not working for other reasons. The sample sizes are so small though (10

and 13 observations) that we do not trust them. According to the bigger samples in the 1975 and

1985 surveys these two classes of men did the same amount of housework. In contrast, in 2003

and 2004 men who classified themselves as “unemployed” did about five to six more hours of

home production than men who were not working for other reasons. Given how much the

numbers switch from decade to decade, we do not feel comfortable making a distinction between

the two types of nonemployed men.



Employed Men Ages 18-64

       Finally, the bottom line in Figure 9 shows estimates of the housework done by employed

men. The estimates from various studies during the 1920s indicate that employed men spent

very little time doing housework, between two and three hours a week (Wilson (1929), Vanek

(1973)). In contrast, by 1965, they averaged around 11 hours per week, and by 2004, they

averaged 16 hours a week.

       Are the numbers for the 1920s too low? One question is the accuracy of wives’ estimates

of husbands’ housework time. A recent study using various methods for measuring time spent

on housework found that wives’ estimates of husbands’ housework hours were lower than

husbands’ estimates of their own housework hours. However, husbands’ estimates of housework

hours were higher than actual time spent, based on monitoring. In fact, wives’ estimates were

much closer to actual time spent by husbands than husbands’ estimates (Lee and Waite (2005)).

Thus, we do not have a reason to believe that wives’ estimates are biased downward.




                                              22
       A second factor that makes the lower estimates of employed men’s housework in the

1920s plausible is the correlation between housework and the length of the workweek. Robinson

(1977, Table 3.2) investigates the effect of workweek length on employed men’s housework

using the 1965 studies. Whereas men who work 30-39 hours a week average 10.5 hours on

housework, those working 55 or more hours a week average 6.4 hours on housework. During

the early decades of the century, employed men worked significantly more hours per week than

they did in later decades. Thus, it is not so surprising that they helped less with the housework.

       Another possible bias is single versus married men. All of the men in the 1920s studies

were married. Do single men do more housework? Our analysis of the 1965 data shows that

whereas the average employed married man in 1965 spent 11.1 hours on home production per

week, the average employed single man spent 9.7 hours on housework. Thus, single employed

men tend to do less housework than married employed men, so the 1920s estimates are not likely

to be biased downward. 11



Individuals Ages 65 and Over

       The estimates presented so far have dealt only with the 18-64 age group. 1975 was the

first year that the 65 and older age groups was included in time diary studies. For 1975, the

estimates of housework range from 32.7 hours for nonemployed women to 12.5 hours for

employed men.     Non-employed women ages 65 and older spend less time than non-employed

women ages 18-64 because most women ages 65 and older do not have young children. After

1975, women’s hours fall slightly and men’s hours increase substantially. There are no estimates

for housework for those ages 65 and over before 1975. To extend the data earlier than 1975, we




                                                23
assumed that the change in home production between 1965 and 1975 for those ages 65 and over

was the same as for those ages 55-64, since those groups followed similar patterns in later years.

Consistent with estimates for other groups, we assume no change before 1965. This age group

was a relatively small part of the population in the first half of the century, so changes in the

estimates do not have much effect.



Children

        Finally, we consider the housework done by children. According to Vanek (1973), in

1926 homemakers reported an average 3.3 hours of housework from children ages 6 to 14 and 5

hours of housework for children ages 15 to 18. Estimates from Juster and Stafford (1991) and

Timmer, Eccles and O’Brien (1985) suggest similar numbers for 1981, around 3 hours for grade

school children and 5 hours for teenagers. Thus, housework by children has been about constant

based on these estimates 60 years apart. We assume that children ages 5-13 worked a constant

three hours a week and children ages 14-17 worked five hours a week on housework.



Summary Measures of Housework

        As discussed above, we construct measures of total housework by weighting the

estimates of each cell by the fraction of the population in that cell. The data appendix gives

details on how we constructed weights for gender, age, and employment categories.

        Figure 10 shows the estimates based on several subcategories. The top panel of Figure

10 shows average weekly hours for men and women between ages 18-64. Although average

hours within employment category did not change much before 1965, average hours of women

11
  One might ask how single men can survive with so little housework done. Single men are much more likely to
turn to the market for their meals and other traditional home production commodities. For example, Chinese



                                                      24
decreased gradually because of the increase in women’s employment rates. Since 1965, average

housework done by women has decreased noticeably. Average housework done by men has

increased gradually over the century.

        The bottom panel of Figure 10 shows average weekly hours of housework by age group

for both sexes combined. Before 1930, those ages 18-64 did about as much housework as those

ages 65 and up. After 1930, older individuals did more housework on average than prime age

individuals. The increase in housework hours is due to two forces. One is the decrease in male

labor force participation rates in this age group. Second, because of changing life expectancies,

women became a greater fraction of the population ages 65 and over. (Recall that women do

more housework than men.) After a peak in 1965, hours decline somewhat so that by 2003 they

are about equal to their 1940s levels. The housework of children ages 0 to 17 averages around

2.5 hours a week.



IV.     The New Measures of Market Work, Schooling, Home Production and Leisure

A. Trends in Non-Leisure Components

        We now have estimates for all of the components needed to measure per capita leisure.

Figure 11 shows the components of the total non-leisure hours measure divided by the entire

population. The first thing to note is that the addition of the government and the use of the total

population imply that market hours do not fall nearly as much as the standard measure suggests.

According to our measure, average annual market hours per capita have only fallen by about 140

hours, rather than 550 hours. School hours, on the other hand, have increased by 100 hours.

        Per capita home production hours are now slightly higher, 67 hours annually, than in

1900. This increase is entirely due to the changing composition of the population rather than to


restaurants were first established in the U.S. because there were so many single, male Chinese immigrants.

                                                        25
within-cell changes. The simple theoretical model we presented earlier in the paper explains

clearly how a decline in the number of children can reduce the hours of work (in this case

housework) of prime age individuals while resulting in little or no change in hours per capita for

everyone. Although women between the ages of 18 and 64 do less housework now, that effect is

swamped by the other factors.

       Figure 12 shows hours devoted to market work and to market work plus school. This

graph makes clear that a substantial part of the decline in market hours of work over the last

century was a reallocation of effort to human capital formation.     Counting market work and

hours spent in school together, average hours in activities oriented toward current or future

market work have decreased only 40 hours since 1900. Thus, 70 percent of the decline in market

hours is accounted for by the increase in hours spent in school.



B. Leisure Per Capita

       To measure annual hours of leisure per capita, we subtract hours spent in market work,

school work, commuting to work and school, and housework from the time endowment. Much

of the literature also subtracts personal care time, such as sleeping and eating, from the time

endowment in calculating leisure. We do not subtract personal care time for the following two

reasons. First, as is evident from Table 1, time spent in most “personal care” activities create

substantial enjoyment, and thus should be categorized as leisure according to our classification

system. Second, Biddle and Hamermesh (1990) argue that time spent sleeping is affected by

market incentives and thus should not be accepted as solely a biological necessity. Based on

these arguments, we count the total time endowment as 24 hours a day, 365 days per year.




                                                26
       Figure 13 shows our new measure of leisure per capita. According to this measure,

leisure per capita was essentially the same in 1900 as it was in 2004, 6,657 hours per year in

1900 and 6,634 hours per year in 2004. These estimates imply 128 hours of leisure per week. If

one wishes to subtract the average amount spent in personal care time of 75 hours a week, this

leaves 53 hours a week of non-personal care leisure time.

       Thus, this new measure implies long-run constancy of leisure per capita.            Despite

massive increases in wages and significant changes in household composition, leisure per capita

has no trend.

       There are, nevertheless, some low frequency movements during the century. Leisure per

capita hit an all-time high during the Great Depression and an all-time low during WWII. As

discussed earlier in the paper, however, we may have underestimated the amount of home

production done during the Great Depression. Another omission that might affect our estimates

of the cyclicality of leisure is time spent on job search by the unemployed. According to the

time use surveys from 1975 on, unemployed individuals spend between 2 and 2.5 hours a week

on job search activities. We constructed a series on total hours spent in job search based on these

numbers and found the total per capita hours spent to be miniscule. Even during the Great

Depression, it amounted to only 12 hours per year on a per capita basis, so we did not include the

series in our non-leisure activities. Actual time spent on job search during the Great Depression

may have been higher, but without firm evidence, we have no basis to increase our estimates.

       In sum, adequately accounting for non-leisure time and considering the entire population

overturns the conclusions drawn from the standard series. While leisure per capita has varied

over the last 105 years and has exhibited some low frequency movements, it is the same now as

it was 105 years ago. Keynes’ predictions on the increase in productivity are proving correct, but




                                                27
it appears that his predictions about a great increase in leisure are not proving true so far for the

U.S.

         The results also imply that the standard RBC assumption that income and substitution

effects cancel may be consistent with the long-run data. What looked like a secular rise in

leisure over time using standard measures was actually a mismeasurement of leisure.



C. Comparison to Other Post-WWII Studies

         A number of other studies have analyzed trends in work and leisure in the post-WWII

period. A controversial study by Schor (1991) argued that leisure declined between the late

1960s and the 1990s. Roberts and Rupert (1995) challenged her conclusions using data from the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics. They show that total paid work plus housework hours have

been relatively constant for husbands and wives (combined) between the mid-1970s and the late

1980s.     Robinson and Godbey (1999) argue that “free time” increased by about six hours a

week between 1965 and 1995. Aguiar and Hurst (2006) find the same increase in leisure

between 1965 and 2003.

         Our results, however, are not at odds with Robinson and Godbey’s and Aguiar and

Hurst’s results for two reasons. First, our measures cover all age groups, whereas their analysis

of trends focuses only on individuals ages 18 to 64. Second, we count time spent in schooling as

non-leisure time whereas Robinson and Godbey count it as free time.

         The simple theory presented in the first part of the paper explains the differing trends

across all individuals versus prime age individuals. According to our simple theory, a decrease

in the fraction of children in the population should raise per capita leisure of adults while leaving

total per capita leisure unchanged.




                                                 28
V.     Conclusion

       This paper has studied trends in market work, home production, schooling and leisure.

We first argued that the standard practice of using the civilian non-institutional population ages

16 and over as a measure of per capita was not justified from a representative agent perspective.

We used both empirical arguments and a theoretical model to show why it was important to

consider the entire population. We then developed more comprehensive measures of non-leisure

time, including work in government, hours spent in school, and home production. We used a

variety of data sources to produce series on aggregate hours spent in school and in home

production back to 1900.

       The new measures give a very different impression of trends in leisure. In contrast to the

standard measure, which implies that per capita leisure time has increased by 550 hours per year,

the new measure suggests that leisure per capita now is essentially the same as it was in 1900.

Thus, Keynes’ prediction about an increase in leisure has not yet materialized.

       Whether this finding implies balanced growth remains to be seen. Although leisure per

capita has no trend, there are important trends in the underlying components, such as the amount

of schooling. Recent work by Ngai and Pissarides (2005) has suggested models that can explain

some of these patterns.

       Finally, one should be mindful of the degree of imprecision of our estimates. While the

data for the post-WWII period is quite good for measuring long-run changes, the data from the

early part of the century is far less precise. Our measures of hours worked in the market depend

entirely on Kendrick’s measures. We have shown, however, that his measures are consistent

with other sources. Our early measures of home production depend on a remarkable set of




                                               29
studies done in the first decades of the 20th Century. While the research conducted was quite

impressive given the resources available, there are concerns about the extent to which the

samples were nationally representative. Our nearly exhaustive search of the related literature

convinced us that the biases were not great. Finally, while we think our series give good

estimates of long-run trends in time use, we are much less confident about the cyclicality of time

use. The data on market hours worked and hours spent in school is fairly precise because most

of it was collected annually. On the other hand, the cyclical movements of home production are

based on the difference in home production done by employed versus non-employed individuals

at a few points in time. Thus, these estimates are very imprecise. The estimates we have

produced are probably correct on the directions of movements over the business cycle, but are

very imprecise estimates of the quantitative movements. Thus, our estimates should not be used

to calibrate models of short-term fluctuations in home production or total leisure.



                                         Data Appendix

Population:

       Estimates of population by age group are from the Census and the CPS. Specific sources
       are Mini Historical Statistics, Statistical Abstract, Demographic Trends in the 20th
       Century, Economic Report of the President, 2005, Table B-34, IPUMS Census, and CPS
       statistics from the BLS. Only the resident population was available before 1939 and after
       1980. To obtain a better estimate of the total population, we added the number of armed
       forces overseas during WWI.           Most series were available annually. Several
       subcategories were available only decennial. We interpolated fractions of larger
       categories between decades in these cases.

Institutional Population:

       Decennial values for 1900-1950 for inmates of institutions were from Census extracts
       from IPUMS, using the variable “Relate.” Later decennial values were from published
       Census tables. The fraction institutionalized was interpolated between decennial years.

Market Hours



                                                30
      1900 -1947 data are from Kendrick Productivity Trends in the United States, 1961, Table
      A-X. From 1948-2002, we used a variety of sources to create total, private and
      government hours. We multiplied the BLS private hours index by a factor to convert it to
      total hours. This factor is the ratio of total full-time equivalent employment to private
      full-time equivalent employment. The series for these calculations are available from the
      BLS, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Tables 6.5, 6.8, and 6.9, and BLS data on unpaid
      family workers (http://www.bls.gov/webapps/legacy/cpsatab5.htm). Both the Kendrick
      and BLS series include hours of employees, the self-employed and unpaid family
      workers in the private sector, as well as hours worked in government enterprises (such as
      the post office). We used the full-time equivalent employees in government (excluding
      government enterprises) as government employment and full-time equivalent persons
      engaged in the private sector plus government enterprises plus unpaid family workers as
      private employment. (The BEA “persons engaged” series includes the self-employed but
      not unpaid family workers.) We obtained annual measures of average hours of full-time
      equivalent workers in government versus the private sector by dividing the BEA series of
      total hours of employees (full time and part time) by the full-time equivalent number of
      employees.


School Hours:

      Enrollment: The K-12 school enrollment numbers were obtained by combining
      information from the Digest of Education Statistics, 2002 and Claudia Goldin “A Brief
      History of Education in the U.S.” August 1999, NBER working paper H0119. Higher
      education enrollment was from Mini Historical Statistics, HS-21. For several years, the
      numbers were only reported every other year. Missing years were filled in with
      interpolation.

      Average days attended per enrolled student: Data for K-12 students are from Goldin,
      Table CG.A.6. We assume that full-time college students engage in significant school
      activities for 5 days a week, 33 weeks a year.

      Fraction of college students who are full-time: The fraction of college students who
      were enrolled fulltime was available only from 1963 – 1998 from the Digest of Education
      Statistics. We used the 1963 fraction for the years before 1963 and the 1998 fraction for
      the years after 1998.

      Hours spent per day in school: According to the Lynd’s (1929) classic study of
      Muncie, Indiana, hours spent in school exclusive of recess was five hours daily for all
      students in 1890. In 1924, it ranged from almost four hours a day for grades 1 and 2 to
      almost six hours a day for high school. We were also able to obtain information about
      school hours in California since the 1930s. Our data are based on interviews with
      Kathryn Ramey, a professional educator who kept records on the length of the school day
      and number of homework hours in California since the 1930s. The length of the school
      day appears to have been relatively constant in California over the last 70 years. Grade
      school typically lasts 7 hours, with about 1 - 1.5 hours for recess and lunch. Homework



                                             31
      averages between zero and half an hour a night. Thus, we assume that time spent on
      schoolwork per day attended is 5.5 hours for grades K-8. The high school day lasts about
      as long as grade school, but the recess and lunch time is shorter and the amount of
      homework is greater. These numbers are consistent with those from Timmer, Eccles, and
      O’Brien’s (1985) time use study of children in 1981.
              We also obtained some information from the BLS Time Use Surveys. The BLS
      Time Use Surveys include only those ages 15 and up. From the 2003 survey, we found
      that full-time students between the ages of 15 and 17 spend eight hours on school and
      homework per day attended. We believe that these figures include lunch and recess.
      Once breaks are excluded, this is roughly 7 hours per day attended. The 2003 survey
      indicates that college students spend less time in class and more time on homework,
      amounting to over eight hours per day attended. Thus, we assume that college students
      spend 8 hours a day per day attended. The BLS time use survey gives hours averaged
      over the entire year. We thus impute 8 hours per day attended by multiplying the BLS
      numbers by 365/165, based on our assumption of 165 days of classes per year.



Home Production:

      Within age-gender-employment group, the main data for home production is from Leed’s
      (1917) dissertation, Vanek’s (1973) dissertation, Robinson and Godbey (1999), articles in
      the Juster and Stafford (1985) volume, Juster and Stafford’s (1991) survey, and data from
      the Aguiar and Hurst (2006) data set and the 2004 BLS Time Use Survey.

      To create total hours spent in housework, we had to use employment-population ratios
      and fractions of the population by age and gender. The following is a description of the
      procedures used.

      1. For the period from 1900-1920, we used decennial census estimates of population and
         labor force by gender from IPUMs. To convert labor force to employment, we used
         Weir’s (1992) unemployment estimates. The 1930 Census gives employment and
         labor force numbers. According to the 1930 data women’s unemployment rates were
         78% of men’s unemployment rates. We assume the same ratio for the earlier years.
         The census of 1910 was known to have overcounted female employment in
         agriculture because of the nature of questions asked, so we do not use information
         from that census.

      2. To interpolate between decennial numbers between 1900 and 1930 in a way that
         captures the cyclicality of employment, we first calculate the annual ratio of total
         employment (from Kendrick) to the population ages 14 and over. Second, we
         calculate the ratio of the decennial employment-population ratio for each age and
         gender group relative to the Kendrick-based number. Third, we interpolate the ratio
         and then multiply it by the Kendrick number to obtain an estimate of annual
         employment-population ratios for each group.




                                             32
3. For 1930 – 1940 we have annual CPS employment numbers, but not by gender and
   not by age. We use the CPS employment-population ratios to interpolate the ratios
   for each of our groups.

4. For 1940-1947, we have annual CPS employment numbers by gender. We use the
   implied ratios to interpolate for each of our groups.

5. For 1948 on, we have annual CPS civilian employment numbers by gender and age.
   We add military employment by gender to the 18-64 age group. The military data are
   from Mini Historical Statistics and official DOD data.

6. We weight the estimates of housework for each of the following cells by the fraction
of the population involved: (1) employed males ages 18-64; (2) non-employed males
ages 18-64; (3) employed females ages 18-64; (4) non-employed females ages 18-64; (5)
employed males 65+; (6) non-employed males 65+; (7) females 65+; (8) children ages 5-
13; (9) children ages 14-17.




                                      33
                                            References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time Over Five
       Decades,” NBER working paper 12082, March 2006.

Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75: (1965): 493-517.

Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright, “Homework in Macroeconomics:
      Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Poltical Economy 99
      (December 1991): 1166-87.

Biddle, Jeff E. and Daniel Hamermesh, “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 98 Part 1 (October 1990): 922-943.

Bittman, Michael, James Mahmud Rice, and Judy Wajcman, “Appliances and Their Impact: The
       Ownership of Domestic Technology and Time Spent on Household Work,” The British
       Journal of Sociology, 55 (2004): 401-423.

Bryant, W. Keith, “A Comparison of the Household Work of Married Females: The Mid-1920s
       and the Late 1960s,” Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal, 24 (June 1996):
       358-384.

Bryant, W. Keith and Cathleen Zick, “Are We Investing Less in the Next Generation? Historical
       Trends in Time Spent Caring for Children,” Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 17
       (Winter 1996): 365-392.

Cain, Glen G., “Women and Work: Trends in Time Spent in Housework,” University of
      Wisconsin-Madison, IRP Discussion Papers DP #747-84, April 1984.

Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur John Coleman II, “The U.S. Structural Transformation and
        Regional Convergence: A Reinterpretation,” Journal of Political Economy, 109 (2001):
        584-616.

Cowan, Ruth Schwartz, More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the
      Open Hearth to the Microwave, New York: Basic Books, 1983.

Crawford, Ida, The Use of Time by Farm Women, Idaho Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin
      146. Moscow: The University of Idaho, 1927.

Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Source of Historical Economic Fluctuations: An
       Analysis using Long-Run Restrictions,” NBER working paper 10631, July 2004.

Friedan, Betty, The Feminine Mystique, New York: W.W. Norton & Co, 1997, originally
       published 1963.




                                             34
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, “Human Capital and Social Capital: The Rise of Secondary
       Schooling in American, 1910-1940,” March 1998, NBER working paper 6439.

Goldin, Claudia, “A Brief History of Education in the U.S.” August 1999, NBER working paper
       H0119.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Zvi Hercowitz, “The Allocation of Capital and Time Over the Business
      Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (December 1991): 1188-1214.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, Mehmet Yorukoglu, “Engines of Liberation,” Review of
      Economic Studies, 72 (January 2005): 109-133.

Greenwood, Jeremey and Guillaume Vandenbroucke, “Hours Worked: Long-Run Trends,”
      NBER working paper 11629, September 2005.

Hansen, Annie L., “Two Years as a Domestic Educator in Buffalo, New York,” Journal of Home
      Economics 5 (1913): 435.

Hartmann, Heidi, Capitalism and Women’s Work in the Home, 1900-1930, Yale University
      Ph.D. Dissertation, December 1974.

Hawrylyshyn, Oli, “Estimating the Value of Household Work in Canada,” Statistics Canada,
      1971, Catalogue No. 13-558, 1978.

Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford, eds., Time, Goods, and Well-Being, Ann Arbor,
        Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1985.

-----------------------, “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings, Behavioral Models, and the
         Problems of Measurement,” Journal of Economic Literature, 29 (June 1991): 471-522.

Kendrick, John W., Productivity Trends in the United States, Princeton: NBER and Princeton
       University Press, 1961.

Keynes, John Maynard, “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren” in Essays in Persuasion,
      London: The MacMillan Press Ltd., 1972, originally published 1931.

Lebergott, Stanley, Pursuing Happiness, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.

Lee, Yun-Suk and Linda J. Waite, “Husbands’ and Wives’ Time Spent on Housework: A
      Comparison of Measures,” Journal of Marriage and Family 67 (May 2005): 328-336.

Leeds, John B., The Household Budget: With A Special Inquiry into the Amount and Value of
       Household Work (Ph. D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1917). Available at:
       http://hearth.library.cornell.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=hearth;idno=4217462 .




                                              35
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 22 (1988): 3-42.

Lynd, Robert S. and Helen Merrell Lynd, Middletown: A Study in Contemporary American
      Culture, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1929.

Maddison, Angus, Phases of Capitalist Development, London: Oxford University Press, 1982.

___________, Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. Development Centre Studies, OECD.
      Paris: OECD, 1995.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Richard Rogerson, “Changes in Hours Worked, 1950-2000,” Federal
      Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28 (July 2004): 14-33.

Mokyr, Joel, “Why Was There More Work for Mother? Technological Change and the
      Household, 1880-1930,” Journal of Economic History, 60 (March 2000): 1-40.

Ngai, Liwa Rachel and Christopher Pissarides, “Trends in Hours and Economic Growth,” CEPR
       Discussion Paper DP5440, December 2005.

Perli, Roberto and Plutarchos Sakellaris, “Human Capital Formation and Business Cycle
       Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 42 (1998): 67-92.

Prescott, Edward C., “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,” Carnegie Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy, 25 (1986), 11-66.

Prescott, Edward C., “Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28 (July 2004): 2-13.

Reeves, Maud Pember, Round About a Pound a Week, London: G. Bell & Sons Limited, 1913.

Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor, “Working in the Market, Working at Home, and the Acquisition of
      Skills: A General-Equilibrium Approach,” American Economic Review, 83 (September
      1993): 893-907.

Roberts, Kristin and Peter Ruppert, “The Myth of the Overworked American,” Federal Reserve
       Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, January 15, 1995.

Robinson, John P., How Americans Use Time: Social-Psychological Analysis of Everyday
      Behavior, New York: Praeger Publishers, 1977.

--------------------, “Changes in Time Use: An Historical Overview,” in Time, Goods, and Well-
         Being, ed. F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of
         Michigan Press, 1985.




                                             36
Robinson, John P. and Geoffrey Godbey, Time for Life: The Surprising Ways Americans Use
      their Time, University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press,
      1999, 2nd edition.

Rodrigue, Jean-Paul et al, Transport Geography on the Web, Hofstra University, 2004.

Schor, Juliet B. The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline in Leisure, United States:
       BasicBooks, 1991.

Siu, Henry, “The Fiscal Role of Conscription in the U.S. World War II Effort,” 2004 UBC
       working paper.

Slichter, Sumner, The Turnover of Factory Labor, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1919.

Timmer, Susan Goff, Jacquelynne Eccles, and Kerth O’Brien, “How Children Use Time” in
     Time, Goods, and Well-Being, ed. F. Thomas Juster and Frank P. Stafford, Ann Arbor,
     Michigan: University of Michigan Press, 1985.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, “The Farmer’s Standard of Living: A Socio-Economic Study of
      2,886 White Farm Families of Selected Localities in 11 States,” Department Bulletin No.
      1466, Washington, D.C., November 1926.

Vanek, Joann, Keeping Busy: Time Spent in Housework, United States, 1920-1970, The
      University of Michigan Ph.D. Dissertation, 1973.

------------, “Time Spent in Housework,” Scientific American 11:116-20.

Walker, Kathryn E., “Homemaking Still Takes Time,” Journal of Home Economics, 61 (October
      1969): 621-624.

Weir, David L., “A Century of U.S. Unemployment, 1890-1990: Revised Estimates and
      Evidence for Stabilization,” in Roger L. Ransom, ed. Research in Economic History.
      Volume 14. Greenwich, Conn. and London: JAI Press, 1992; 301-46.

Wilson, Maud, The Use of Time by Oregon Farm Homemakers, Oregon Agricultural Experiment
      Station Bulletin 256. Corvallis: Oregon State Agricultural College, 1929.




                                              37
                    Table 1: Enjoyment of Various Activities in 1985
                      (Adapted from Robinson and Godbey (1999))

9.3   Sex                                       6.9
9.2   Play sports                               6.8
9.1   Fishing                                   6.7      Second job
 9    Art, music                                6.6      Cook, work at home, shop
8.9   Bars, lounges                             6.5
8.8   Play with kids, hug and kiss              6.4      Child care, help adults
8.7                                             6.3      Work commute
8.6   Talk/read to kids                         6.2
8.5   Sleep, church, attend movies              6.1      Dress
8.4                                              6       Pet care, classes
8.3   Read, walk                                5.9      Errands
8.2   Work break, meals out, visit              5.8      Housework
8.1                                             5.7
 8    Talk with family                          5.6
7.9   Lunch break                               5.5      Home repair, grocery shopping
7.8   Meal at home, TV, read paper              5.4
7.7   Knit, sew                                 5.3      Homework
7.6                                             5.2      Pay bills, iron
7.5   Recreational trip                         5.1
7.4                                              5       Yardwork
7.3   Hobbies                                   4.9      Clean house, dishes
7.2   Baby care, exercise, meetings             4.8      Laundry
7.1   Gardening                                 4.7      Child health, doctor, dentist
 7    Work, homework help, bathe                4.6      Car repair shop




                                          38
                        Figure 1
           Annual Hours Worked in Business
Divided by Civilian Non-Institutional Population Ages 16+



     1600
     1400
     1200
     1000




            1900   1920   1940      1960   1980   2000
                                 year




                            39
                            Figure 2
      Population Ages 0-15 as a Fraction of Total Population



.4
.35
.3
.25
.2




  1900          1920       1940        1960     1980      2000
                                   year




                            Figure 3
      Population Ages 65+ as a Fraction of Total Population
 .12
 .1
 .08
 .06
 .04




       1900      1920      1940        1960    1980      2000
                                   year




                                  40
                       Figure 4
   Government Hours as a Fraction of Total Work Hours




.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
0




   1900        1920      1940        1960   1980     2000
                                 year




                           Figure 5
       New Estimates of Annual Market Hours Per Worker
2700
2400
2100
1800




      1900     1920      1940        1960   1980     2000
                                 year




                                41
                       Figure 6. School Enrollment Rates




                   High School Enrollment Rate for Ages 14-17
0 25 50 75100




            1900       1920      1940           1960   1980   2000
                                         year


                Average Days Attended per Enrolled Student, K-12
160
130
100




            1900       1920      1940           1960   1980   2000
                                         year


                Higher Education Enrollment Rate for Ages 18-22
0 20 40 60 80




            1900       1920      1940           1960   1980   2000
                                         year




                                        42
                          Figure 7A
      Annual Per Capita Hours Spent on School for Ages 5-22



900
700
500
300




  1900         1920       1940        1960      1980      2000
                                  year




                         Figure 7B.
  Hours Spent in School as a Fraction of Total Market Work
  .35
  .3
  .25
  .2
  .15
  .1




      1900      1920      1940        1960    1980      2000
                                  year




                                 43
                    Figure 8. Estimates of Hours of Housework per Week
                   by Housewives and All Non-employed Women Ages 18-64
                      (Size of the marker indicates sample size of the study)

30 40 50 60 70
  hours per week




               1900        1920      1940       1960         1980      2000      2020
                                                year

                                     housewives               nonem ployed




       Figure 9. Estimates of Housework by Employment & Sex Category
                                 (ages 18-64)
 60
 40
 20
 0




         1900              1920        1940           1960          1980        2000
                                               year

                             nonem ployed wom en               em ployed wom en
                             nonem ployed men                  em ployed m en




                                              44
                       Figure 10. Average Weekly Hours of Housework



                                     Ages 18-64, by Sex
10 20 30 40 50
hours per week
       0




                1900        1920       1940           1960     1980     2000
                                               year

                                        fem ales             m ales



                                     Both Sexes, by Age
               30
hours per week
  10   0 20




                1900        1920       1940           1960     1980     2000
                                               year

                                     ages 18-64              ages 65+
                                     ages 0-17




                                              45
                            Figure 11. Hours Per Capita in Non-Leisure Activities



                                 Market Hours                                   Commute Hours (Market and School)




                                                                     100 200 300 400
700 800 900 10001100
     annual hours




                                                                      annual hours
                                                                           0
                   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980   2000                         1900      1920   1940     1960   1980   2000
                                         year                                                                 year


                                 School Hours                                                   Home Production Hours
                                                                     700 800 900 1000 1100
100 200 300 400
 annual hours




                                                                          annual hours
         0




                   1900   1920    1940     1960   1980   2000                            1900   1920   1940     1960   1980   2000
                                         year                                                                 year




                                                                46
              Figure 12. Per Capita Market-Oriented Hours



1400
1200
1000
800
600




       1900     1920        1940           1960        1980      2000
                                   y ear

                         market             market plus school




                                   47
        Figure 13. Annual Leisure Hours Per Capita




6800
6700
6600
6500
6400




       1900    1920     1940      1960    1980       2000
                               year




                           48
