NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DOES THE LAW OF ONE PRICE FAIL? AN EXPERIMENT ON INDEX MUTUAL
FUNDS
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 12261
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12261

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

We are indebted to Anna Blank, David Borden, Carlos Caro, Ananya Chakravarti, Keith Ericson, Christina
Jenq, Shih En Lu, Dina Mishra, Kelly Shue, Dmitry Taubinsky, Chelsea Zhang, Fan Zhang, and Eric
Zwick for their excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Sally Zeckhauser, John W. Nolan,
Ken Toy, and Thomas E. Vautin for facilitating the experiment with Harvard staff. We thank Jeff Brown,
Gideon Saar, and seminar participants at the Boston Fed, NBER, University of Connecticut, University
of Maryland, University of Pennsylvania, and Yale for helpful comments. We acknowledge individual
and collective financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021650 and T32-AG00186)
and the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10- P-98363-2 to the National Bureau
of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions
expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of NIA, SSA, any other agency
of the Federal Government, or the NBER. Choi acknowledges financial support from the Mustard
Seed Foundation.
© 2006 by James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds
James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 12261
May 2006, Revised April 2008
JEL No. D14,D18,D43,D83
ABSTRACT
Experimental subjects allocate $10,000 across four S&P 500 index funds. Subject rewards depend
on the chosen portfolio’s subsequent return. Because the investments are not actually intermediated
by the fund companies, portfolio returns are unbundled from non-portfolio services. The optimal portfolio
therefore invests 100% in the lowest-cost fund. Nonetheless, subjects overwhelmingly fail to minimize
fees. When we make fees transparent and salient, portfolios shift towards cheaper funds, but fees are
still not minimized. Instead, subjects place high weight on normatively irrelevant historical returns.
Subjects who choose high-cost index funds are relatively much less confident about their asset allocation
choices.

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu
David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-14
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@harvard.edu

Brigitte C. Madrian
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu

“S&P 500 index funds are mutual funds whose goal is to mirror the return of the
S&P 500 index. The underlying portfolios of these funds are similar to
commodities because they hold essentially identical portfolios of securities.
However, like many other end-products that are based on commodities, S&P 500
index funds themselves are not commodities. These funds differ from one another
through the services that are packaged with their securities portfolios and through
other characteristics. Differences in services and characteristics allow mutual
funds to appeal to the needs of a wide range of investors.”
Sean Collins, Investment Company Institute (2005, p. 2)

Mutual fund fees vary by an order of magnitude across firms, even though the industry
has hundreds of competing providers. There is, however, scant evidence that more expensive
funds pick securities well enough to offset their higher fees (e.g. Carhart, 1997; Gruber, 1996).
Some authors have argued that investors should not choose high-fee funds, particularly in the
index fund market, where the underlying portfolio is a commodity (Elton, Gruber, and Busse,
2004). Industry trade groups have responded by arguing that variation in non-portfolio services,
such as financial advice or complementary investment instruments, explains the variation in fees
(Collins, 2005). Academic economists have explained the demand for high-fee funds with search
cost models (Sirri and Tufano, 1998) and models that combine search costs and services
(Hortaçsu and Syverson, 2004).
We report the results of a set of experiments that shed light on these theories of the
demand for high-fee mutual funds. In these experiments, we gave 730 subjects four S&P 500
index fund prospectuses and asked them to allocate $10,000 among these funds. To make
choices incentive-compatible, subjects’ expected payments depended on the profits of their
portfolios over a specified time period after the experimental session. We offered especially large
incentives to 391 of the subjects; for them, the cost of the most expensive portfolio exceeded the
cost of the least expensive portfolio by $94. Because the investments were intermediated by the
experimenters (and not by the fund companies themselves), subjects’ returns were completely
unbundled from any fund services. Thus, we are able to identify the effect of varying fees while
holding services constant—an identification that would be extremely difficult to achieve in a
non-laboratory setting. In the absence of such service effects, the optimal portfolio allocates the
entire investment to the lowest-cost index fund.

3

Our experimental subjects may be better-equipped than most investors to make
sophisticated investment decisions. Our largest subject group (which received the largest
incentives) consists of Harvard staff members, who on average have many years of experience
managing their personal finances. Furthermore, 88% have at least a college degree, and 60%
have some graduate school education as well. Our next largest group of participants consists of
MBA students from Wharton. The remaining subjects are college students recruited on the
Harvard campus. Our MBA subjects reported an average combined SAT score of 1453, which is
at the 98th percentile nationally, and our college subjects reported an average score of 1499,
which is at the 99th percentile.1 When we measure financial literacy directly, we find that all
three subject groups are more knowledgeable than the typical American investor.
Despite removing variation in fund services, we find that almost none of the subjects who
received only the prospectuses minimized fees. We test the role of search costs in this failure to
minimize fees by eliminating them in one of our experimental conditions. In this treatment,
subjects received the four fund prospectuses as well as a one-page sheet that summarized the
funds’ front-end loads and expense ratios (reproduced in Appendix B).
In another treatment, we study what happens when we eliminate search costs for
historical returns, as some mutual fund advertising strives to do (Jain and Wu, 2000; Sapp and
Tiwari, 2004; Cronqvist, 2004; Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005). Subjects in this condition
received the four prospectuses and a summary sheet that showed each fund’s historical
annualized return over the longest period reported in its prospectus—usually the fund’s return
since inception (Appendix C). The dates over which these long-horizon historical returns are
calculated differ across funds due to varying fund inception dates and prospectus publishing
cycles. Thus, returns since inception should be ignored when predicting across-fund variation in
future index fund returns. In fact, we constructed our fund menus so that long-horizon historical
returns are positively correlated with fees; as a result, chasing past returns lowers future expected
returns.
Finally, we study a third treatment, administered only to the Harvard staff sample, in
which subjects received the four prospectuses and one page of answers to frequently asked
questions (FAQs) about S&P 500 index funds (Appendix D). In particular, subjects were told
1

These averages are consistent with the school-wide statistics publicly reported by the universities. See
www.collegeboard.com/prod_downloads/about/news_info/cbsenior/yr2005/02_v&m_composite_percentile_ranks_0

4

that all S&P 500 index funds seek to make their pre-fee investment returns approximate the S&P
500’s return. We wanted to see if supplying an explanation of what S&P 500 index funds are
would drive portfolios to the lowest-cost fund.
Our results lead us to the following description of mutual fund investing. First, many
people do not realize that mutual fund fees are important for making an index fund
investment decision. Therefore, it is unlikely that their search effort is directed towards finding
fees. Staff in the control condition ranked fees as only the fifth most important factor in their
decision out of eleven factors, and college students in the control condition ranked fees eighth.
Their mean fees were 208 and 122 basis points above the possible minimum, respectively.
Second, even investors who realize fees are important do not minimize index fund
fees. The MBAs in the control condition ranked fees as the most important factor in their
decision. Nonetheless, the MBAs’ average fee was only 10 basis points below the college
students’ average, a statistically insignificant difference.2 It seems that the cost of accurately
finding fees in the prospectuses is relatively high for MBAs, and/or the false allure of other
factors is strong enough for MBAs to offset the benefits of prioritizing fees.
Third, making fee information transparent and salient reduces allocations to highcost funds. Subjects receiving the fees summary sheet selected lower-cost portfolios than control
subjects. Making fees transparent also caused subjects to report that fees were more important in
their portfolio decision. These shifts are consistent with investors not accurately identifying fees
in mutual fund prospectuses, even when they are highly motivated like our staff subjects and
only need to search over a small number of funds.
Fourth, even when fee information is transparent and salient, investors do not come
close to minimizing index fund fees. Among those receiving the one-page fee summary sheet,
90% of staff and college students and 81% of MBAs failed to minimize index fund fees.
Evidently, search costs alone do not fully account for the willingness to hold high-fee index
funds. Subjects instead seem to value non-fee attributes of index funds. In our experiment, nonportfolio services should not matter, since the subjects do not receive such services. Therefore,
subjects must believe that some non-fee attributes predict future fund returns.

506.pdf for percentile rankings of combined SAT scores.
2
We had to offer a slightly different fund menu to staff subjects, so MBA and staff fees cannot be compared
directly.

5

Fifth, investors are strongly swayed by historical return information. All subject
groups ranked fund performance since inception as one of the top three factors influencing their
portfolio decision. Because we had selected funds so that the longest-horizon return reported in
the prospectus was positively correlated with fees, this returns-chasing behavior decreased
expected returns. Eliminating search costs for long-horizon historical returns by providing the
returns summary sheet caused students to allocate more money to the fund with the highest longhorizon historical return. Staff portfolios, however, did not respond to the returns summary sheet,
suggesting that highly motivated investors generally find historical returns when they are given
prospectuses for a small number of funds right before their investment decision.
Sixth, investors do not understand that without non-portfolio services, S&P 500
index funds are commodities. The fact that subjects underweight fee information and are
influenced by irrelevant historical return information is strong evidence against subjects’
understanding the commodity nature of pre-fee index fund returns. When we explained to staff
subjects what S&P 500 index funds are in the FAQ treatment, portfolio fees dropped modestly,
although the statistical significance of this drop is marginal.
Seventh, investors in high-cost index funds have some sense that they are making a
mistake. Higher fees were paid by subjects who reported having less confidence that their choice
was optimal for them, a higher likelihood of changing their portfolio in response to professional
investment advice, and less general investment knowledge.
Our results add to a growing body of evidence that individual investors do not make
optimal asset allocation decisions (e.g., Benartzi and Thaler, 2001; Cronqvist and Thaler, 2004;
Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2005; Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2007; Cronqvist, 2004;
Barber, Odean, and Zheng, 2005). Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes our
experimental design. Section II discusses the characteristics of our subject pool. Section III
describes the main results from the experiment, and Section IV interprets the results. Section V
explores the link between portfolio choices and subject characteristics. Section VI describes the
results of a similar experiment we ran using actively managed funds rather than index funds. We
conclude in Section VII.

6

I. S&P 500 Index Fund Experiment Design
During the summer of 2005, we recruited MBA students at Wharton and college students
at Harvard for the index fund experiment.3 We recruited Harvard staff members for the
experiment in the summer of 2007. We paid the MBA students a $20 participation fee, the
college students a $5 participation fee, and the Harvard staff members a $10 participation fee.
Subjects were also eligible for further payments that depended on their investment decisions, as
described below.4
All subjects received photocopies of four S&P 500 index funds’ prospectuses.
Prospectuses are often the only document sent to potential investors requesting information about
a fund.5 Subjects also received an investment choice sheet. The investment choice sheet given to
staff subjects is reproduced in Appendix A. (Materials given to student subjects were similar to
the staff materials. All experimental materials, including prospectuses, may be downloaded from
the first author’s Website.)
The choice sheet was one page long and had three sections. The first section explained
the purpose of the experiment: to allocate $10,000 among the four S&P 500 index funds. It also
described the payment scheme. Student subjects were told that one participant would be selected
at random to win any positive return his or her chosen allocation earned from September 1, 2005
through August 30, 2006.6 That is, if the value of the winning participant’s portfolio exceeded
the $10,000 initial investment at the end of this period, the winner of the lottery would receive a
payment equal to the value of the portfolio on August 30, 2006 minus the initial investment of
$10,000. If the value of the winning participant’s portfolio fell short of the initial $10,000
investment, the winner would receive nothing but would also not be responsible for the loss. In
3

The MBA students were mostly first-year students recruited during their pre-term orientation. Therefore, they had
received very little MBA coursework at the time of the experiment. Nonetheless, our point stands: this highly
selected group is very sophisticated relative to the typical individual investor.
4
Student subjects could also receive another future payment contingent upon choices in an unrelated experiment run
immediately after ours. See Ericson (2005) for a description of this concurrent experiment.
5
We had a research assistant pose as a potential investor and call a dozen companies’ customer service numbers to
ask for material that would be useful for deciding whether to invest in the companies’ S&P 500 index funds. Our
research assistant’s conversation with the Morgan Stanley representative was particularly amusing. He was told,
“There are better S&P 500 index funds out there… There’s no question that Vanguard’s fund will outperform
ours… Do not buy our S&P 500 index fund. It will not accomplish anything. I wouldn’t be able to look at myself in
the mirror in the morning if I recommended that fund to you.”
6
There was one winner on each campus. Students on each campus were not aware that we were running sessions on
the other campus.

7

contrast, every subject in the 2007 Harvard staff experiment was promised the upside return of
their $10,000 portfolio, but only for the month of September 2007 rather than for a full year. This
Harvard staff experiment forced us to effectively write a call option on $4 million of underlying
securities, a short position that we hedged by buying calls on our own outside account. Because
of the high cost of this hedge, we used an investment horizon of only one month for the staff
experiment.
The second section of the choice sheet gave a numerical example of how the portfolio
payout would be calculated. The third section contained a matrix in which participants entered
their investment allocation. Participants were told they could allocate their investment across as
many or as few funds as they desired, subject to two constraints: (1) they had to allocate exactly
$10,000 in total, and (2) they had to satisfy the minimum opening balance requirement for any
fund to which they made an allocation. We imposed the latter restriction to mimic the constraints
that an investor would face when making a real investment in these funds. The minimum
opening balance for each fund was listed next to the column where participants were to write
their selected allocation.
The control group received only the choice sheet and prospectuses for each of the funds.
The first of the three randomly selected treatment groups also received a one-page “fees sheet”
(staff version reproduced in Appendix B). The fees sheet explained that mutual funds charge
fees, showed how to calculate the impact of loads and expense ratios on portfolio value, and
listed the load, expense ratio, and dollar cost of the load and expense ratio for a one-year $10,000
investment in each of the four funds participants could select. All of the fees sheet information
was also contained in the prospectuses. If subject choices in the control condition reflect optimal
utilization of all relevant information in the prospectuses, then the fees treatment group should
on average select the same portfolio as the control group.
The returns treatment group received the choice sheet, prospectuses, and a one-page
“returns sheet” (staff version reproduced in Appendix C) listing the annualized returns net of all
fees (including the load) over the longest horizon reported in each of the four funds’
prospectuses. For student subjects, these long-horizon returns were all returns since the fund’s
inception. For staff subjects, three of the long-horizon returns were returns since inception, and
one was a ten-year return. (The reason for this discrepancy is explained later in this section.) The
sheet showed the dates over which the returns were calculated, as well as the standard

8

disclaimer, “Past performance is no guarantee of future results.” The date ranges of the longhorizon returns varied across funds. Thus, long-horizon return variation was driven almost
entirely by the S&P 500’s performance during the date range and should be ignored when
predicting future relative returns. There is extensive evidence that mutual fund investors chase
past returns (Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser, 1993; Ippolito, 1992; Sirri and Tufano, 1998;
Chevalier and Ellison, 1997) but the rationality of such behavior is a subject of debate (Gruber,
1996; Carhart, 1997; Zheng, 1999; Sapp and Tiwari, 2004). Our experiment tests returns-chasing
rationality by varying exposure to past return information that should have no effect on fund
allocation decisions.
The FAQ treatment was administered only to one-quarter of the staff subjects. In addition
to the choice sheet and four prospectuses, these subjects received a sheet of paper with answers
to frequently asked questions (FAQs) about S&P 500 index funds (reproduced in Appendix D).
The sheet addressed the following questions:
•

What is a mutual fund?

•

What is an S&P 500 index fund?

•

What is the S&P 500 Index?

If control subjects were choosing high-cost funds simply because they did not understand that all
S&P 500 index funds are seeking to imitate the same portfolio’s return, supplying this
explanation may cause their portfolios to shift to lower-cost funds.
Subjects in all groups were given as much or as little time as they wanted to make their
investment allocations. They were not allowed to confer with each other while making their
choices. When participants had made their investment allocation, they returned all of the
materials in their packet and were given a three-page debriefing survey to complete (staff version
reproduced in Appendix E). The survey asked for some demographic information. It also asked
participants how important various factors were in their investment decision, how long they had
looked at the prospectuses, and how confident they were that the investment allocation they had
chosen was optimal for them. Finally, it asked a series of questions designed to assess the
participants’ financial literacy. These questions were modeled after those asked in the widely
cited John Hancock Eighth Defined Contribution Plan Survey (John Hancock Financial Services
(2002)). Thus, we are able to compare our subjects with John Hancock’s representative sample
of individuals between the ages of 25 and 65 who contribute money to a retirement savings plan

9

and have some choice of investment options in the plan. After returning the debriefing survey,
the experiment ended.
We chose the four funds offered to the student subjects to satisfy the following criteria
(we will describe how we chose the funds offered to staff subjects later):
•

They sought to mimic the return of the S&P 500 index

•

They were front-end load funds with wide variation in the total fees charged

•

They were less than 10 years old, and hence reported annualized return since fund
inception in their prospectus

•

Annualized returns since inception were positively correlated with fees across funds

•

Their prospectus was available as a PDF document online

We focus on S&P 500 index funds because we can rank this universe normatively.
Returns before fees are nearly identical across these funds, so the dominant driver of net return
variation is the fees the funds charge. Because subjects did not make actual investments in the
funds, non-portfolio considerations like the fund’s customer service or the waiver of loads when
purchasing the fund family’s other funds should be irrelevant.
We wanted wide variation in the fees charged by the funds we offered so that subjects’
decisions would meaningfully affect their expected returns. The largest source of S&P 500 index
fund fee variation is their loads, which vary in the CRSP mutual fund database from 0% to
5.75% of invested funds. There is also substantial variation in annual expense ratios, which vary
from 6 to 200 basis points. We restricted the set of funds under consideration to those with loads
because we did not want to confound sensitivity to total fees with sensitivity to the mere
presence of a load. We opted to include only front-end load funds (rather than also offering backend load funds) in order to facilitate explaining the funds’ fees on only one sheet of paper.
Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005) present evidence that mutual fund investors are more sensitive
to loads than expense ratios. Therefore, subjects are likely to be more sensitive to our
experiment’s fund fees than to fees in the general index fund universe, where there are many noload funds.
By requiring that our funds be less than 10 years old, we ensured that their prospectuses
reported annualized returns since inception. Because we wanted to distinguish irrational returnschasing behavior from rational fee-avoiding behavior, we searched for a fund menu where fees
were positively correlated with annualized returns since inception.

10

Finally, we restricted the set of S&P 500 index funds to those with a PDF prospectus
available online. Although most mutual fund companies post their fund prospectuses on the
Internet, many are in HTML format only. Printing these HTML files resulted in many formatting
problems on the hard copies, such as page breaks in the middle of tables. We did not want the
graphical polish of a prospectus to unduly influence subject choices. Furthermore, we did not
want to reformat the HTML prospectuses because we wanted subjects to see the information
provided by the mutual fund companies in the way that the companies had intended.
After imposing the above criteria, the set of suitable S&P 500 index funds was
remarkably small. The four funds we selected are the Allegiant S&P 500 Index Fund, the Mason
Street Index 500 Stock Fund, the Morgan Stanley S&P 500 Index Fund, and the UBS S&P 500
Index Fund. For all four funds, we specified that subjects could only invest in the Class A
shares.7 The funds, their ticker symbols, minimum opening balance requirements, fees, and
annualized returns since inception net of all fees are listed in Panel A of Table 1. These numbers
are taken from the most recent prospectuses available at the time of the experiment, which listed
returns through December 31, 2003.
The expense ratio across the four funds varied from 0.59% to 0.80%, and the load varied
from 2.50% to 5.25%.8 The total annual fee (expense ratio plus front-end load) on a $10,000
investment held for one year varied from a low of $309 for the Allegiant fund to a high of $589
for the Morgan Stanley fund.9 Though the Allegiant fund is the lowest-cost fund, the total fee for
the UBS fund is only $11 more. The other two, the Mason Street and Morgan Stanley funds,
have substantially higher loads and expense ratios.
The annualized returns since inception across the four funds varied from a low of 1.3%
for the Allegiant fund to a high of 5.9% for the Mason Street fund. All four funds were
7

Many mutual funds provide different classes of shares. Some share classes will charge a lower fee for investments
that exceed a certain threshold, typically much higher than the $10,000 hypothetical investment that could be made
in this experiment. Other share classes are differentiated by charging either a front-end or a back-end load.
8
The expense ratio associated with each of these funds is not unambiguous because all four funds have in the past
waived part of their stated expenses on an ad hoc basis each year. In this paper, we use the expense ratio from the
prior year after any expense waivers, as stated in the prospectus, unless the fund guarantees the waiver level in the
following year. This net-of-waiver expense ratio is what Morningstar reports and uses to rate funds. See
Christoffersen (2001) for a discussion of mutual fund fee waivers.
9
We calculate fees on a one-year $10,000 investment with the formula $10,000 × (expense ratio + load) for
simplicity, since that was the total fee implicitly presented to subjects in the fees treatment condition. Calculating
fees using the formula ($10,000 × load) + ($10,000 × (1 – load) × expense ratio) yields almost identical results for
all of the paper’s analyses. We use the formula $10,000 × (expense ratio/12 + load) to calculate fees on a one-month
investment.

11

established during a 19-month window, but the S&P 500 Index level ranged from 757 at the
Mason Street fund’s inception to 1047 at the Allegiant fund’s inception. This variation in the
S&P 500 Index value at inception is largely responsible for the differences in the reported return
since inception. The four funds’ contemporaneous returns after expenses differ by no more than
35 basis points in any year from 1999 to 2003 (the lowest-cost fund, Allegiant, always has the
highest return), and the difference in loads—225 basis points at most—is amortized over at least
five years of fund existence when calculating annualized returns since inception. Note that the
fund with the highest annualized return since inception (the Mason Street fund) is one of the two
high-cost funds, whereas the fund with the lowest reported return since inception (the Allegiant
fund) is the lowest-cost fund.
We wanted to offer the same funds to the staff subjects, who were recruited two years
after the student subjects. However, the Mason Street fund was acquired by American Century
Investments in 2006 and incorporated into an existing American Century index fund. Therefore,
we replaced the Mason Street fund with the Phoenix Insight Index Fund, which also had high
fees and historical returns. Panel B of Table 1 shows the characteristics of the funds offered to
staff subjects, as listed in the most recent prospectus available at the time of the experimental
sessions.
The three funds that were offered to both students and staff—the Allegiant, Morgan
Stanley, and UBS funds—had similar expense ratios and front-end loads in 2005 and 2007. The
total fees paid by staff subjects were generally lower, however, because their investment horizon
was only one month, so they were charged for only one month of ongoing expenses rather than a
full year. The liquidation of staff subjects’ portfolio after one month also triggered a 1% earlyredemption fee for the UBS fund, raising its cost to staff subjects relative to its cost to student
subjects. Whereas the Morgan Stanley fund was the most expensive fund offered to student
subjects, the Phoenix fund was by far the most expensive fund offered to staff subjects.
Because the Phoenix fund had been in operation for more than ten years at the time of the
staff experiment, its prospectus did not list an annualized return since inception, but instead listed
a ten-year historical return. We reported this ten-year return for the Phoenix fund on the staff
subjects’ fees sheet. The Phoenix fund’s 7.3% ten-year return is significantly higher than the
other funds’ returns since inception, which are between 3.1% and 3.8%. In addition, the 16.5%
one-year historical return (excluding the sales load) listed in the Phoenix fund’s prospectus was

12

much higher than the other funds’ one-year returns of around 4%. This is because the most
recent prospectus for the Phoenix fund listed returns through 2006 (a good year for the market),
whereas the other prospectuses only listed returns through 2005.10
Recall that every staff subject was promised the upside return on their chosen portfolio.
Each staff subject was thus effectively given a call option whose strike price was $10,000 and
whose underlying asset’s initial value was $10,000 × (1 – portfolio load). This created large
incentives for the staff subjects to make optimal choices. Based on the yield of the 30-day
Treasury bill and the implied volatility given by the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility
Index (VIX) at the close of August 21, the day before the first staff sessions began, the BlackScholes value of allocating 100% to the Allegiant fund was $170, whereas the value of allocating
100% to the Phoenix fund was $76. Therefore, each staff subject stood to gain $94 from moving
from the worst portfolio to the best portfolio.11
II. Subject Characteristics
As noted earlier, our subjects were Harvard staff members, Wharton MBA students, and
college students recruited on the Harvard campus. Although we aimed to recruit only MBA
subjects on the Wharton campus, we did not explicitly prohibit non-MBA students from
participating in the experiment, and our Wharton campus subject pool included 15 college
students and two economics Ph.D. students.12 Because we believe the differences between
undergraduate and graduate students are more significant than the differences between the
undergraduate student populations across the two university campuses, we group the MBA
students with the economics Ph.D. students and refer to them collectively as the “MBA sample.”
We group the college students on the Wharton campus with the student subjects at the Harvard
campus and refer to them collectively as the “college sample.”
Table 2 gives summary statistics on our subject pools. The average staff subject is about
40 years old, which means that they typically have a couple of decades of experience managing
10

In addition, the Phoenix fund’s one-year return was inflated by a one-time payment made to the fund by the fund’s
former administrator. The 2006 S&P 500 return was 15.78%, in contrast to the Phoenix fund’s 16.47% return. The
end of the prospectus reveals in a long table that excluding the non-recurring payment, the fund’s 2006 return was
only 15.18%.
11
In the end, staff subject payments due to capital gains totaled only $3,397 due to the market’s performance and the
high fees most subjects paid.
12
We confirmed the Harvard staff and Wharton student affiliations by checking their school-issued identification
cards.

13

their personal finances. As expected, the student subjects are substantially younger. The majority
of our staff subjects are female, whereas both the college and MBA samples have male
majorities. The staff subjects are very well-educated: 88% have at least a college degree (almost
all of these are bachelor’s degrees, not associate’s degrees), and 60% have some graduate
education or a graduate degree. The “college” sample includes a few high school students who
were taking summer school classes on campus, as well as a few college graduates. Both MBAs
and college subjects report extraordinarily high average SAT scores (the 98th and 99th
percentiles, respectively).13
Every subject group is more financially literate than the typical American investor
sampled in the John Hancock Defined Contribution Plan Survey (John Hancock Financial
Services (2002)). Only 8% of John Hancock respondents knew what kinds of assets a money
market fund holds, versus 21% of our staff subjects, 40% of our MBA subjects, and 15% of our
college subjects.14 John Hancock respondents on average thought that the stock of their own
company was less risky than an equity mutual fund; on a 5-point scale, the average risk rating
was 3.1 for employer stock and 3.6 for an equity mutual fund. In contrast, all ten of our
experimental groups (four staff groups, three MBA groups, and three college student groups) on
average rated a typical Fortune 500 stock as more risky than an equity mutual fund. (However,
this second comparison is potentially confounded by the fact that John Hancock respondents
were asked about the stock of their own employer, whereas our subjects were asked about the
stock of a typical Fortune 500 company.)
Through the luck of the draw, staff subjects in the fees treatment group are younger, more
likely to be female, and more educated than the other staff subjects. We will show in Section IV
that our treatment estimates are robust to controlling for these demographic differences. In
addition, control group MBAs are less financially knowledgeable than other MBAs when judged
by their knowledge of what a money market fund’s investments are. In unreported regressions,
we find that controlling for whether this question was answered correctly does not qualitatively
change our inference about the MBA fees treatment effect and strengthens the statistical
significance of the returns treatment effect.
13

Approximately one-third of the MBAs and one-sixth of the college sample reported not having taken the SAT.
Many of these subjects may be foreign students, which raises the concern that poor English skills or unfamiliarity
with U.S. financial institutions may cause them to pay high fees. However, we find no significant difference in mean
fees between student subjects who did and did not take the SAT (two-sided p-value of 0.54, not reported in a table).

14

Consistent with their high-powered incentives, staff subjects reported spending the most
time reading the prospectuses: about 14 minutes on average. MBAs reported spending about 12
minutes reading the prospectuses, and college students reported spending about 9 minutes.15
Students in both control groups spent more time reading the prospectuses than the treatment
groups, which seems sensible given that they received only the prospectuses and neither
summary sheet. This pattern is reversed among staff subjects, who spent the least time reading
the prospectuses when in the control group, but the differences between the staff control group
and the other staff treatment groups are not statistically significant.
As a whole, these numbers alleviate concerns that subjects simply randomized without
exerting any mental effort when making their allocations. The average time spent reading the
prospectuses should be enough for a knowledgeable subject to find the expenses in the four
documents. Since participants could leave the experiment at any time they wished, time spent in
the experiment likely reflects time actually spent in the decision-making process. Additional
evidence against the randomization hypothesis comes from Wald tests, which can reject equality
of subjects’ mean allocations to each fund at the 1% level for all ten experimental subgroups.
III. Main Experimental Results
Table 3 shows the mean portfolio fee (load plus expense ratio plus short-term redemption
fee) paid in each condition by subject type, as well as the average (weighted by dollar allocation)
annualized long-horizon historical return of the funds in the portfolios. The average fee paid by
staff in the control condition is $456, which is higher than the $431 they would have paid if they
had selected randomly, and much higher than the $255 they would have paid if they had
allocated all $10,000 to the lowest-cost fund, Allegiant. We cannot directly compare staff
allocations to student allocations due to differing fund menus, but we can directly compare MBA
and college student allocations. Contrary to our expectations, MBAs did no better than college
students when simply provided with the mutual fund prospectuses. MBAs in the control
condition paid $421 in fees on average, which is only $10 less than the average college control
14

The correct answer among the choices offered is short-term U.S. government bonds.
When a subject reported a range of time, such as “10 to 15 minutes,” we assigned the midpoint of that range to the
subject. The staff and MBA figures are close to those calculated from our own records of how much time elapsed
between a subject’s receiving the experimental materials and his or her returning them to receive the debriefing
survey. Unfortunately, we did not keep our own records of how much time college subjects took, so we cannot
independently corroborate their reports.

15

15

fee, and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the means are equal (two-sided p = 0.52). The fees
of the average control student’s portfolio are only slightly below the $443 fee subjects would
have paid if they had chosen randomly and well above $309 fee of the lowest-cost fund,
Allegiant.
The black bars in Figure 1 show the average control group allocations across the four
funds. All three control groups allocated only 18 to 19% of their money to the lowest-cost fund,
Allegiant. Staff and MBAs also had similar allocations to the Morgan Stanley fund of 18 or 19%.
But staff allocated 15 percentage points less to the cheap UBS fund than MBAs because they
invested 38% of their portfolio in the most expensive fund, Phoenix Insight (which was not
offered to students). In contrast, MBAs invested only 23% in their costly fourth option, Mason
Street (which was not offered to staff).
Comparing MBA allocations to college student allocations is more straightforward
because the two groups were offered the same set of funds. Both student control groups’
allocations to the two cheap funds, Allegiant and UBS, are similar—19% and about 40%,
respectively. The groups’ allocations differ primarily in the way they decided to allocate the
portion of their portfolio devoted to expensive funds: MBAs allocated more to Mason Street than
Morgan Stanley (23% versus 18%), whereas the proportions are almost exactly flipped (17%
versus 27%) for the college students. The slightly lower average fee paid by MBAs is not,
however, primarily driven by their relative preference for Mason Street over Morgan Stanley.
The more important factor is that MBAs allocated 59% to the two cheap funds in total, whereas
college students allocated a slightly lower 56%. This total is an important determinant of
portfolio fees because the two cheap funds’ fees are only 11 basis points apart from each other,
and the two expensive funds’ fees are only 34 basis points apart, but over 200 basis points
separate the cheap funds from the expensive funds.
The second row of Table 3 shows that providing the fees sheet lowered the average fee
paid by $24 for staff, $55 for MBAs, and $21 for college students. The drop is significant at the
5% level for the staff and the 1% level for the MBAs, but it is insignificant for the college
sample, both because of the smaller magnitude of the effect and the fact that the college sample

16

is only a third of the size of the staff or MBA sample.16 It seems that the MBAs’ sophistication
manifested itself in their greater responsiveness to useful information.
Nonetheless, most MBAs did not use the information optimally. The grey bars in Figure
1 show a shift to the lowest-cost fund for the fees treatment groups relative to the control groups.
But the staff, MBA, and college subjects in the fees treatment groups still allocated 49%, 20%,
and 37% of their assets to the two high-cost funds, respectively. The histograms in Figure 2 show
that only 9% of staff subjects, 19% of MBA subjects, and 10% of college subjects in the fees
treatment allocated all of their money to the lowest-cost fund. While these proportions are higher
than the 3% of staff controls, 6% of MBA controls, and 0% of college controls who allocated all
their money to the cheapest fund, they are far from the 100% one would expect under optimal
choice. This result suggests that search costs for fees alone cannot explain the tendency to invest
in high-fee index funds, since the fees sheet brings these search costs close to zero.17 Instead,
subjects seem to either misunderstand what they are getting in exchange for higher fees or value
normatively irrelevant characteristics.
Given the existing evidence on mutual fund returns-chasing, a likely candidate for a nonfee characteristic that subjects desire in their index funds is high past returns. The third row of
Table 3 shows portfolio statistics for subjects who had normatively irrelevant long-horizon past
returns highlighted to them by the returns summary sheet. The returns sheet increased returnschasing among students. MBAs’ average long-horizon historical return rose from 3.06% in the
control group to 3.53% under the returns treatment, a difference that is significant at the 1%
level. The college sample responded even more strongly to the irrelevant information in the
returns sheet; the average return increased from 2.86% to 4.03%, a change that is also significant
at the 1% level. In this case, the MBAs’ sophistication manifested itself in their lower
responsiveness to irrelevant information. The white bars in Figure 1 show that the Mason Street
fund, which has the highest long-horizon historical return offered to students, gained portfolio
share at the expense of every other fund. Because we had constructed the fund menu so that fees
would be positively correlated with returns since inception, chasing past returns reduced
16

Holding fixed the point estimate of the fee treatment effect size and the variance of subject fees, tripling the
college sample size would result in the college fee treatment effect becoming significant at the 10% level.
17
The fees summary sheet did not contain information on the UBS fund’s early-redemption fee, although it did warn
subjects, “Other fees may apply. Please check the fund’s prospectus for more details.” Even without the earlyredemption fee, however, the UBS fund was more expensive than the Allegiant fund, so a cost-minimizing
investor’s decision would not be affected by ignorance of the early-redemption fee.

17

expected future returns. The MBA returns treatment group paid $19 more on average than the
MBA control group, while the college returns treatment group paid $55 more than the college
control group.
On the other hand, the returns sheet had no effect on staff. Staff in the returns treatment
chose portfolios with an insignificantly lower average historical return than staff in the control
condition. We will discuss in Section IV a potential explanation for why the returns sheet
affected students but not staff.
The possibility that subjects are confused about the nature of S&P 500 index funds
motivated our final treatment condition, in which subjects were given a page with answers to
frequently asked questions about S&P 500 index funds. The fourth row of Table 3 shows
portfolio statistics for staff subjects in this treatment. Fees for this group were lower by $15
relative to staff control subjects, although the result is statistically significant at the 10% level
only under a one-sided test. Despite the weak statistical significance, the hashed bars in the top
panel of Figure 1 suggest that this drop is not just due to random variation. Both cheaper funds
received more money in the FAQ treatment than in the control condition, and both expensive
funds received less money. The hashed bars in the top panel of Figure 2 show, however, that the
FAQ treatment was not successful in increasing the number of subjects who chose the cheapest
possible portfolio.
IV. Interpretation
In order to gain insight into what motivated subjects’ decisions in the four experimental
conditions, we asked them in the debriefing survey (the staff version is reproduced in Appendix
D) to rate how important eleven factors were in shaping their portfolio decision. We assign the
integers 1 through 5 to the five possible ratings, with 1 corresponding to “not very important at
all” and 5 corresponding to “very important.” Table 4 reports the average integer rating of each
factor’s importance with the associated ordinal ranking in parentheses (lower numbers indicate
greater ordinal importance).
The staff and college control groups ranked fund performance over the past year and fund
performance since inception as the first- and second-most important factors respectively. This
helps explain why the Phoenix Insight fund received the most money from staff subjects (see
Figure 1); as noted in Section I, both its one-year and long-horizon historical returns are

18

relatively high due to its fund inception date and prospectus publishing cycle. In contrast, the
fund menu offered to students did not feature a clear winner on the historical returns dimension.
Mason Street had the lowest one-year return (excluding loads) due to its high expense ratio, but
the highest return since inception. Allegiant had the highest one-year return but the lowest return
since inception. College control subjects ended up favoring the UBS fund, which had the secondhighest one-year return and the second-highest return since inception.
The next two most important factors for staff and college control groups were the funds’
investment objectives and the desire to diversify across funds. All S&P 500 index funds have the
same investment objectives, so the high ranking of this factor is puzzling. Given that the four
funds hold approximately the same portfolio, the high ranking of diversification suggests that
subjects are misapplying a diversification heuristic (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001). Consistent with
their reported diversification motive, 49% of the staff control group and 53% of the college
control group allocated some money to all four funds. Of the eleven factors, fund fees, expenses,
and loads were ranked fifth by control staff and eighth by control college students. In light of this
ranking, it seems unlikely that college and staff subjects’ search efforts were primarily directed
towards finding the most relevant information about the funds—their cost.
In contrast, MBA control subjects ranked fees as the most important factor in their
portfolio decision. As noted above, however, their fees are not significantly lower on average
than the college control subjects’ fees. The minimal gain that the MBA controls reaped from
their prioritization of fees suggests that the cost of accurately finding fees in the prospectuses is
relatively high even for MBAs and/or that the false allure of past returns—ranked second and
third by the MBA controls—and other factors is strong enough to offset the benefits of
prioritizing fees.
Providing the fees sheet elevated the importance ranking of fees. In the fees treatment
condition, staff subjects ranked fees as their second-most important factor (versus fifth in the
control condition), and college subjects ranked fees as their most important factor (versus eighth
for the control group). MBAs in both the control and fees treatment conditions ranked fees as
their most important factor, but the cardinal rating of fees in the fees treatment is higher. Staff
subjects receiving the FAQ sheet also increased their relative rating of fees’ importance slightly,
raising their ordinal rank to fourth (versus fifth in the control condition), although the cardinal
rating of fees is lower than in the control condition.

19

The returns sheet similarly elevated the relative ranking of long-horizon past returns for
students. College students in the returns treatment condition ranked returns since inception as
their most important factor (versus second for the control group), downgrading the more sensible
one-year return factor to second place (versus first for the control group). MBAs in the returns
treatment ranked the two past performance factors first and second (versus second and third for
the control group). On the other hand, consistent with the weak effects we saw in Table 3, staff’s
ranking of returns’ importance does not seem to have responded strongly to the returns sheet.
Their ordinal ranking of returns remains the same (first and second) between the two conditions,
and the cardinal ratings are only slightly higher in the returns treatment.
These factor rankings appear to contain real information. Table 5 presents results from a
set of univariate regressions within each subject pool of portfolio fees and long-horizon past
returns on the integer ranking of the eleven factors (each cell has coefficient estimates from a
separate regression). The results must be interpreted with caution because it is not clear that the
rating units are comparable across individuals, nor that the distance between adjacent categories
is always equal. Nonetheless, the regressions indicate that under this coding, those who rated
fees as a more important driver of their decision paid less in fees, whereas those who rated
returns since inception as more important chose portfolios with higher long-horizon historical
returns.
The fees and returns treatment effects are consistent with the summary sheets’ lowering
search costs for subjects who value low fees and high past returns but observe both with
considerable noise when given only prospectuses. When a characteristic is observed with zero
precision, an agent should put no weight on it in her decision; conversely, when the
characteristic’s observational precision increases, the agent will put more weight on the
characteristic, as our subjects who received a summary sheet reported doing. Furthermore,
increased observational precision of a valued characteristic will cause subject portfolios to
contain a higher share of funds with that valued attribute.
Under this interpretation, the returns sheet’s null effect on staff—despite staff in both
control and returns treatment conditions reporting that they placed high weight on the
information contained in the returns sheet—implies that control staff (but not control students)
observed past long-horizon returns relatively precisely. This may be due to the fact that staff
were highly motivated by their large incentives and so expended more effort than students in

20

finding the past returns information. Staff, however, either did not believe that fees were
similarly important or had a hard time finding fees in the prospectuses, so they did not precisely
observe fees despite the high stakes. Hence, the fees sheet had scope to shift staff portfolios
towards lower-cost funds.
The fact that highly motivated investors are able to accurately identify past returns in the
prospectus does not necessarily imply that mutual fund advertising that highlights past returns
has no effect on investment decisions. In the real world, investors must contend with thousands
of mutual funds rather than just four, so even very highly motivated investors are likely to
observe many (most) funds’ past returns imprecisely prior to seeing an advertisement.
The search cost effects of the summary sheets may have been augmented by implicit
advice effects, where subjects inferred that the information on the summary sheet is normatively
important simply because it had been given to them by the experimenters. But if one chooses to
interpret the treatment effects as arising entirely through the implicit advice channel, it is not
obvious why staff heeded the implicit advice of the fees sheet but not the returns sheet.
Finally, the FAQ treatment lowered fees as expected, but did not move subjects close to
the minimum-fee portfolio. This failure may be due to several factors. First, our FAQ answers
may not have been clearly understood. Second, we did not explicitly state that the optimal
portfolio allocated 100% to the lowest-cost fund, since any effect arising from distributing such a
statement would be difficult to interpret in light of the strong experimenter demand effect the
statement would generate. It may have been beyond the capability of most subjects to infer that
cost-minimization is the optimal strategy when picking among mutual funds holding nearly
identical portfolios. Third, the fees may have been too difficult to accurately identify in the
prospectuses, causing subjects to place little weight on them in their portfolio decision. Finally,
subjects may have continued to believe that there is a significant amount of active management
in an index fund, leading to predictable outperformance unrelated to lower fees. Fund companies
may intentionally contribute to this confusion in order to soften price competition (Gabaix and
Laibson, 2006; Gabaix, Laibson, and Li, 2005; Carlin, 2006). For example, the Allegiant fund’s
2006 prospectus states, “However, the Adviser believes that employing certain active
management strategies for a percentage of the Fund’s assets, if successful, will result in net
returns after expenses that may more closely approximate the returns of the S&P 500 Index.”

21

V. Portfolio Choices and Subject Characteristics
In this section, we examine how subject characteristics affected their portfolio choices.
We first consider the impact of basic demographic characteristics. Table 6 regresses portfolio
fees and long-horizon historical returns on treatment, age, gender, and education dummies.
Among staff subjects, we find that women paid higher fees, but there is surprisingly no
relationship between education and fees. If anything, subjects who had only a high school
education or less paid the lowest fees on average. This is because low-education subjects were
more prone to distribute their portfolios evenly among the four investment options instead of
chasing the Phoenix Insight fund’s high past returns. The significant negative coefficient on the
fees treatment dummy in the fees regression indicates that the staff fees treatment effect does not
arise simply because staff who were randomized into the control group were somewhat less
educated than staff who were randomized into the fees treatment group.
Among student subjects, we find that MBAs who are older and female chase past returns
since inception more aggressively. In unreported regressions, we include total SAT scores (math
plus verbal) as a control variable for student subjects, which causes our sample size to drop in
half due to missing score data. We find no significant relationship between SAT scores and fees;
the point estimate indicates that a 100 point rise in combined SAT score is associated with only a
3 basis point decline in fees among MBAs and a 3 basis point rise in fees among college
students.
In addition to the basic demographic characteristics discussed above, the debriefing
survey completed by respondents included questions designed to gauge financial knowledge and
investment confidence. The second, fifth, and eighth columns of Table 7 show the distribution of
responses to the questions about the likelihood of changing one’s decision in response to
professional advice, confidence that one’s decision was optimal, self-assessed investment
knowledge, and the types of investments found in a money market fund. Note that the MBAs
score the highest on investment confidence and both the objective and self-assessed measures of
financial knowledge. Staff subjects have intermediate levels of confidence and knowledge, and
college students score the lowest on these measures.
The third, sixth, and ninth columns of Table 7 display a striking negative relationship
between fees and confidence or knowledge. For example, in all three subject groups, the average
fee increases monotonically with the self-reported likelihood that subjects would change their

22

decision after consulting a professional investment advisor. The subjects who paid the highest
fees themselves doubted that they were making the best portfolio allocation. Fees also generally
fall with the level of confidence or knowledge measured by questions about self-assessed
confidence that the portfolio decision was the right one for the subject, self-assessed investment
knowledge, and the types of investments found in a money market fund. The most notable nonmonotonicities occur among MBAs who consider themselves “very knowledgeable” investors
and college subjects who are “very confident” about their portfolio decision; these extremely
confident subjects paid higher fees than many of their less confident peers, but represent a small
fraction of their respective samples (6% of MBA and 5% of college subjects). Staff who were
“not at all confident” about their decision paid lower fees than “somewhat confident” and “less
than confident” staff (due to the tendency of the least confident staff to distribute their
allocations more evenly across funds than their slightly more confident peers), but this group too
represents only a small fraction (7%) of the staff sample.
In unreported regressions, we find that the negative relationship between financial
knowledge/confidence and fees is generally present even after controlling for gender, education,
and experimental treatment.18 Therefore, responses to these survey questions are useful for
predicting portfolio choice quality beyond what demographics and information conditions can
tell us.
VI. Small Cap Value Fund Experiment
Because most mutual funds are actively managed, we ran a similar experiment in Spring
2004 using four actively-managed small cap value funds in the investment menu.19 The subjects
in this experiment were 36 law, MBA, and undergraduate students enrolled in a class at the
University of Pennsylvania. Table 8 describes the four mutual funds in this experiment: the
American Express Small Cap Value Fund, the Columbia Small Cap Value Fund, the Morgan
Stanley Small-Mid Special Value Fund, and the Scudder Small Company Value Fund. All four
funds charged front-end loads for their Class A shares, which were the share classes made
18

The self-reported confidence and knowledge variables are assigned an integer from 1 to 3 or 1 to 5 in the
regressions. For Harvard staff, self-assessed investment knowledge, confidence, and likelihood to change one’s
decision are significant. For MBAs, knowledge of money market fund investments and likelihood to change one’s
decision are significant. For college students, self-assessed investment knowledge and confidence are significant,
and likelihood to change one’s decision has a p-value of 0.13.
19
Chronologically, this experiment was run before the index fund experiment.

23

available to subjects. Total fees for a one-year $10,000 investment ranged from $664 for the
Morgan Stanley fund to $746 for the Scudder fund. We did not attempt to create a positive
correlation between past returns and fees in this experiment. In fact, the correlation between past
one-year returns and fees is –0.73, so returns-chasing tended to lower portfolio fees.
As in the index fund experiment, no formal time constraints were placed on the subjects,
and one subject was randomly chosen to receive any profit his or her portfolio realized in the
ensuing year. In contrast to the index fund experiment, this experiment had no returns or FAQ
treatment conditions.
Even though the normative ranking of funds in the active-management universe is not as
clear as in the passive-management universe, it appears that making fee information salient has a
similar effect on investor choices in both realms. This suggests that subjects in the control
condition may not be optimally using fee information to make their choices. Table 9 shows the
mean portfolio fee (load plus expense ratio) paid by subjects in the control and fees treatment
conditions. In the control condition, the average fee is $720. This is exactly equal to the fee
subjects would have paid if they had randomly chosen portfolios and is much higher than the
$664 fee they would have paid if they had allocated all $10,000 to the lowest cost fund, Morgan
Stanley. Those in the fees treatment group chose portfolios with lower fees ($705), but this is
still much higher than the minimum possible fee. The difference relative to the control group,
$15, is significant at the 10% level. Given possible differences in expected returns across these
actively managed funds, it is more difficult to say whether paying these higher fees in the
treatment condition was rational.
Figure 3 shows the mean portfolio share invested in each fund for the control and fees
treatment groups. In the control group, the lowest cost fund (Morgan Stanley) accounts for 25%
of total assets, whereas the highest cost fund (Scudder) accounts for 24% of total assets. Relative
to the control group, participants in the fees treatment group allocated 19 percentage points more
to the lowest-cost fund and 9 percentage points less to the highest-cost fund. Figure 4 shows the
distribution of total fees in the control and fees treatment group portfolios. As expected given the
results in Figure 3, the fee distribution shifts to the left for the fees treatment group. Table 10
shows that both groups reported in their debriefing forms that past fund performance over a
longer horizon than one year was the most important factor in their portfolio choice. However,
treatment subjects ranked expense ratios as the third most important factor in their decision,

24

whereas control subjects ranked expense ratios a distant eighth. No other questions were asked
on the debriefing form of this experiment.
VII. Conclusion
When consumers in a commodity market observe prices and quality with noise, a high
degree of competition will not drive markups to zero (Gabaix, Laibson, and Li, 2005; Carlin,
2006). In this paper, we present an experiment that suggests investors exhibit confusion about the
mutual fund market.
In our experiment’s control condition, subjects reviewed four S&P 500 index fund
prospectuses and allocated $10,000 across those funds. Subjects’ expected payments depended
on their subsequent portfolio performance. Because payments were made by the experimenters,
investment company services like financial advice were unbundled from portfolio returns.
Despite this unbundling, subjects overwhelmingly failed to minimize index fund fees. Even
subjects who claimed to understand the importance of fees nevertheless showed minimal
sensitivity to the fee information in the prospectus.
In one treatment condition, we made fee information transparent and salient. This
reduced allocations to high-cost funds, but investors still overwhelmingly did not minimize index
fund fees. These results imply that many investors do not understand the importance of mutual
fund fees. Subjects based their choices on other normatively irrelevant mutual fund attributes—
long-horizon past returns, in particular. Explaining to subjects that all S&P 500 index funds try
to make their pre-fee returns equal the S&P 500 Index return had only a small effect on portfolio
fees paid.
Our subjects demonstrated a low absolute level of financial sophistication, including
those who were enrolled in an elite MBA program. However, our subjects are significantly more
sophisticated than the typical American household that is contributing to a retirement account. It
is likely that some investors—particularly high net worth investors—have managed to overtake
the literacy of Wharton MBA students. Hence, asset markets may be efficient on a dollarweighted basis. But welfare calculations, which are affected by asset management fees, are
weighted by person, not by net worth.
Policymakers commonly regulate the form of price disclosure. For example, most U.S.
states have unit pricing laws that require grocery stores to show customers the price-per-unit-

25

weight or the price-per-unit-volume to facilitate comparisons across products. In a similar vein,
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulates mutual fund prospectuses to facilitate
comparisons across funds. Our results indicate, however, that current regulations may not be
achieving their intended result. First, mutual fund investors may not see the fees, which are now
published inside a long prospectus.20 Second, even investors who do see the fees may not know
how to use them in forming their portfolios. Unfortunately, new transparency regulations may
have effects that are small and short-lived. Asset-management companies may respond to new
regulations by shrouding their fees in other ways, such as through soft-dollar arrangements with
their brokers.21
Our results also suggest that developing reliable ways of eliciting agents’ confidence in
their own actions may prove to be a fruitful way of identifying areas in which optimization errors
play an economically important role. We show that subjects who pay higher fees tend to be less
sure that they are maximizing their own utility. Students taking a math exam can roughly predict
whether they got an answer right at the time they write down their answer. Economic agents may
also know when they are likely to have made an error in a utility maximization problem.
Unfortunately, having a sense that your choice is wrong does not necessarily tell you how to fix
it.

20

The SEC has recently proposed a simplified prospectus template that is shorter than traditional prospectuses.
Another set of randomized experiments (Beshears et al., 2008) studies the impact of this simplified/shortened SEC
disclosure form. The simplified disclosure has at best a modest effect on portfolio choice.
21
In a soft-dollar agreement, a mutual fund will overpay its broker for trades in exchange for a return transfer of
resources, like research services. We thank Gideon Saar for bringing this issue to our attention.

26

References
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005. “Out of Sight, Out of Mind: The Effects
of Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows.” Forthcoming in Journal of Business.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2001. “Naive Diversification Strategies in Retirement
Saving Plans.” American Economic Review 91, pp. 79-98.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2008. “Improving
Disclosure.” Harvard mimeo.
Carhart, Mark, 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Finance 52, pp.
57-82.
Carlin, Bruce I., 2006. “Strategic Price Complexity in Retail Financial Markets.” University of
California Los Angeles mimeo.
Chevalier, Judith and Glen Ellison, 1997. “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 105, pp. 1167-1200.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2007. “Are Empowerment and
Education Enough? Underdiversification in 401(k) Plans.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2005(2), pp. 151-198.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2007. “Reinforcement
Learning and Investor Behavior.” NBER Working Paper 10454.
Christoffersen, Susan E. K., 2001. “Why Do Money Fund Managers Voluntarily Waive Their
Fees?” Journal of Finance 56, pp. 1117-1140.
Collins, Sean, 2005. “Are S&P 500 Index Mutual Funds Commodities?” Investment Company
Institute Perspective 11(3).
Cronqvist, Henrik, 2004. “Advertising and Portfolio Choice.” Ohio State University Working
Paper.
Cronqvist, Henrik and Richard Thaler 2004. “Design Choices in Privatized Social Security
Systems: Learning from the Swedish Experience,” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings 94, pp. 424-428.
Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, and Jeffrey Busse, 2004. “Are Investors Rational: Choices Among
Index Funds,” Journal of Finance 59, pp. 261-288.
Ericson, Keith Marzilli, 2005. “Forecasts of Prospective Memory: Are They Unbiased?”
National Bureau of Economic Research mimeo.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson, 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, pp.
505-540.
27

Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, and Hongyi Li, 2005. “Extreme Value Theory and the Effects of
Competition on Profits.” Harvard University mimeo.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996. “Another Puzzle: The Growth in Actively Managed Mutual Funds.”
Journal of Finance 51, pp. 783-810.
Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993. “Hot Hands in Mutual Funds:
Short-Run Persistence in Relative Performance.” Journal of Finance 48, pp. 93-130.
Hortaçsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson, 2004. “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, pp. 403-456.
Ippolito, Richard A., 1992. “Consumer Reaction to Measures of Poor Quality: Evidence from the
Mutual Fund Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics 35, pp. 45-70.
Jain, Prem C., and Johanna Shuang Wu, 2000. “Truth in Mutual Fund Advertising: Evidence on
Future Performance and Fund Flows.” Journal of Finance 55, pp. 937-958.
John Hancock Financial Services, 2002. “Insight into Participant Investment Knowledge &
Behavior: Eighth Defined Contribution Plan Survey.” Boston, MA: John Hancock Financial
Services.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Andrei Shleifer, 2005, “Persuasion in Finance.” NBER Working
Paper 11838.
Sapp, Travis, and Ashish Tiwari, 2004. “Does Stock Return Momentum Explain the ‘Smart
Money’ Effect?” Journal of Finance 59, pp. 2605-2622.
Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998. “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows.” Journal of
Finance 53, pp. 1589-1622.
Zheng, Lu, 1999. “Is Money Smart? A Study of Mutual Fund Investors’ Fund Selection Ability.”
Journal of Finance 54, pp. 901-933.

28

Appendix A. Staff Investment Choice Sheet
Subject number: ____________
Please allocate $10,000 among the S&P 500 index funds listed below. You may choose to allocate all
$10,000 to one fund or allocate your investment evenly or unevenly across as many funds as you like.
We will calculate how much money a real investor would get back if he or she sent $10,000 to the funds
below according to the allocation that you choose, assuming that each fund received the investment at
3:00 P.M. on August 31, 2007, and the investments were sold at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, September 28,
2007 (the last business day of September). If the investment is worth more than $10,000 at the end of
September 28, 2007, we will pay you the investment profit (the investment value minus $10,000). If the
investment is worth less than $10,000 at the end of the period, you will not be responsible for these
losses. This is a risk-free opportunity to win a potentially large reward.
PAYOFF CALCULATION EXAMPLES
Example #1: Suppose selling your hypothetical investment on September 28, 2007 would give you
$11,000. Then we would pay you $1,000, the difference between your original investment and your final
investment value at the end of September (in addition to the $10 participation payment you will receive
today).
Example #2: Suppose selling your hypothetical investment on September 28, 2007 would give you
$8,500. Since your final account balance is less than $10,000, you would not be paid for your
investment (but you would still keep the $10 participation payment you will receive today).

Below is the menu of S&P 500 index funds from which you may choose.
• Write the dollar amount you would like to allocate to each fund in the last column
• You may invest in as many or as few funds as you choose
• Please be careful to allocate a total of exactly $10,000
• If you put money in a fund, that amount must satisfy the minimum opening
allocation requirement
Mutual Fund

Symbol

Minimum Opening Allocation
Your Allocation in Dollars
if Buying Shares in Fund
(column must sum to $10,000)

Allegiant S&P 500 Index
Fund - Class A

AEXAX

$500

Morgan Stanley S&P 500
Index Fund - Class A

SPIAX

$1,000

Phoenix Insight Index Fund
- Class A

HIDAX

$500

UBS S&P 500 Index Fund Class A

PSPIX

$1,000

Æ The prospectuses for these 4 funds are attached Å
Any portfolio allocations which violate minimum opening allocation requirements or
which fail to total $10,000 will be ineligible for the investment payout.

Appendix B. Staff Fees Summary Sheet
FEE INFORMATION
• Mutual funds charge fees to investors.
• Some mutual funds charge a one-time fee when you purchase shares. This fee is called a frontend load and is a fixed percent of your purchase amount.
• Mutual funds also charge an ongoing fee that is a predetermined fraction of the fund balance.
Over the course of one year, the total ongoing fee approximately equals:
(Your average fund balance) × (The fund’s expense ratio)
• Other fees may apply. Please check the fund’s prospectus for more details.

TABLE OF FEES

Mutual fund

Symbol

Front-end load

Front-end load fee if
you purchase $10,000
worth of shares

Expense ratio

Approximate annual
ongoing fee if your
average balance is
$10,000

Allegiant S&P 500
Index Fund - Class A

AEXAX

2.50%

$250

0.60%

$60

Morgan Stanley S&P
500 Index Fund
- Class A

SPIAX

5.25%

$525

0.64%

$64

Phoenix Insight Index
Fund - Class A

HIDAX

5.75%

$575

0.73%

$73

UBS S&P 500 Index
Fund - Class A

PSPIX

2.50%

$250

0.70%

$70

Front-end load example
If you purchase $10,000 worth of shares in a
fund and the front-end load is 2.5%, then you
would pay
$10,000 × 2.5% = $250
in load fees at the time of purchase.

Expense ratio example
If the average balance is $10,000 and the
expense ratio is 0.60%, then an investor
would pay approximately
$10,000 × 0.60% = $60
in ongoing fees over the course of one year.

Appendix C. Staff Returns Summary Sheet
RETURN INFORMATION

Mutual Fund

Symbol

Average Annual Return
(During Longest Time Period
Reported in Fund’s Prospectus)1

Allegiant S&P 500 Index Fund - Class A

AEXAX

3.1% 2

Morgan Stanley S&P 500 Index Fund Class A

SPIAX

3.6% 3

Phoenix Insight Index Fund - Class A

HIDAX

7.3% 4

UBS S&P 500 Index Fund - Class A

PSPIX

3.8% 5

1

Includes the effect of fees, expenses, and sales loads, but not taxes.
10/15/1998 – 12/31/2005
3
09/26/1997 – 12/31/2005
4
01/01/1997 – 12/31/2006
5
10/02/1998 – 12/31/2005
2

Past performance is no guarantee of future results.

Appendix D. Staff FAQ Sheet

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS (FAQs)
QUESTION 1: What is a mutual fund?
Answer: A mutual fund invests money on your behalf.
Any money you give a mutual fund to manage will earn the same
percent return as the investments the mutual fund holds, minus the
fees the mutual fund charges you for its services.
QUESTION 2: What is an S&P 500 index fund?
Answer: An S&P 500 index fund is a mutual fund that tries to
make its pre-fee investment return approximate the S&P 500
Index’s investment return.
QUESTION 3: What is the S&P 500 Index?
Answer: The S&P 500 Index measures the total stock market value
of 500 of the largest U.S. companies. It is one of the most widely
used stock market indexes in the world.
The investment return of the S&P 500 Index is the percent change
over time in the total stock market value of these 500 companies.

Appendix E. Staff Debriefing Questionnaire
Please complete this short questionnaire and return it to be eligible for receiving payment.
1.

Age:

______________

2.

Gender (please circle):

3.

What is the highest level of education listed that you have completed? (Check only one.)

Male / Female

Some high school
High school graduate
First year of college
Second year of college
Third year of college
College graduate
4.

In the previous task, you were asked to allocate $10,000 among four different mutual
funds. How important were the following factors in shaping your final investment
decision? (Please check the appropriate boxes.)
Not
important
at all

A. Quality of prospectus
B. Brand recognition
C. Past experience with fund companies
D. Fund fees, expenses, and loads
E. Minimum opening balance
requirements
F. Investment objectives
G. Fund performance over the past year
H. Fund performance since inception
I.

Fund performance over a different
horizon

J.

Customer service of fund

K. Desire to diversify across funds
L. Other: _________________________

Only
slightly
important

Somewhat
important

Quite
important

Very
important

5.

How likely is it that you would change your decision if you consulted a professional
investment advisor? (Please check only one box.)
Very likely
Somewhat likely
Not likely

6.

Did you look at the funds’ prospectuses to help you make your decision?
Yes
No

7.

If so, for how long?

Approximately ___________ minutes

How confident are you that the decision you made is the right one for you? (Please check
only one box.)
Very confident
Relatively confident
Somewhat confident
Less than confident
Not at all confident

8.

How knowledgeable an investor do you consider yourself to be? (Please check only one
box.)
Very knowledgeable
Relatively knowledgeable
Somewhat knowledgeable
Less than knowledgeable
Not at all knowledgeable

9.

Please rate each of the following investments’ riskiness on a scale of 1 to 5.
(1 indicates “no risk” and 5 indicates “very high risk.” Circle the appropriate number.)
(a) A large U.S. stock mutual fund
(b) A savings account at your bank
(c) U.S. corporate bonds
(d) Stable value/money market fund
(e) Stock of a typical Fortune 500 company
(f) An international stock mutual fund
(g) An emerging markets stock mutual fund

No risk
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Very high risk
4 5
4 5
4 5
4 5
4 5
4 5
4 5

Don’t know
Don’t know
Don’t know
Don’t know
Don’t know
Don’t know
Don’t know

10.

What return do you expect the following asset types to earn annually, on average, during
the next five years? (Please give your best guess. If you expect an asset type to lose
money on average, write a negative number.)
U.S. stocks
_____%
U.S. corporate bonds _____%
Money market funds _____%
Stable value funds
_____%

11.

Which of the following types of investments are found in a money market fund? (You
may check more than one type.)
Short-term U.S. government bonds
Corporate bonds
Stocks
None of the above

Table 1. Characteristics of Index Funds Used in Experiment
This table shows information on the mutual funds used in the index fund experiment, taken from the most up-to-date prospectuses
available at the time of the experimental sessions. The approximate fee on a $10,000 investment is calculated for the investment
horizon of the experiment: one month for the Harvard staff members, and one year for the Wharton MBA and Harvard College
students.
Mutual fund
and share class

Ticker
symbol

Inception
date

Minimum
opening
balance

Expense
ratioa

Front-end
load

Approximate
fee on $10K
investment

Longesthorizon return
in prospectusb

Panel A: Wharton MBA and Harvard College experiment (2005)
Allegiant S&P 500 Index
Fund – Class A

AEXAX

11/15/1998

$500

0.59%

2.50%

$309

1.28%c

Mason Street Index 500
Stock Fund – Class A

MISAX

3/31/1997

$1,000

0.80%

4.75%

$555

5.90%c

Morgan Stanley S&P 500
Index Fund – Class A

SPIAX

9/26/1997

$1,000

0.64%

5.25%

$589

2.54%c

UBS S&P 500 Index
Fund – Class A

PSPIX

10/2/1998

$1,000

0.70%

2.50%

$320

2.54%c

Panel B: Harvard staff experiment (2007)

a

Allegiant S&P 500 Index
Fund – Class A

AEXAX

10/15/1998

$500

0.60%

2.50%

$255

3.08%c

Morgan Stanley S&P 500
Index Fund – Class A

SPIAX

9/26/1997

$1,000

0.64%

5.25%

$530

3.64%c

Phoenix Insight Index
Fund – Class A

HIDAX

4/19/1996

$500

0.73%

5.75%

$581

7.34%d

UBS S&P 500 Index
Fund – Class A

PSPIX

10/2/1998

$1,000

0.70%

2.50%

$356e

3.80%c

After fee waivers
Annualized and after fees, expenses, and sales loads, but before taxes
c
Return since fund inception
d
10-year return
e
Includes 1% early redemption fee
b

Table 2. Experimental Subject Characteristics
This table shows the characteristics of the subjects in each experimental condition. Some fields are blank because certain questions were
not asked of all subjects. SAT scores for subjects 27 or more years old are adjusted upward to reflect the April 1995 recentering of SAT
scores. See http://www.collegeboard.com/sat/cbsenior/equiv/rt027027.html for the conversion table. Some statistics are calculated with
slightly smaller sample sizes than reported in the last row, due to non-response.
MBA students

Harvard staff

Average age
Percent male
Highest education
High school or less
Some college
College degree
Some graduate school
Graduate degree
SAT I score
Average verbal
Average math
Did not take SAT
Do not remember or
do not wish to answer
Knows what a money
market fund holds
Average risk rating
(1 to 5; higher = riskier)
Fortune 500 stock
U.S. equity mutual
fund
Avg. self-reported minutes
reading prospectus
Sample size

College students

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

FAQ
treatment

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

41.1
37%

39.4
29%

41.5
35%

40.4
37%

27.7
63%

27.4
66%

27.4
70%

21.0
50%

22.0
48%

21.0
63%

3%
9%
30%
19%
39%

0%
11%
22%
15%
52%

5%
8%
28%
20%
38%

1%
9%
34%
19%
37%

1%
1%
98%
---

0%
0%
100%
---

0%
0%
100%
---

7%
83%
10%
---

10%
76%
14%
---

8%
74%
19%
---

-----

-----

-----

-----

714
730
30%
23%

717
741
35%
15%

719
737
33%
14%

759
752
20%
7%

760
752
17%
10%

741
730
11%
11%

28%

19%

22%

18%

33%

42%

44%

14%

17%

14%

3.34
3.12

3.49
2.98

3.59
3.16

3.58
3.14

3.02
2.68

3.36
2.98

3.28
2.74

3.57
2.70

3.14
2.43

2.79
2.25

13.3

13.4

14.3

14.4

13.6

11.1

10.7

11.2

8.4

8.5

N = 97

N = 97

N = 100

N = 97

N = 83

N = 85

N = 84

N = 30

N = 29

N = 28

Table 3. Average Portfolio Fees and Historical Returns
The top half of the table gives the average (weighted by dollar allocation) fees and historical returns of the funds chosen by each
experimental group. For staff, the historical return is the longest-horizon annualized return reported in the fund’s prospectus. For
students, the historical return is the annualized return since fund inception. The bottom half of the table reports two-sided p-values of t
tests for the equality of mean fees and historical returns, allowing for each group to have a different variance. The null hypothesis is
listed in the first column, and each subsequent column corresponds to a different subject population and variable whose equality is
being tested. For example, the second column in the row containing “Control = fees treatment” reports the p-value for the test that the
control Harvard staff subjects paid the same average fee as the Harvard staff subjects in the fees treatment group.
Harvard staff
Average longAverage
horizon past
fees
return

MBA students
Average
Average
returns since
fees
inception

College students
Average
Average
returns since
fees
inception

Control group

$456

4.96%

$421

3.06%

$431

2.86%

Fees treatment group

$432

4.80%

$366

2.30%

$410

2.61%

Returns treatment group

$450

4.90%

$440

3.53%

$486

4.03%

FAQ treatment group

$441

4.82%

--

--

--

--

Control = fees treatment

0.045

0.346

0.000

0.000

0.290

0.152

Control = returns treatment

0.612

0.690

0.164

0.012

0.002

0.000

Control = FAQ treatment

0.186

0.402

--

--

--

--

Fees treatment = returns treatment

0.109

0.538

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Fees treatment = FAQ treatment

0.454

0.926

--

--

--

--

Two-sided p-values from t tests of
equality of means (unequal variances)

Table 4. Importance of Various Factors in Subjects’ Investment Decision
Each cell reports the average importance the factor had on the relevant subsample’s investment decision, as elicited in the debriefing
surveys. There were five possible responses, from “not important at all” to “very important.” We assigned integers 1 through 5 to each
possible response, with higher integers corresponding to greater importance. Each factor’s ordinal rank for the relevant subsample is in
parentheses, with lower integers corresponding to greater ordinal importance. The last row lists the greatest number of observations used
to calculate each column’s average ratings; some factors’ average ratings use slightly fewer observations due to non-response.
Harvard staff

MBA students

College students

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

FAQ
treatment

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

Control
group

Fees
treatment

Returns
treatment

Quality of prospectus

2.61 (7)

2.80 (6)

2.65 (7)

2.65 (7)

2.27 (9)

2.46 (9)

2.65 (8)

2.75 (5)

2.93 (4)

2.96 (5)

Brand recognition

2.36 (8)

2.32 (8)

2.36 (8)

2.29 (8)

2.75 (6)

2.77 (6)

2.75 (7)

2.63 (7)

2.79 (5)

3.00 (4)

Past experience with
fund companies

2.20 (9)

2.15 (9)

2.25 (9)

1.96 (9)

2.39 (8)

2.74 (7)

2.57 (9)

1.43 (11)

2.11 (9)

2.26 (8)

Fund fees, expenses,
and loads

3.05 (5)

3.41 (2)

2.92 (5)

2.94 (4)

3.72 (1)

4.19 (1)

3.53 (3)

2.59 (8)

3.39 (1)

2.54 (7)

Minimum opening
balance requirements

1.96 (11)

2.10 (10)

1.86 (11)

1.89 (10)

1.77 (11)

2.07 (11)

1.80 (11)

1.60 (10)

1.97 (10)

1.68 (11)

Investment objectives

3.18 (3)

3.39 (4)

3.08 (4)

3.23 (3)

3.24 (4)

3.52 (4)

3.41 (4)

3.00 (4)

2.76 (6)

2.79 (6)

Fund performance
over the past year

3.57 (1)

3.88 (1)

3.58 (1)

3.52 (1)

3.54 (2)

3.73 (2)

3.78 (1)

4.17 (1)

3.17 (2)

3.54 (2)

Fund performance
since inception

3.40 (2)

3.40 (3)

3.45 (2)

3.30 (2)

3.45 (3)

3.63 (3)

3.72 (2)

3.87 (2)

2.97 (3)

3.86 (1)

Fund performance
over different horizon

2.89 (6)

2.63 (7)

2.73 (6)

2.68 (6)

2.67 (7)

3.16 (5)

2.88 (5)

2.72 (6)

2.18 (8)

2.22 (9)

Customer service of
fund

2.02 (10)

2.06 (11)

1.94 (10)

1.85 (11)

1.87 (10)

2.17 (10)

1.90 (10)

1.97 (9)

1.93 (11)

1.82 (10)

Desire to diversify
across funds

3.07 (4)

2.81 (5)

3.18 (3)

2.75 (5)

2.89 (5)

2.73 (8)

2.78 (6)

3.33 (3)

2.76 (6)

3.39 (3)

Sample size

N = 97

N = 97

N = 100

N = 96

N = 83

N = 84

N = 83

N = 30

N = 29

N = 28

Table 5. Effect of Factor Importance Ranking on Portfolio Fees and Historical Returns
Each cell reports the slope coefficient from a univariate regression of subjects’ portfolio fees or
average fund historical returns (dollar-weighted) on subjects’ ratings of each factor’s importance
in shaping their investment decision. For staff, the historical return is the longest-horizon
annualized return reported in the fund’s prospectus. For students, the historical return is the
annualized return since fund inception. The explanatory variables are coded as integers from 1 to
5, where 1 corresponds to the response “not at all important” and 5 to the response “very
important.” The last row lists the greatest number of observations used in each column’s
regressions; some regressions use slightly fewer observations due to non-response. Standard
errors are in parentheses.
Harvard staff

MBA students

College students

Portfolio
fees

Longhorizon past
return

Portfolio
fees

Returns
since
inception

Quality of prospectus

8.53*
(3.55)

0.046
(0.052)

9.27
(4.98)

0.071
(0.069)

-1.26
(6.66)

-0.083
(0.089)

Brand recognition

-3.03
(3.78)

-0.233**
(0.053)

10.45*
(4.39)

-0.025
(0.061)

13.10*
(6.39)

0.033
(0.086)

Past experience with
fund companies

-2.57
(3.29)

-0.085
(0.047)

5.98
(4.11)

0.049
(0.057)

12.46*
(6.12)

0.136
(0.082)

-16.95**
(5.81)

-0.152
(0.079)

Fund fees, expenses, and
loads

-17.33**
(2.80)

-0.188**
(0.041)

-22.21**
(4.17)

-0.283**
(0.058)

Portfolio
fees

Returns
since
inception

Minimum opening
balance requirement

-0.41
(3.82)

-0.051
(0.055)

-3.22
(5.41)

-0.113
(0.074)

-0.67
(7.56)

-0.021
(0.099)

Investment objectives

2.07
(3.32)

0.024
(0.048)

0.53
(3.86)

0.039
(0.053)

-5.68
(5.92)

-0.122
(0.077)

Fund performance over
the past year

18.16**
(3.22)

0.328**
(0.045)

3.28
(4.19)

0.077
(0.057)

-4.94
(6.77)

0.008
(0.089)

Fund performance since
inception

15.70**
(3.02)

0.188**
(0.044)

6.55
(3.98)

0.132*
(0.055)

-0.54
(5.85)

0.139
(0.075)

Fund performance over a
different horizon

9.91**
(3.03)

0.110*
(0.044)

-1.43
(4.09)

-0.006
(0.056)

2.86
(6.32)

0.000
(0.084)

Customer service of
fund

1.85
(3.75)

-0.048
(0.054)

8.44
(5.31)

0.024
(0.073)

-0.84
(7.60)

-0.132
(0.098)

Desire to diversify
across funds

3.88
(2.96)

-0.006
(0.042)

13.52**
(3.81)

0.060
(0.054)

9.93
(5.97)

0.029
(0.079)

Sample size

N = 385

N = 250

N = 250

N = 87

N = 385

* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.

N = 87

Table 6. Demographic Correlates of Portfolio Fees and Historical Returns
This table reports regressions where the dependent variable is portfolio fee or average fund
historical returns (dollar-weighted). For staff, the historical return is the longest-horizon
annualized return reported in the fund’s prospectus. For students, the historical return is the
annualized return since fund inception. Fees treatment, Returns treatment, and FAQ treatment
are dummies for being in the fees treatment group, returns treatment group, and FAQ treatment
group, respectively. Female is a dummy for female gender. High school or less, Some college,
College degree, Some graduate school, and Graduate degree are dummies for the highest
educational attainment reported by subjects. The regressions were run without a constant term
and with a full set of applicable education dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Harvard staff
Portfolio
fees

Longhorizon
past return

MBA students
Portfolio
fees

Returns
since
inception

College students
Portfolio
fees

Returns
since
inception

Fees treatment

-26.90*
(11.51)

-0.189
(0.166)

-51.46**
(12.69)

-0.699**
(0.166)

-20.72
(18.04)

-0.234
(0.204)

Returns treatment

-7.13
(11.32)

-0.086
(0.164)

23.04
(12.75)

0.554**
(0.167)

59.75**
(18.30)

1.214**
(0.207)

FAQ treatment

-16.65
(11.41)

-0.180
(0.165)

--

Age

0.06
(0.35)

0.001
(0.005)

3.58
(2.63)

0.081*
(0.034)

-1.84
(1.89)

0.013
(0.021)

Female

25.95**
(8.58)

0.164
(0.124)

18.39
(11.17)

0.317*
(0.146)

11.04
(15.27)

-0.031
(0.173)

High school or less

412.4**
(32.15)

4.124**
(0.465)

461.85**
(106.21)

3.796**
(1.387)

351.81**
(44.47)

2.400**
(0.504)

Some college

441.63**
(22.82)

4.608**
(0.330)

302.85**
(106.56)

0.460
(1.391)

392.19**
(43.11)

2.665**
(0.488)

College degree

429.39**
(17.60)

4.703**
(0.255)

370.21**
(53.83)

2.215**
(0.610)

Some graduate school

455.75**
(17.64)

5.125**
(0.255)

Graduate degree

434.94**
(18.30)

4.815**
(0.265)

--

N = 389

N = 389

N = 250

Sample size

-313.21**
(74.36)

* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level

--

-0.668
(0.971)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

N = 250

N = 87

N = 87

Table 7. Portfolio Fees and Historical Returns by Investor Confidence and Knowledge
This table reports the frequency of responses to four debriefing survey questions and the average portfolio fee or average (weighted by
dollar allocation) fund historical returns of those who gave each response.
Harvard staff
Average
Average
Proportion
portfolio
historical
fee
return
of answers

MBA students
Average
Avg. retProportion
portfolio
urns since
fee
inception
of answers

College students
Average
Avg. reProportion
portfolio
turns since
fee
inception
of answers

Q5. How likely is it that you would
change your decision if you
consulted a professional investment
advisor?
Not at all likely
Somewhat likely
Very likely

13%
50%
37%

$456
$513
$519

4.42%
4.94%
4.95%

20%
54%
26%

$389
$409
$424

2.76%
2.96%
3.12%

6%
41%
53%

$395
$435
$453

2.60%
3.00%
3.33%

Q7. How confident are you that the
decision you made is the right one
for you?
Very confident
Relatively confident
Somewhat confident
Less than confident
Not at all confident

8%
28%
39%
19%
7%

$454
$497
$521
$520
$505

4.56%
4.71%
5.01%
4.99%
4.90%

12%
47%
25%
13%
4%

$356
$384
$413
$414
$439

2.64%
2.98%
2.99%
2.89%
3.63%

5%
25%
31%
23%
16%

$443
$420
$441
$458
$458

3.34%
2.91%
3.07%
3.29%
3.43%

Q8. How knowledgeable an investor
do you consider yourself to be?
Very knowledgeable
Relatively knowledgeable
Somewhat knowledgeable
Less than knowledgeable
Not at all knowledgeable

2%
12%
40%
31%
15%

$422
$476
$510
$518
$519

4.37%
4.66%
4.91%
4.90%
5.00%

6%
22%
35%
30%
6%

$427
$397
$408
$409
$450

3.20%
2.89%
2.87%
2.94%
3.68%

1%
10%
24%
28%
37%

$320
$412
$430
$432
$470

2.50%
2.90%
2.95%
3.09%
3.42%

21%

$500

4.94%

40%

$393

2.80%

15%

$442

3.24%

79%

$509

4.85%

60%

$420

3.06%

85%

$445

3.15%

Q11. Which of the following types of
investments are found in a money
market fund?
Correct answer (short-term U.S.
government bonds)
Incorrect answer (corporate
bonds, stocks, none of the above)

Table 8. Small Cap Value Fund Experiment: Fund Characteristics
This table shows information on the mutual funds used in the small cap value fund experiment, taken from the most up-to-date
prospectuses available at the time of the experimental sessions. These prospectuses were published in the second half of 2003 and give
returns information as of year-end 2002.
Frontend load

Approximate fee
on one-year $10K
investment

1-year
historical
returnb

5-year
historical
returnb

Mutual fund
and share class

Ticker
symbol

Minimum
opening
balance

American Express Partners Small
Cap Value Fund – Class A

ASVAX

$2,000

1.60%

5.75%

$735

-19.24%

N/A

Columbia Small Cap Value
Fund – Class A

CSMIX

$1,000

1.59%

5.75%

$734

-12.3%

1.73%

Morgan Stanley Small-Mid
Special Value Fund – Class A

JBJAX

$1,000

1.39%

5.25%

$664

-9.23%c

N/A

Scudder Small Company Value
Fund – Class A

SAAUX

$1,000

1.71%

5.75%

$746

-14.97%

-1.87%

a

Expense
ratioa

As shown in prospectus fee tables. All funds’ expenses are after fee waivers, except for the Columbia fund, whose fee table did not account for the 9 basis point
fee waiver.
b
After fees, expenses, and sales loads, but before taxes
c
For the period May 28, 2002 (fund’s inception date) through April 30, 2003, which is the only period whose return is reported in the prospectus.

Table 9. Small Cap Value Fund Experiment: Average Portfolio Fees
This table reports the average fee on a $10,000 investment paid by the control and fees treatment
groups in the small cap value fund experiment, where the fund fees correspond to those found in
Table 8. In addition, it presents the p-value from a test of the null hypothesis that the mean fee
paid by both groups is equal, allowing for each group to have a different variance.
Control (N = 18)

$720

Fees treatment (N = 18)

$705

Two-sided p-value from t test of
equality of means (unequal variances)
Control = fees treatment

0.0568

Table 10. Small Cap Value Fund Experiment:
Importance of Various Factors in Subjects’ Investment Decision
Each cell reports the average importance the factor had on the relevant subsample’s investment
decision, as elicited in the debriefing surveys. There were five possible responses, from “not
important at all” to “very important.” We assigned integers 1 through 5 to each possible
response, with higher integers corresponding to greater importance. Each factor’s ordinal rank
for the relevant subsample is in parentheses, with lower integers corresponding to greater ordinal
importance. Some factors’ ratings are calculated based on slightly fewer observations due to nonresponse.
Control

Fee treatment

Quality of prospectus

2.17 (7)

2.94 (8)

Brand recognition

2.78 (4)

3.31 (4)

Past experience with fund companies

1.61 (11)

2.75 (9)

Expense ratios

2.00 (8)

3.44 (2)

Minimum opening balance requirements

1.83 (10)

2.44 (10)

Investment objectives

2.83 (3)

3.31 (4)

Asset mix of the funds

2.94 (2)

3.13 (6)

Fund performance over the past year

2.78 (4)

3.44 (2)

Fund performance over a longer horizon

3.28 (1)

3.88 (1)

Customer service of fund

1.89 (9)

2.25 (11)

Desire to diversify across funds

2.67 (6)

3.06 (7)

N = 18

N = 18

Sample size

Figure 1. Average Fund Allocations by
Subject Group and Experimental Condition

Fraction of Total Assets

Harvard staff
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

27%
18%

18% 21%

Allegiant
(Total Fees: 2.55%)
Control

38% 35% 36%
34%

29%
25% 25% 28%

19%

UBS
(Total Fees: 3.56%)
Fees treatment

14%

18% 17%

Morgan Stanley
(Total Fees: 5.30%)

Returns treatment

Phoenix Insight
(Total Fees: 5.81%)
FAQ treatment

MBA students
Fraction of Total Assets

60%
50%

43%

40% 37% 38%

40%
30%

35%
23%

19%

20%

12%

18%

15%

9%

11%

Mason Street
(Total Fees: 5.55%)

Morgan Stanley
(Total Fees: 5.89%)

10%
0%

Allegiant
(Total Fees: 3.09%)

UBS
(Total Fees: 3.20%)

Control

Fees treatment

Returns treatment

Fraction of Total Assets

College students
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

48%
37%
30%

33%
23%

19%

27%
17%

9%

Allegiant
(Total Fees: 3.09%)

Control

UBS
(Total Fees: 3.20%)

Mason Street
(Total Fees: 5.55%)

Fees treatment

23% 20%

14%

Morgan Stanley
(Total Fees: 5.89%)

Returns treatment

Figure 2. Histogram of Fees Paid by Subject Group and
Experimental Condition

Fraction of subjects in
condition

Harvard staff
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
$255

$256-$310

$310-$364

$364-$419

$419-$473

$473-$528

$528-$582

Total Fees Paid ($)

Control

Fees treatment

Returns treatment

FAQ treatment

Fraction of subjects in
condition

MBA students
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
$309

$310-$357

$357-$403

$403-$450

$450-$496

$496-$543

$543-$589

Total Fees Paid ($)

Control

Fee treatment

Return treatment

Fraction of subjects
in condition

College students
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
$309

$310-$357

$357-$403

$403-$450

$450-$496

$496-$543

$543-$589

Total Fees Paid ($)

Control

Fee treatment

Return treatment

Figure 3. Small Cap Value Experiment:
Average Fund Allocations by Experimental Condition
50%
Fraction of total assets

44%

40%
32%

30%

25%

24%
20%

19%

20%

21%
15%

10%
0%
Morgan Stanley
Columbia Small Cap American Express
Small-Mid Special
Value Fund
Partners Small Cap
Value Fund
(Total Fees: 7.34%)
Value Fund
(Total Fees: 6.64%)
(Total Fees: 7.35%)
Control

Scudder Small
Company Value
Fund
(Total Fees: 7.46%)

Fees treatment

Figure 4. Small Cap Value Experiment:
Histogram of Fees Paid by Experimental Condition.

Fraction of subjects

50%

44%
39%

40%

39%

30%
22%

22%

20%
10%

17%

6%

6%

6%
0%

0%
$664

$664-$685

$685-$705

$705-$725

Total fees paid ($)
Control

Fees treatment

$725-$746

