                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   STABILITY FIRST: REFLECTIONS INSPIRED BY OTMAR
                    ISSING’S SUCCESS AT THE ECB’S CHIEF ECONOMIST

                                              Vitor Gaspar
                                             Anil K. Kashyap

                                          Working Paper 12277
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12277


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




Prepared for the ECB Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing. We thank the organizers of the Conference,
Klaus Masuch, Lucrezia Reichlin, Wolfgang Schill and Frank Smets for asking us to write the paper and for
their suggestions and comments. We thank Vítor Constâncio, Lars Jonung and Jeremy Stein for helpful
conversations. We gratefully acknowledge useful comments and suggestions by Marta Abreu, Olivier
Blanchard, Alan Blinder, Steve Cecchetti, Silvia Luz, Huw Pill, David Vestin and Mike Woodford. We are
particularly grateful to Rasmus Pilegard, Tatiana Tekušová, Robert Szemere , Daniel Ryden and Pedro
Próspero Luís for providing us with data we used in section 1. The views expressed in the paper are our own,
and are not necessarily shared by the institutions with which we are affiliated. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Vitor Gaspar and Anil K. Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Stability First: Reflections Inspired by Otmar Issing’s Success as the ECB’s Chief Economist
Vitor Gaspar and Anil K. Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 12277
May 2006
JEL No. E31, E52, E58, E44

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we review Otmar Issing's career as the ECB's inaugural chief economist and we
document many notable successes. We try to infer some general principles that contributed to these
successes and draw some lessons. In doing so, we review the evidence using Woodford’s (2003)
recent revival of the Wicksellian approach to monetary policy making. Suitably interpreted the
baseline model can rationalize Issing’s three guiding principles for successful policymaking. This
baseline model, however, fails to account for the important role that monetary and financial analysis
played in the conduct of policy during Issing’s tenure. We propose an extension of the model to
account for financial developments and show that this extended model substantially improves our
understanding of ECB practice. We conclude by listing six open questions, relevant for the future
of central banking in Europe that Issing may want to consider in case leisure allows.

Vitor Gaspar
Banco de Portugal
148, Rua do Comercio
1101 Lisbon Codex
PORTUGAL
vitor_r_gaspar@bportugal.pt

Anil Kashyap
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagogsb.edu
“It is in the nature of beginning that something new is started which cannot be
expected from what may have happened before. This character of startling
unexpectedness is inherent in all beginnings.”

Hannah Arendt, Human Condition, page 177-178.


“Excellence, then is a state concerned with choice (...) being determined by the right
rule and in the way in which the man of practical wisdom would determine it.”

Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 1106b36-1107a2.


We review Otmar Issing’s service as the inaugural Chief Economist of the European
Central Bank (ECB). During his 8 years in the post he faced many unique challenges.
Many of the hurdles associated with creating a new central bank and launching a new
currency could have been anticipated, but some such as the terrorist attacks in
September 2001 and the Asian Financial crisis in the Fall of 1998 (as the final
preparations for the ECB were underway) could not have been foreseen. We study the
choices that Issing and his colleagues made in confronting these challenges, the
performance of monetary policy over the period and ask if there are any lessons that
can be drawn from this episode.

Early in his tenure Issing revealed his thinking on many of these matters.
Specifically in 1999 he wrote:1

“As a central banker directly involved in monetary policy making, I have been dealing
with uncertainty and its consequences for a large part of my professional life.(...) But
never have I felt the impact of uncertainty as acutely as in the weeks that preceded the
introduction of the euro and the birth of the single monetary policy.(...) when the
Governing Council made its final announcement on the monetary policy strategy and
was getting ready for the Changeover Weekend, the uncertainty was at its peak.
Nothing could be taken for granted, no matter how careful the preparatory work had
been.”

Perhaps because of this awareness Issing designed a monetary policy framework that
accounted for the uncertainties confronting the newly formed central bank. In doing
so, he faced at least six specific challenges. The first has to do with data uncertainty.
Here we may distinguish two different aspects. The creation of the euro area, a new
economic entity, introduced a discontinuity in existing statistical time series.
Historical time series for the euro area exist only since 1999. In order to perform
econometric analysis it is necessary to use synthetic aggregates, based on national
data, before 1999. The other aspect to bear in mind relates to the fact that, at the start,
the timeliness and scope of information was below the standard, normally available to
the central bank of an industrialized country.


1
 Otmar Issing, Monetary Policy of the ECB in a World of Uncertainty, Address to the ECB
Conference Monetary Policy Making under Uncertainty, December 1999.


                                                                                          1
Secondly, the creation of the ECB and the start of the single monetary policy could be
expected to induce a structural break a la Lucas (1976). Interestingly the available
evidence suggests that, probably because of the gradual convergence process prior to
monetary unification, no discontinuity took place.

Thirdly, the introduction of the euro is a catalyst for structural change leading to
deeper trade and financial integration. Changing patterns of integration, in turn, affect
the linkages across euro area economies. Already in 1999, Wim Duisenberg, the first
President of the ECB, underlined the importance of obtaining better knowledge about
the structure and functioning of the euro area economy and, in particular, of the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. For policymakers this meant that they
needed to account for both parameter uncertainty and model uncertainty.

Fourth, the ECB as a new institution, had to start operating without the benefit from a
track record. Blinder (1999), in his book, portrays central bankers as obsessed with
credibility. There are excellent reasons for such obsession. When inflation
expectations become unhinged, inflation dynamics become unstable with inflation
literally feeding on itself. The experience of the Great Inflation testifies how
economic performance is affected and how long it takes to re-establish price stability.

Fifth, as stressed above, the creation of a new central bank, responsible for the
conduct of monetary policy in a new economic entity the euro area is an event of
historical magnitude, in the context of European integration. It is a major defining
moment of constitutional relevance. Nevertheless, many issues of governance,
political legitimacy and political accountability remain open, potentially affecting the
position of central bank in the political realm.

Finally, a source of immediate concern, in the early days of the ECB, related to some
specific difficulties associated with the transition process. Obstfeld (1998) refers to
both the fixing of the conversion rates of national currencies to euro and the start of
operations of the European large value payment system (TARGET), an essential
ingredient for a smooth transition to the new Eurosystem’s operational framework for
the implementation of monetary policy.

Against this backdrop, and the ECB’s mandate to deliver price stability, over the
medium term, we evaluate the policy strategy that the ECB adopted. We argue that it
has worked surprisingly smoothly and surprisingly well. Issing is at the root of this
outstanding performance. This explains the quote from Aristotle in epigraph to this
paper. According to Aristotle, practical deliberation, meaning, for our purposes
policy-making, can never be fully scientific. There must always be an element of art,
associated with the ability to grasp the relevant particulars. Decisions are always made
in concrete, individual, historical context. However, this is not the aspect we will want
to highlight. Instead, we want to recall that also, according to Aristotle, the standard
of excellence in decision-making is the man of practical wisdom. In other words, it is
the successful policy-maker.

Thus, according with Aristotle’s viewpoint, we ask, in this paper, whether the ECB’s
success under Issing happened as predicted by a variant of the New Keynesian model
(clearly derived and systematically explored in Woodford 2003). We offer this model
not because it necessarily characterizes Issing’s views of the structure of the economy


                                                                                       2
or the monetary transmission mechanism, but rather because it has become the
workhorse model used in the academic literature studying monetary policy design.

We find that ECB practice and the predictions of benchmark model depart most
sharply regarding the importance of the financial system in the conduct of monetary
policy. Most renditions of the traditional model abstract from any structural
representation of the monetary and financial system and of the role of the financial
system in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. We believe that this may
prove a very important omission for our ability to understand the actual conduct of
policy. In the spirit of Wicksell we distinguish between the policy rate and the loan
rate (which is the relevant rate for determining spending decisions). We extend the
standard model in a very simple way to take into account this additional complication.
We argue that by doing so we can better understand actual ECB conduct.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 1 we present an overview of
the single monetary policy after seven years. We stress the unique, historical changes,
associated with the creation of the euro area and the starting up of the ECB. We go on
to ask
        Has the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy worked?
        How did it work?
Given the perspective taken in the paper it is clear that the answer to the first question
will be yes.

In section 2 we will discuss a model that includes some minimum conditions, which
are necessary in order for monetary policy to be effective. The conditions we will be
focusing on derive from the role of money as a unit of account. Specifically, we use a
fundamental equation that appears in most models using a new Keynesian or New
Neoclassical Synthesis approach to monetary policy making (these include
Goodfriend and King, 1997, 2001, Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1999, Svensson and
Woodford, 2005 and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 2005). In this class of
models the fundamental friction comes from imperfect price adjustment associated
with the mechanism of nominal price setting by monopolistic competitive firms. We
focus on optimal policy as implied by the Woodford (2003) variant of the model, and
relate the model’s policy prescriptions to those annunciated by Issing.

In section 3 we will look at the transmission mechanism of monetary policy through
the financial system, in general, and the banking system, in particular. Woodford’s
model also spells the connection between policy rates and expenditure precisely. In
his basic set-up, there is a direct link between the policy rate and expenditure.
However, going back to Wicksell there have been debates as to how to model the
relevance of the financial system in the transmission of monetary policy. Inspired by
Wicksell we will minimally depart from the standard set-up and introduce a second
interest rate that matters for spending. In deference to Wicksell will call this rate the
“loan” rate.2 Such extension allows us to consider important issues such as liquidity,
financial stability and asset prices and their relevance for the conduct of monetary
policy.

2
  See Brainard (1964), Brunner and Meltzer (1972, 1993), Friedman (1970), Tobin (1969), Bernanke
and Blinder (1988) and very recently Cecchetti and Li (2005)).



                                                                                              3
In section 4 we will conclude and list a number of open questions that men of
practical wisdom (in particular Otmar Issing) may want to reflect upon.


       1. Brief overview of the Single Monetary Policy 1999-2005.


The questions we will examine in this section are:

           Has the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy worked?
           How did it work?

The answer to the first question is clearly yes. The European Union Treaty and the
statute of the ECB and the European System of Central Banks (EUT and the Statute)
state that maintaining price stability is the primary goal of monetary policy. On
October 13, 1998, the Governing Council adopted a precise, quantitative definition of
price stability based on a specific statistical indicator: “Price stability shall be defined
as year-on-year increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), for the
euro area of below 2 percent. (ECB (1998)).” The ECB’s aim was to maintain price
stability over the medium term. On May 8, 2003, the Governing Council further
clarified that it aimed at maintaining inflation below (but close to) 2 percent, over the
medium term.3 Table 1 and Chart 1 show that ECB has essentially attained this goal:
the average annual increase, in the HICP, during the first seven years of the single
monetary policy has been very close, but not below 2 per cent.

The announcement of a precise, quantitative definition of price stability, based on a
specific indicator fulfills three functions: by making the primary objective more
visible and easier to understand it makes monetary policy more transparent and
predictable. The definition also provides an objective yardstick against which the
performance of the monetary authority may be measured. Thus, it helps
accountability. Lastly, the definition, together with the medium term orientation,
helps anchoring inflation expectations enhancing the credibility of policy.

One fundamental characteristic of the ECB´s approach to maintaining price stability is
its medium-term orientation (ECB (1999)). Apart from providing a long term anchor
to expectations a medium-term orientation also allows, after a shock, for a gradual
approach in returning to price stability. Such a gradual approach may be called for in
order to avoid unnecessary volatility in economic activity and interest rates. An
important qualification follows from the fact that the ECB has always emphasized that
the relevant time horizon is not constant. It depends on the current state, the nature
and characteristics of the shocks and on the functioning of the economy. Moreover, a
medium term orientation also acknowledges the importance of long and variable lags
of monetary transmission, avoiding the dangers of short-sighted activism. In other
words the uncertainties associated with the timing and magnitude of monetary policy
actions is too great to allow for fine-tuning of short term developments in the price
level.


3
    See ECB(2003a, 2003b) and Issing et al (2003) for more details.


                                                                                          4
The remark above that inflation was, in the period 1999-2005, close (but not below) 2
percent is an example of an ex post evaluation of the performance of policy. The small
deviation is easily accounted for given the accumulation of a long list of
miscellaneous shocks to the price level (e.g. oil prices and other commodity prices,
food prices, administered prices and indirect taxes). Examining Chart 1 it becomes
clear that the ECB has also been successful in keeping price stability, in the more
imprecise sense of maintaining inflation low and stable. Moreover, given the medium
term orientation the differences between the various indicators included in the Chart
are immaterial.

                                    Insert Chart 1 about here


Table 1: Price Stability and overall Macroeconomic Stability.
                                                Euro Area                   US
                                                1990-1998     1999-2005     1990-1998     1999-2005
                                              Average StDev Average StDev Average StDev Average StDev
HICP/CPI 12th month % change                      2,81 1,07     2,01 0,46     3,10 1,14     2,53 0,71
Real GDP quarterly % change                       0,48 0,52     0,46 0,36     0,76 0,53     0,71 0,53
Real Consumption quarterly % change               0,48 0,58     0,43 0,40     0,78 0,51     0,87 0,41
Employment quarterly % change                     0,12 0,34     0,28 0,24     0,32 0,35     0,26 0,44
Unemployment rate                                 9,80 0,99     8,55 0,47     5,93 0,97     5,05 0,79
Long-term interest rates                          8,23 1,98     4,60 0,64     6,78 1,04     4,86 0,82
Short-term interest rates                         7,62 2,80     3,13 0,96     4,88 1,29     2,95 1,79

Source: Masuch (2005)

As already noted the Governing Council definition of price stability is not only a
benchmark for ex post accountability but also an anchor for inflation expectations.
The latter aspect is closely linked to credibility. Thus, in the second place, we must
examine the ECB’s performance in terms of credibility. Chart 2 plots two such
measures the five-year ahead inflation forecast, from the ECB’s Survey of
Professional Forecasters and the 10-year break-even inflation rate recovered from the
10-year index linked bond.4 From the Chart it is clear that expectations have been
stable and consistently close to the ECB’s definition of price stability (please notice
the scale on the vertical axis). Castelnuovo and others (2003) and Gaspar (2003) have
shown that there is a very low correlation between short run forecasts (or changes in
short run forecasts), which are much more volatile, and long run forecasts (or changes
thereof).

                                    Insert Chart 2 about here

At the same time it is clear from Table 1 (which is taken from Masuch, 2005) that the
stability of inflation and inflation expectations has coincided with low volatility of
important real variables like GDP and employment. Low volatility compared with the
recent past (but also longer time periods, see Masuch, 2005) and also with the US –

4
  Computed on the basis of bonds, issued by the French treasury, indexed to the euro area HICP,
maturing in 2012. The break even inflation rate is computed by equating the yield to maturity on the
real bond to the nominal bond with the same maturity.


                                                                                                       5
where volatility was also fallen recently. The drop in volatility is particularly marked
for financial variables like long term interest rates.

It is worthwhile to pause to consider the facts. Clearly it is not possible to conclude
from comparing volatilities that monetary policy has caused such improvement.5
However, in the literature following Rogoff’s (1985) contribution, it was expected
that delegation of monetary policy to an independent (conservative) central bank
would lead to lower inflation on average and to higher volatility of output. Alesina
and Summers (1993) looked at this proposition using a sample of OECD countries.
They found that central bank independence was, as expected associated with lower
average inflation, but also that the variance of growth or employment were not related
to central bank independence. In such perspective the experience of the ECB adds to
the evidence pointing to the compatibility between price stability and overall
macroeconomic stability. We will comment on this further below.

How has it worked?

In the Eurosystem, as in all modern central banks, monetary policy operates first
through a short tem interest rate. The central bank offers two standing facilities: a
lending and a deposit facility. The two standing facilities define a corridor limiting the
fluctuation in the overnight rate. Moreover, the ECB steers market interest rates
though its regular main refinancing operations. If we look at Chart 3 the first few
weeks of 1999 – the start of the single monetary policy - do not stand out. It shows
that banks adapted quickly and easily to the new environment. The evidence suggests
that the precautions taken by the Governing Council, on 22 December 1998, in
particular the narrow corridor (of just 50 basis points) defined by the marginal lending
facility and the deposit facility, effectively contained money market volatility. After a
few teething problems in the first few days the situation rapidly stabilized so that
already on 21 January 1999 the ECB was able to announce the normalization of the
corridor width effective from the following day onwards. The start of the
Eurosystem’s operational framework and of the TARGET system occurred in a
seamless way (calming the concerns referred to in the Introduction).6

                                   Insert Chart 3 about here

To sum up: after seven years the balance of the single monetary policy is impressive:

        -   The transition to the single monetary policy has been seamless.
        -   Price stability over the medium term has been maintained.
        -   Inflation expectations have been low, stable and (by and large) compatible
            with the ECB’s definition of price stability.
        -   Volatility of macroeconomic variables has declined.
        -   Volatility of long term bond yields has declined as well.




5
  However, see Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes and Krause (2006) for some evidence that monetary policy
might be responsible.
6
  See Gaspar, Perez-Quirós and Sicilia (2001) for more detailed documentation on the operational
transition to the single monetary policy.


                                                                                                    6
In our view much of this success is attributable to the monetary policy strategy that
Issing helped design. Issing (Issing et al, 2005, pp 75-76) summarizes the policy and
strategy that emerged as follows:

“As in the Bundesbank's case, the ECB's approach involves both rule like
features, consistent with the results of monetary theory, and an attention to central
banking experience in the implementation phase. The key messages from monetary
policy theory which emerge through the lens of my professional experience can be
stated as follows:

     - don’t try tricks, don’t try to be too clever;
     - keep steady, keep committed to your mandate even in exceptional
circumstances;
     - say as much as you can of what you are going to do: announce a
strategy;
     - don’t be dogmatic, but follow a policy which is always in line with
your strategy.”

He concludes by announcing three principles for successful conduct of monetary
policy.

         1) Institutions matter. Central bank independence and a mandate for price
stability are crucial pre-requisites for successful central banking: “Sound institutional
arrangements play a central role. Historical evidence and theory agree in pointing out
that central bank independence and a clear mandate for price stability are the basic
elements of a sound institutional set-up.”

        2) Credibility is paramount: “They provide the premises to establish
credibility, to anchor inflationary expectations and ultimately deliver price stability
and foster a stable macroeconomic environment.”

        3) Temptation must be resisted. Moral responsibility and fortitude are
fundamental in the face of economic complexity and change: “We must never forget
this message, nor ever take credibility for granted, even at times when price stability
is established and there seem to be minor challenges ahead. Credibility is hard to
gain, but it is easily lost. To be maintained, it requires continuous vigilance. If lost, it
can be regained only at high costs to society.”

The ECB´s monetary policy embodies these three principles. The ECB’s mandate and
independence are enshrined in the European Union Treaty and in its Statute. Thus,
they have a constitutional character in Europe. Moreover, the strategy is medium term
oriented, forward-looking and based on a full information approach. Its assessment of
the current economic situation and risks to price stability is based on two
complementary viewpoints: economic analysis and monetary analysis. Furthermore,
the communication strategy of the ECB is organized around explaining interest rate
decisions in terms of how they relate to the price stability mandate.7


7
  An important part of the communication strategy has also to provide regular updates on the ECB’s
experience and what the experience implied for the monetary policy strategy. See Issing (1999b, 2000,
2001c, and 2005).


                                                                                                    7
In this section we will not comment further on specific decisions and their
circumstances. We will look at some examples in the following sections.

However, before moving on, it is important to note that during this period many
important events took place at the European level. A partial list includes the
disappointing pace of structural reforms in many Member States and in the EU as a
whole, as is clear from the European Commission own review of the Lisbon strategy,
the debate over budgetary discipline and the Stability and Growth Pact (culminating
with the ruling of the European Court of Justice and the revision of some secondary
legislation), the enlargement of the European Union to include ten new Member
States and the rejection of the European Constitution in referenda by French and
Dutch voters.

Issing (1995) wrote:

“In view of European integration, the role and responsibilities of the central bank are
assuming international and supranational dimensions to an unprecedented extent.
Since nothing less than the future constitution of the Community is at stake in this
integration process, the position of the future European central bank within the overall
pattern of the “political union” is not the least of issues that have to be considered and
decided.”

And in (2001a) he wrote a paper where he started, as an economist by posing the
question: Can One Size Fit All? And ended with his passionate answer that as an
European citizen “At this juncture monetary union simply cannot fail. It must
succeed: One size must fit all.”

The first question we address to Otmar Issing is:

Monetary union is a major institutional change that will necessarily lead to important
behavioral changes, which cannot be accurately foreseen. At the same time, proper
functioning of the monetary union also calls for institutions to change, for structural
reform.

Given the fact the monetary, economic and political trends are co-determined and co-
evolutionary what is the ground for optimism about the future of the European Union?
How will political forces affect the operation of the European Central Bank and the
Eurosystem?




                                                                                        8
      2. Economic Analysis: Maintaining Price Stability and Anchoring Inflation
         Expectations.

“If it were in our power to regulate completely the price system of the future, the ideal
position ... would undoubtedly be one in which, without interfering with the inevitable
variations in the relative prices of commodities, the general level of prices ... would
be perfectly invariant and stable. And why should not such regulation lie within the
scope of practical politics? ... Absolute prices ... are a matter in the last analysis of
pure convention, depending on the choice of a standard of price which lies within our
power to make.”

Knut Wicksell, Interest and Prices, page 4.8

In this section, we follow the approach proposed by Aristotle and ask whether the
successes that have just been documented accord with the predictions of the kind of
model that has become the standard in the academic literature that studies optimal
monetary policy decision-making. We focus on specifically on the fundamental
equation that appears in most models using a new Keynesian or New Neoclassical
Synthesis approach to monetary policy making (these include, among others,
Goodfriend and King, 1997, 2001, Walsh, 1998, Goodfriend, 2002 and Svensson and
Woodford, 2005). Our analysis draws most heavily on the variant of this model
studied by Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and by Woodford (2003).

This model rests on several critical assumptions. First, it presumes that the goods
market is populated with a set of monopolistically competitive firms as in Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977). Second, this imperfect competition means that firms must set prices.
As in Calvo (1983), firms commit to a fixed nominal price in advance of knowing the
demand for that period. At the end of each period a fraction of the firms are allowed
to adjust their price freely, while the remaining firms increase theirs’ based on the
inflation rate observed in the period. This so-called partial indexation assumption is
made so that the model’s predicted persistence in inflation will match that found in
the data. We also will explore the implications of dropping the indexation. Third,
firms produce using labor under a marginal diminishing returns technology. Fourth,
output is demand determined at the set price.

Finally, the model allows for shocks that create a tension between price stability and
output gap stabilization. For example, in the case of a positive “cost-push” shock
inflation rises and output falls relative to its natural level.

Inflation in this framework is inefficient because firms have promised to meet demand
at their fixed nominal price. Consequently aggregate inflation moves real, relative
prices (which is inefficient). We consider model’s presumption of nominal price
rigidity as appropriate since absent some sort of price stickiness monetary policy will
be neutral; if prices can all adjust proportionally following a change in the quantity of




8
    Quoted in Michael Woodford’s Interest and Prices, page 1.


                                                                                       9
money then no real quantities (including most importantly the real interest rate) will
be affected by monetary policy.9

One of Issing’s contributions to this debate was to promote basic research on these
issues and in this case the Eurosystem Inflation Persistence Network produced a
wealth of information on price setting and inflation dynamics. A very short summary
of findings from micro data sets is that prices do change infrequently (only about 15
percent of consumer prices change each month). Thus, price stickiness is clearly
documented. When prices do change, they can either increase or decrease. In euro
area data, 60 percent of the prices changing are increases, while 40 percent are
declines. Price changes are sizeable (on average 8 per cent for price increases and 10
per cent for price decreases). There is no evidence of mechanical indexation to past
inflation, undermining the micro-foundations, for the inclusion of lagged inflation, in
the New Keynesian Phillips curve. Price reviews are more frequent than price
changes, which calls into question the rational inattention version of the sticky
information story (for additional elaboration and complete references see Angeloni et
al, 2004, Issing (2004), Fabiani et al., 2005 and Alvarez et al., 2005). In any case, for
the remainder of this paper we will follow the dominant trend in the literature to stick
to the Calvo price-setting assumption.

Woodford (2003) shows that under rational expectations, these standard assumptions
lead to a Phillips curve of the form
(1)      π t − γπ t −1 = β (Ε t π t +1 − γπ t ) + κxt + u t ,
where π is inflation, x is the output gap, β is the discount rate, κ is a convolution of
the structural parameters, γ is the degree of indexation of prices, not optimally set
each period, and u is a cost-push shock (assumed i.i.d.). Thus, in equation (1) inflation
is determined by lagged inflation, inflation expectations, the output gap and the shock.
In this section, we will simply assume that the central bank directly controls the
output gap, thereby abstracting from the complexities of the monetary transmission
mechanism.10 The assumption does not affect the main results we will present. We
postpone the discussion of the importance of the monetary transmission mechanism to
section 3.
Furthermore, up to a second order approximation, the (negative of the) period social
welfare function (as also shown in Woodford, 2003) takes the form
(2)    Lt = (π t − γπ t −1 ) 2 + λxt2 ,
where λ is another function of the underlying structural parameters.

The problem of minimizing the loss function in equation (2) subject to the linear
constraint (1), given by the New Keynesian Phillips curve resembles the classic linear
quadratic framework explored in the 1950s by Simon (1956) and Theil (1954, 1957).
Simon and Theil extended the deterministic framework of Tinbergen (1952) to a
9
   We are less convinced that the Calvo formulation of the rigidity is necessarily appropriate and are
intrigued by the recent papers such as Klenow and Kyvstov (2005), Golosov and Lucas (2005) and
Gertler and Leahy (2006) that explore competing formulations.
10
   Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) explain the approach we follow, by appealing to a division of the
optimal policy problem in two stages. In the first stage, the one we will focus on, the optimal path of
inflation and the output gap are determined. In the second stage, the policy rate path, compatible with
the optimal solution, determined in stage one, is worked out using a forward-looking IS curve.


                                                                                                      10
stochastic set-up and showed that, in the linear-quadratic framework, both certainty
equivalence and the separation of estimation and control held true. The main
difference of our problem relative to the classical policy instrument choice framework
is that expectations about the future are endogenous and influence the current state of
the economy. Recently, Svensson and Woodford (2003) have identified conditions for
these results to hold in models with forward-looking behavior.

The first order conditions for the central banker's problem may be shown to imply:

                    κ
(3)     xt = -               ut .
                 κ2 +λ

Under the optimal discretionary policy, the output gap only responds to the current
cost-push shock. In particular, following a positive cost-push shock to inflation,
monetary policy is tightened and the output gap falls. The strength of the response
depends on the slope of the New Keynesian Phillips curve, κ, and the weight on
output gap stabilization in the loss function, λ. The reaction function in (3) contrasts
with the one derived in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999). They assume that the loss
function is quadratic in inflation (instead of the quasi-difference of inflation) and they
find that, in such a case, the output gap is also a function of lagged inflation.
The corresponding equation for inflation as a function of the shock is:
                                λ
(4)      π t = γπ t - 1 +          ut .
                             κ2 +λ
Equation (4) makes it clear that under partial indexation inflation will respond
gradually and persistently to a temporary cost push shock. Inflation persistence
contrasts here with a non-persistent response of the output gap to cost-push shocks
(assumed to be i.i.d.).
Expressing inflation directly as a function of the output gap:
                             λ                             κ
(5)      π t - γπ t -1 = -     xt        or       xt = -     (π t - γπ t -1 ) .
                             κ                             λ

The solution under commitment is considerably different. Specifically, the expression
relating the output gap and inflation becomes11:

                             κ
(6)        xt − xt −1 = -      (π t - γπ t -1 )
                             λ

What general principles for the conduct of monetary can we extract from this set-up?
What questions remain for a wise policy-maker?

First, all models incorporating the type of nominal rigidity that we have discussed
imply a strong case for price stability. The idea, which does not seem to depend on the
details of the modeling strategy, is that the allocative inefficiency, associated with

11
   The first order condition relative to the first period would be different. We disregard such peculiarity
assuming that the optimization was performed a long time in the past. This is the idea of Woodford’s
timeless perspective.


                                                                                                        11
relative price dispersion will, in general, be eliminated by the stability of the
aggregate price level (assuming γ<1). The way to achieve such an outcome is to
follow a monetary policy regime where firms, when setting prices, will have no desire
to change them. Such decisions, in turn, will validate the firms’ initial expectations. In
the absence of cost-push shocks the intuition behind this principle is clear. As
Goodfriend and King (1997, 2001) stress nominal price stickiness is the only
distortion preventing the identity between the rational expectations equilibrium and
the first best allocation of resources. Thus, optimal monetary policy aims at
reproducing the allocation of resources which would occur under flexible price
equilibrium. Thus, the model clearly accords with Issing’s first principle that
emphasizes the primacy of a price-stability mandate and the wisdom of delegating
such mandate to an independent central bank.

Second, it is apparent directly from equation (1) that policy credibility will also be
important. In particular, given a positive cost push shock, the central bank is faced
with a dilemma because the output gap will drop and inflation will rise. However, the
tension depends importantly on what happens to expected inflation. If the public
believes that the expected inflation will be lower following the temporary increase in
inflation, the policymaker’s problem is made less acute. Conversely, if the public
foresees higher expected inflation it magnifies the shock making the policy dilemma
worse. This observation rationalizes Issing’s second principle that stresses the
importance of credibility.

Issing’s third principle focuses on the risks associated with caving in to the temptation
to accommodate a shock and associated problems once inflation expectations become
unhinged. The preceding discussion suggests that this is clearly possible. The
importance of this consideration appears to center on the nature of the shocks that the
policymaker must confront. The discussion in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) is
particularly illuminating on this point. They show that optimal policy calls for
offsetting demand shocks and for accommodating shocks to potential output. In all
such circumstances stabilizing prices ensures stability of the output gap (or
alternatively the mark up). In such circumstances, Goodfriend and King (2001),
explain that policy aiming at price stability is neutral policy precisely because it
maintains output close to its potential.12 In all such circumstances there are no trade-
offs. So in these specifications only cost-push shocks create a dilemma for the central
bank. Offsetting all other shocks is optimal so that only an incompetent central bank
would fail to do so.

So what exactly are these cost push shocks? Woodford (2003) shows that, in the
context of the current class of models, it is possible to ground cost-push disturbances



12
    The model of Goodfriend and King is within the tradition of optimal taxation in general equilibrium,
in the spirit of Ramsey (1927) and Lucas and Stokey (1983). The basic intuition follows from looking
at the wedge between price and the marginal cost – the mark-up – as analogous to a tax rate. Constant
mark-ups are optimal (or approximately optimal) in a way which is analogous to tax smoothing over
the business cycle or uniform taxation in the optimal taxation literature. As in the optimal taxation
literature there may be departures from optimality of constant mark-ups and price stability but they
argue departures are likely to be minor and temporary. In their setting preserving price stability keeps
output at potential.



                                                                                                    12
on time-varying tax wedges or mark-ups.13 Alternatively, Benigno and Woodford
(2004) show that in an extended model with other distortions, output will normally be
below its efficient level so that other factors, such as exogenous government spending
shocks also change the gap between the flexible price level of output and the efficient
level of output varies over time. Thus, these disturbances introduce a trade-off
between inflation volatility and output gap volatility.

Finally, in a recent paper Blanchard and Gali (2005) argue that the introduction of real
frictions, in the model, creates an environment where the gap between the natural
level of output and the efficient level of output fluctuates endogenously in response to
economic shocks. Blanchard and Gali argue that real wage rigidity is more than an
example of a real friction. It is their belief that real wage rigidities rank high in their
ability to contribute to the empirical explanation of the business cycle. The model is
also able to account for some empirical facts about inflation, namely its strong
dependence on lagged inflation.

Taken together it seems that either using the baseline model sketched above, or more
complicated variants involving more frictions, there will be a wide range of shocks
that may create a temptation for the central bank. The possibility of yielding to
temptation directly threatens credibility. As equation (3) shows optimal discretionary
policy involves just a linear response to the cost-push shock. This implies that the
output gap is not persistent (under the assumption of i.i.d. shocks) and inflation is
persistent. Such policy is not globally optimal. Indeed, as Woodford (2003) shows,
commitment to a history-dependent policy allows for the simultaneous reduction in
the volatility of inflation and of the output gap. The ability to commit – that is
credibility – is associated with welfare gains.

What explains this result? The key aspect is forward-looking behavior on the part of
price setters. As Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003) show, a
central bank will want to commit to pursue a policy of sustaining its response to cost-
push shocks so that the policy persists well after the shock has vanished from the
economy. Specifically, a positive cost-push shock should be followed by a
persistently negative output gap (and vice-versa). Such response is optimal because it
generates expectations of a reduction in the price level that reduce the immediate
impact of the shock, spreading it over time. With optimal policy, under commitment,
inflation expectations operate as automatic stabilizers in the face of cost-push shocks.
This stabilizing effect explains why it is possible to improve the inflation volatility,
output gap volatility trade-off and why caving in to the temptation to combat these
shocks would be misguided. Thus, it seems that simple extensions of the benchmark
model account well for Issing’s three key principles.

We are not sure Issing would agree. In Issing et al (2005), Issing recommends
“skepticism in the application of theoretical results on how to optimally balance short
term trade-offs and the belief that, once the benefits of medium and long-run price
stability have been attained, the additional gains produced by such “optimized”
policies are “small”, and often model-dependent.” Our second question to Otmar
Issing, is thus: as a practical matter what are the most likely threats to the credibility

13
  The approach in Woodford (2003) is very common in the literature. See, for example, Clarida, Gali
and Gertler (2001), Smets and Wouters (2003) and Steinsson (2003).


                                                                                                  13
of the European Central Bank? Which temptations are hardest to resist, what mistakes
easiest to make? How important is communication with the European people as
prevention against such possibilities?

We close this section by noting one further implication of the role of expectations as
potential automatic stabilizers. Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Woodford (2003),
show that the price level is stationary for the case of optimal policy under
commitment (taking the timeless perspective). Under commitment and without partial
indexation the policy rule may be written simply as:

(7) xt = − κ .⎛⎜ pt − p * ⎞⎟ .
           λ⎝              ⎠


Woodford (2003) shows that the price level is stationary even allowing for partial
indexation (provided γ<1). In addition, Vestin (2006) shows that, for the case γ=0, it
is possible to implement fully optimal policy through the delegation of a target for the
path of the price level to the central bank. Clearly, in such a case, it is possible to
improve on the discretionary inflation targeting case by entrusting a price path target
to the central bank. Inflation volatility and output gap volatility can be reduced.
Therefore, even in the case of a society that cares only about inflation and output gap
stability, it might still be beneficial to entrust the central bank with a price level
mandate. This is just one example of a modified loss function (as in Rogoff (1985) or
Walsh (1995)).

The main alternative to sticky price is sticky information models, which, recently
have been formulated on the basis of behavioral models.14 Interestingly the
conclusions for policy are very similar to those summarized above. Ball, Mankiw and
Reis (2003) show that optimal policy stabilizes the path for the price level in response
to productivity and demand shocks. In case shocks to mark-up levels are added the
optimal response becomes, as before, flexible targeting of the price level.

Before putting forward our third question to Issing it is necessary to take a step back
and look at the role of money as a unit of account. Robert Shiller (1997) illustrates the
important role of money as a unit of account in long-dated financial contracts. The
absence of indexation clauses in most contracts is a puzzle given the magnitude of
long term inflation risk in historical time series. The relevance is clear when thinking
about buying real estate or planning for retirement. From such a viewpoint price level
stability appears important in its own right. These important aspects of the role of
money as a unit of account are not present in the theoretical frameworks we have
presented in this Section. Moreover, as Coulombe (1997) was among the first to point
out, price level targets help to alleviate the zero lower bound on interest rates
constraint on monetary policy. The reason is that they are consistent with increasing
inflation expectations in the face of deflation shocks.15 Lastly, it seems from the
implications of the current vintage of sticky prices and sticky information models, that
we have considered here, that a focus on price level stability would lead to even better
outcomes in terms of inflation and output gap variability. In such context, focusing on

14
     See Blanchard (1990).
15
     Gaspar and Smets (2000) present some simulations illustrating the relevance of this argument.


                                                                                                     14
price level stability can be interpreted as a commitment device.16 In “Why Price
Stability?”17 Issing states “that the question of whether to focus on the price level or
the inflation rate remains an open issue”.

After more than five years and given the results reviewed above, our third question to
Otmar Issing is18: Is time now ripe to consider again the costs and benefits of
stabilizing the path for the level of prices (rather than the inflation rate)? Why not
price level stability?


3. Monetary and Financial Analysis

While the baseline model succeeds, albeit under duress, in delivering Issing’s three
principles, we argue in the remainder of the paper that it ignores monetary and
financial analysis that plays an important role in ECB’s decision-making. The easiest
way to see the omission is to study Chart 4, which shows the ECB’s description of the
monetary transmission mechanism.19 The logic of the New Keynesian model can be
traced through the left hand side of the Chart, which shows the link between the
official interest rate, expectations and prices. The Chart, however, also shows that
policy is believed to operate by affecting bank and market rates, which independently
are thought to influence prices.

Modeling the transmission mechanism using a single interest rate has a long tradition
in macroeconomics (e.g. in the IS/LM model). Bernanke and Blinder (1988) argued
that the IS/LM model could be usefully extended by allowing for a second interest
rate. The argument that follows makes the same point in the context of the New
Keynesian model. More specifically, we argue that a second interest rate is also
necessary to capture Wicksell’s view of the economy. We start the discussion by
reviewing a few key episodes that are odds with the baseline model and then discuss
extensions necessary to understand the observed ECB practice.

We find it useful to consider three episodes where monetary and financial conditions
drove monetary policy decisions and actions. To be concrete, we briefly review the
ECB’s actions related to the asset market turbulence in the Fall of 1998 and
September 2001, as well as the words used to discuss possible asset market bubbles.

In the second half of 1998, just at the ECB was preparing for the launch of the
common monetary policy, the international financial system was hit with a series of
shocks. First, on August 17th the Russian Government devalued the ruble, defaulted
on its domestic debt and declared a moratorium on its payment to foreign creditors
(see Chiodo and Owyang (2002) for a summary of the events).

The losses on the bonds destroyed the capital of the Long-Term Capital Management
(LTCM) hedge fund. LTCM was a hugely levered entity and it began looking for

16
   See Vestin (2006).
17
   Issing (2001b)
18
   See Dugay (1994) for an early survey of the issues raised by price level targeting as an alternative to
inflation targeting.
19
   See ECB, 2004, Chart 3.1. The ECB’s account of the monetary transmission mechanism and its
empirical features in the euro area are presented in section 3.2., pages 45-49.


                                                                                                        15
additional financing. By mid-September it became clear that LTCM was at risk for
failing. Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, described the situation as
follows:20

“It was the judgment of officials at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who were
monitoring the situation on an ongoing basis, that the act of unwinding LTCM's
portfolio in a forced liquidation would not only have a significant distorting impact on
market prices but also in the process could produce large losses, or worse, for a
number of creditors and counterparties, and for other market participants who were
not directly involved with LTCM. …

Financial market participants were already unsettled by recent global events. Had the
failure of LTCM triggered the seizing up of markets, substantial damage could have
been inflicted on many market participants, including some not directly involved with
the firm, and could have potentially impaired the economies of many nations,
including our own.”

On this logic the Federal Reserve Bank of New York helped organize a rescue of
LTCM. Nonetheless, spreads on corporate securities relative to government securities
widened and many firms were unable to roll-over their commercial paper when it
came due.

At the September 29th FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve cut the Federal Funds rate
25 basis points, from to 5.5 to 5.25. Donald Kohn (who was then a staff member)
summarized the case for the cut as follows:21

“The case for easing does not rest on incoming data about the economy. As many of
you have noted, the information that has come available since your last meeting
indicates that the economy continues to expand at a pace around the growth rate of
potential. That has kept the unemployment rate flat at a very low level and inflation
has edged higher on a twelve month basis, at least as measured by the core CPI.
Thus, a standard, backward-looking Taylor rule that called for a 5.5 percent funds rate
in August would continue to do so today.

Rather, the case for easing relies on projections that have been marked down by
developments overseas and in U.S. financial markets.”

The Federal Reserve went on to cut interest rates two more times. In each case the
FOMC pointed to conditions in financial markets (and not any direct evidence of
weakness in spending) as the rationale for the moves.

The ECB’s Governing Council also decided in November that a coordinated interest
rate cut by the National Central Banks was in order. Thus, on December 3 1998, there
was a concerted reduction of official interest rates to 3 per cent. The move represented
the final convergence of interest rates in preparation to the start of the single monetary
policy. Remarkably, the average three month interbank rate declined, in the countries

20
   Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan, “Private-sector refinancing of the large hedge fund, Long-
Term Capital Management” Before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of
Representatives October 1, 1998
21
   FOMC transcripts for the September 29, 1998 meeting, page 77.


                                                                                                 16
participating in the euro area, by about 70 basis points between August 1998 and the
end of the year. Half of the adjustment took place following the decision of 3
December. Issing et al. (2001) explain the rationale for these moves on two grounds:
First, weakness as recorded by leading indicators. Second, turmoil in international
markets and negative wealth effects associated with stock market losses. These
together with low inflation and inflation prospects implied that risks to price stability
were moving to the downside.

The decisions taken by the ECB in the wake of the terrorist attacks against the United
States on September 11, 2001 provide unambiguous evidence that the ECB acts as if
shocks to the financial system can be important for monetary policy. In this case the
ECB announced on that day that “the Eurosystem stands ready to support the normal
functioning of markets. In particular, the Eurosystem will provide liquidity to the
markets, if need be.” It re-iterated this pledge the next day and conducted a “liquidity
providing fine-tuning operation.” On September 13, it reconfirmed the commitment
to support the functioning of markets and repeated the liquidity providing fine-tuning
operation. It also announced that it had opened a $50 billion swap line with the
Federal Reserve to “facilitate the functioning of financial markets and provide
liquidity in dollars.” On September 17, the bank cut the policy rate by 50 basis points.
Thus, this is a case where the ECB perceived the disorder in financial markets to be
critically important and was willing to act promptly to restore order. In any case it is
important to point out that the decision was made easier because, at the same time,
economic prospects for the euro area were also weakening.

Finally, throughout Issing’s tenure at the ECB, one of the most hotly debated issues
for both policymakers and academics has been the linkages between asset prices and
monetary policy. There seems to be little dispute that a sharp decline in asset prices
can be disruptive. For instance, there is broad consensus that the decade-long slump
in Japan was triggered by a collapse in asset prices and then prolonged by spillover
effects of the collapse into the banking system (IMF (2002)). There is also broad
agreement that failure to deal decisively with financial system weakness was a major
policy mistake (Bernanke (2000), Kohn (2006)). But, the question of what do when
faced with a large increase in either equity prices or house prices remains
contentious.22

Issing (2003a) offers a nuanced view on how to deal with this. On the one hand he
notes, “it is worth stressing that according to the previous arguments considering
financial imbalances - from time to time - may lead to a different monetary policy
stance than fixed-horizon inflation targeting, despite the fact that the only objective of
the central bank is price stability (defined over the appropriate medium term
horizon).” Yet on the other hand, if one does not adhere rigidly to the fixed-horizon
then provided that “the central bank employs a medium term horizon for the definition
of price stability and implies a strategy encompassing a stability-oriented, forward-
looking approach, financial imbalances will implicitly obtain the attention they
deserve.”



22
  Issing’s view on this (Issing (20003b) and Issing (2002)), which we agree with, is that pre-emptive
policy moves based purely elevated asset values would be dangerous.



                                                                                                  17
Our fourth question to Issing is thus: some proponents of inflation targeting
recommend focusing on an inflation forecast at a fixed time-horizon (say two years).
Many times you have suggested that a flexible time frame, and sometimes a long time
frame, maybe be necessary to cope with some shocks and risks. What are the most
important considerations determining the length of the relevant time horizon? How
can such considerations be most effectively communicated? Does the unwillingness
to commit to a fixed time horizon create temptation that can undermine credibility?

Can the baseline new Keynesian model account for the right-hand side of Chart 4?

Up to this point we intentionally abstracted from the mechanism by which monetary
policy affects the output gap. To determine whether we can reconcile the baseline
model with the aforementioned concerns regarding the financial system we must
explore these connections more thoroughly. In Woodford (2003, chapter 4) this
connection is precisely derived. In particular, he shows that

(8) xt = η Et xt +1 + α ( ρ t − Etπ t +1 ) + vt

where ρ is the interest rate that is relevant for spending decisions and v is the
aggregate demand shock.

One of the points of Woodford (2003) is that equation (8) is consistent with
Wicksell’s view of the economy. We agree with this, although Wicksell himself
presumed that a “loan” rate was the relevant one for spending and so in deference to
Wicksell we will refer to ρ as a loan rate. As we explain below, ρ could also be
interpreted as the required return on equity or the corporate bond rate.

In contrast to the Wicksellian approach, the convention in the recent literature is to
equate ρ with the policy rate. We believe the distinction between treating ρ as being
perfectly and imperfectly linked to the policy rate is critical and that an extended
model that presumes an imperfect connection generates several interesting insights.

One reason for considering an imperfect connection is that no users of this model
believe that the short-term interest rate is the critical interest rate for spending.
Instead one presumably equates ρ with the policy rate because the appropriate longer
term interest rate that belongs in (8) is itself a stable function of the policy rate; the
expectations hypothesis of term-structure determination might justify this
simplification if there were no time-variation in any term-premia. Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005), and many others document the considerable time-variation in term-
premia. More importantly, the Fall 1998 and September 2001 episodes specifically
suggest that policymakers are sometimes quite concerned about such variation.
Indeed, Chart 4 shows that the ECB believes that it is crucial to monitor developments
regarding the connections between the policy rate and market rates (and asset
prices).23




23
     See ECB (2004) pages 44-49.


                                                                                       18
Accordingly, in the remainder of the paper we explore the consequences of
introducing a distinction between the policy rate and the loan rate.24 Specifically, we
assume

(9) ρt = ς t xt + δ t (i t , ε t )i t + z t ,

where i denotes the policy rate and ε a stochastic disturbance affecting the monetary
transmission mechanism.

This formulation is admittedly ad-hoc and we make no attempt to provide micro
foundations that deliver this precise equation. Instead, we view it as a relatively
general specification that allows us to nest various hypotheses that have been put
forward about the workings of financial markets. For instance, one way to think of
(9) is as of a description of the equilibrium in loan market. Naturally, loan rates
would rise when output is abnormally high – more generally we allow ρ to depend on
x to capture the effects of the demand for credit on the price of credit. Likewise, when
the policy rate increases, loan rates tend to rise; in general arbitrage considerations
would require expected rates of returns on other securities to rise when the rate of
return on the safe asset increases.

We allow for time variation in δ, the function governing the link between the policy
rate and the loan rate, because of the evolving nature of intermediation (that we
discuss further below). Under this interpretation, ε would be a vector of factors that
also affect the loan rate, such as the amount of capital in the banking system or the
net-worth of borrowers. Finally, we allow for a disturbance z in the loan market that
we also discuss shortly.

Substituting this back into the output gap equation yields the following:

(10) (1 − ας t ) xt = η Et xt +1 + α (δ t (i t , ε t )i t + zt − Etπ t +1 ) + vt

The usual special case considered by Woodford and most others in the literature
presumes that δ and ς are known multipliers and z is zero. We see three reasons for
generalizing in this way. First, we believe it allows us to formalize the concerns
raised by Wicksell and others. Using Wicksell’s framework it is natural to think about
two wedges: first the wedge between the loan rate and the Wicksellian natural rate
(the difference putting the “cumulative process” in motion) and second, the wedge
between the loan rate and the policy rate. Second, it provides a convenient way to
formalize a great deal of empirical evidence, including the large project on the
monetary transmission that Issing initiated. Finally, it helps explain some aspects of
the monetary policy strategy that has been practiced by the ECB. From this viewpoint,


24
  The alternative approach would be allow financial factors to matter, but to assume that this reflects
un-modeled factors that affect desired spending; this amounts to assuming in (8) that v and not ρ is the
relevant channel through which financial factors matter. It is possible that some cases, such as a
decline in asset prices that reduce wealth, might naturally correspond to this interpretation. But, in
other cases this assignment is less clear. For instance, the widening spreads on corporate bonds and
commercial paper in the Fall of 1998 most naturally would be interpreted as raising the cost of capital
for firms. Depending on whether there is any credit-rationing this type of shock might or might not
belong in the residual in (8). Undoubtedly, the change in the spreads should appear in ρ.


                                                                                                      19
the loan rate is a summary of all the variables determining the financing conditions in
the economy (as in ECB (2004)).

Taking (10) together with the Phillip’s curve and a monetary policy rule allows us
derive several propositions about the role of monetary and financial analysis in the
conduct of monetary policy.

First, in the usual special case considered in the literature, the fact that spending
depends on a loan rate and only indirectly on the policy rate would be inconsequential
for the monetary authority. The policymakers would have to recognize that the
coefficients on output and the policy rate in the aggregate demand equations are
reduced form coefficients, but they would be stable reduced form coefficients.

Second, if zt is random and α is known certainty equivalence results apply. So this
particular type of the uncertainty would have little practical impact on the central
bank’s conduct.

Alternatively, if relevant parameters are both unknown and time-varying then the
central bank’s job becomes much harder. The literature does not seem to provide any
general insights. In cases where uncertainty is primarily about the static effect of the
policy instrument on spending, then the problem looks much like the one studied by
Brainard (1967) and the associated reasoning suggests that the policy-maker will
behave cautiously (meaning he should move less than implied by certainty
equivalence). On the other hand, if the uncertainty relates to the dynamic effects of
policy, and the dynamics of the system threaten to become unhinged, then the central
bank should be extra aggressive in responding to shocks, thereby stabilizing inflation.

As signaled by the quote from Issing at the start of this paper, he struggled with how
to handle uncertainty throughout his career as a central banker. One further indication
of the importance he placed on this problem is that he sponsored two major
international conferences (in 1999 and 2004) on this theme of how to operate given
uncertainty and imperfect knowledge.

He also supported a cooperative venture between the ECB and the National Central
Banks of the Eurosystem to study the monetary transmission from a variety of angles.
The Monetary Transmission Network (MTN) research offers the most complete
assessment to date of how monetary policy appears to operate in the euro area.

It is particularly relevant, in the context of Chart 4, that much of the MTN research
was aimed at studying the importance of shifts in bank loan supply in the transmission
of monetary policy. Operationally this amounted to comparing changes in loan
volumes for different types of banks (small versus large, liquid versus illiquid,
members of groups versus independent, etc) following changes in policy rates. In
terms of (9) these different bank characteristics would be candidates for ε. There was
no single contrast the revealed systematic differences in all countries, although in
nearly all cases it appears that banks with fewer liquid assets on their balance sheets
seem to cut lending relatively more when policy rates rise. Thus, at an aggregate level
the amount (and distribution of) liquidity in the banking system is one candidate
proxy for ε that deserves more scrutiny. Interestingly, neither the level of bank



                                                                                     20
capital, nor the size of a bank seemed to be closely related to the degree to which bank
lending changes.

The MTN and a number of follow up studies at the ECB and elsewhere in the
Eurosystem have also explored the role of the “financial accelerator” in influencing
investment (Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)). Broadly these studies tend to
find clear evidence that financial factors tend to amplify changes triggered by changes
in policy rates. The MTN evidence suggests that firm size typically does not govern
the importance of these effects, but there are many predictable differences as to which
types of firms respond more or less strongly to changes in interest rates.

There has been less research to date on the role of non-bank financing (and more
precisely disturbances to this type of financing) in affecting spending. But, there is a
great deal of indirect evidence suggesting that these disturbances could be important.
For instance, there is a large literature that studies the predictive power of yield
spreads for many macroeconomic variables. Moneta (2005) shows that in the euro
area the spread between the ten-year government bond rate and the three month
interbank rate is a good predictor of recessions. Importantly, his regressions show
that this spread has out of sample forecasting ability, that the spread adds information
over and above the information past data on recessions, and that the spread is a more
informative forecasting variable than GDP, stock prices and a composite index of
leading indicators. This could be accounted for in our framework assuming that ρ
should be a long-term interest rate and by associating z with the term premia.

Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2005) estimate a small dynamic, stochastic general
equilibrium model of the euro area economy that allows for 14 different disturbances.
They find that when they suppress financial shocks the model predicts that output
volatility would drop substantially (by more than half using their baseline
estimates).25 Thus they conclude that further modeling of the financial system is
critically important for understanding euro area business cycle dynamics.

In the current version of their model, shocks to the net worth of entrepreneurs are the
critical financial disturbances. This could captured in (9) by posting that household
net worth belongs in ε or that the residual, z, might be related to net worth. The
conjecture that these shocks could be important is also consistent with the findings by
Adalid and Detken (2006) that loose money, associated with excessive growth in
monetary aggregates, is related to asset price increases and that these increases lead to
spending increases (and ultimately recessions).

Thus, a third general proposition about (10) is that there are many routes by which a
change in the policy rate might be amplified or dampened due to financial factors.
The ECB’s monitoring and cross-checking seeks to identify these cases.

Such considerations lead to our fifth question to Issing: how best to characterize the
various channels of the monetary transmission mechanism in a theory of monetary
policy? Specifically, what monetary and financial shocks are likely to be most
relevant? What remain as the least certain features of the transmission mechanism?
25
   Dynan, Elmendorf and Sichel (2006) assemble a variety of evidence that suggests that changes in the
structure of financial markets have contributed to the decline in volatility of real activity in the United
States.


                                                                                                        21
One last issue concerns the role of monetary aggregates. Patinkin (1965, 1968) and
Humphrey (1997) convincingly show that Wicksell was a main upholder of the
quantity theory of money. For example, in Wicksell’s cumulative process monetary
expansion (contraction) is crucial to accommodate the increase (decline) in prices
occurring when the loan rate is below (above) the natural rate. In his Lectures on
Political Economy he devotes 50 pages refuting the critics of the classical quantity
theory of money. Wicksell (like Fisher) uses the quantity theory to argue that
monetary policy can only bear responsibility for the determination of the value of
some nominal variable (e.g. the price level). Nevertheless, in our simplified account
of the Wicksellian loan rate and our discussion on the implications for the conduct of
monetary policy, the explicit role of monetary aggregates has been very limited.

Others have argued for a more central role for monetary aggregates. For example
Christiano and Rostagno (2001) argue that monitoring money allows for
improvements on the outcomes implied by a Taylor rule, while Nelson (2003)
(following a tradition that prominently includes Brunner and Meltzer) states that
monetary aggregates may serve as proxy for the substitution effects of monetary
policy in an environment where the multiplicity of financial assets matters.

This leads us to our last question to Issing: Is our reading of Wicksell in error? If so, is
there a modification of the model in section 3 (or a completely different model) that
would make the role of money explicit? Put differently, can we move past the
quantity theory to use monetary aggregates more productively in the policy process?




                                                                                         22
     4. Conclusion.

In this paper, we review Otmar Issing’s career as the ECB’s inaugural chief
economist. We began by documenting many notable successes including: 1) the
seamless transition to the single monetary policy; 2) the maintenance of price stability
over the medium term; 3) low and stable inflation expectations; 4) reduced volatility
of key economic variables.

 We argue that the standard New Keynesian model, which is widely used in the theory
of monetary policy, is able to account for many features that characterize Otmar
Issing’s approach to the conduct of monetary policy. In particular, it seems to account
for Issing’s three guiding principles for the successful conduct of monetary policy,
namely: 1) Institutions matter. Theoretical reasoning and historical experience show
that price stability and central banking independence are the two defining features of
sound institutional arrangements. 2) Credibility is fundamental. It is necessary to
ensure price stability in a way that is compatible with an overall environment of
macroeconomic stability. 3) Temptation must be resisted. In particular, never take
credibility for granted, be constantly vigilant and beware of the lasting costs of policy
mistakes.

Thirty years ago, Charles Goodhart (1981, page 116) formulated is famous law “that
any observed statistical regularity will tend to collapse once pressure is put upon it for
control purposes.” Issing examined Goodhart’s law (in Issing, 1997) and interpreted it
as a particular case of the Lucas (1976) critique. Goodhart’s law was inspired by the
historical example of change and instability of monetary policy in the UK. Thus,
Issing decided, inspired by the experience of the Bundesbank, to spin the Lucas
critique in the opposite direction. Our favorite formulation of Issing’s law26 is: “a
policy (...) geared to steadiness and medium-term objectives reinforces ... stability ...
and hence the foundation of the policy itself.” Goodhart’s law stresses a vicious circle
of instability generating instability. Issing’s law, instead, stresses the virtuous circle of
stability begetting stability. Thus one of our major conclusions is that the success of
the ECB illustrates the practical relevance of Issing’s law.

Our second major conclusion is that the link between theory and the practice of
monetary policy, at the ECB, under Issing, is the least clear concerning the role of
monetary and financial analysis. Our assessment is that this mostly reflects the
limited attention that financial factors have received in the theoretical models. We
proposed one extension that moves towards filling this gap. While we find the
extended model helpful for organizing many observations about practice, we
recognize that the lack of foundations to our model is a serious short-coming. We
hope that by calling attention to this disconnect between the theory and practice we
can trigger more research to close this gap.

Finally, we see the comparison of the theory and practice as raising many questions.
We hope, as a parting gift, Issing, in due course, will share his thoughts on these
specific questions.

26
  In Issing (1997) the reference is clearly to the monetary targeting strategy of the Bundesbank. We
have omitted these references in order to highlight the general relevance of Issing’s law.


                                                                                                       23
First, given the fact the monetary, economic and political trends are co-determined
and co-evolutionary what is the ground for optimism about the future of the European
Union? How will political forces affect the operation of the European Central Bank
and the Eurosystem?

Second, as a practical matter, what are the most likely threats to the credibility of the
European Central Bank? Which temptations are hardest to resist, what mistakes are
easiest to make? How important is communication with the European people as
prevention against such possibilities?

Third, is time now ripe to consider again the costs and benefits of stabilizing the path
for the level of prices (rather than the inflation rate)? Why not price level stability?

Fourth, what are the most important considerations determining the length of the
relevant time horizon? How can such considerations be most effectively
communicated? Does the unwillingness to commit to a fixed time horizon create
temptation that can undermine credibility?

Fifth, how best to characterize the various channels of the monetary transmission
mechanism in a theory of monetary policy? Specifically, what monetary and financial
shocks are likely to be most relevant? What remain as the least certain features of the
transmission mechanism?

Sixth, is our reading of Wicksell is in error? If so, is there a modification of the
model in section 3 (or a completely different model) that would make the role of
money explicit? Put differently, can we move past the quantity theory to use monetary
aggregates more productively in the policy process?

Issing’s awareness of the key importance of uncertainty, imperfect knowledge and
communication has been, in our view, crucial to his success. As in the concluding
quote from Machiavelli, Issing benefited from good fortune:

“(…) anybody wise enough to understand the times and the types of affairs and to
adapt himself to them would have always good fortune (…) and it would come to be
true that the wise man would rule the stars and the Fates.”

Niccolò Machiavelli, January 1513, letter to Piero Soderini in Ragusa, in Allan
Gilbert, The Letters of Machiavelli, University of Chicago Press, 1988.




                                                                                      24
References

Adalid, A. and C. Detken, 2006, Asset Price Booms and Excess Liquidity, mimeo,
ECB.

Alesina, A. and L. Summers, 1993, Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic
Performance: Some Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
25: 151-62.

Alvarez, L. et al., 2005, Sticky Prices in the Euro Area: a Summary of New Micro
Evidence, ECB Working Paper 563, December.

Angeloni, I. et al., 2004, Inflation Persistence in the Euro Area: Preliminary Summary
of Findings, available at
http://www.ecb.int/events/pdf/conferences/inflationpersistence/IPN_interim_report_d
ecb.pdf

Ball, L., N.G. Mankiw and R. Reis, 2003, Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies,
NBER Working Paper 9491, February.

Benigno, P. and M. Woodford, 2004, Inflation Stabilization and Welfare: the Case of
a Distorted Steady State, NBER Working Paper, 10838, October.

Bernanke, B., 2000, Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis? in
R. Mikitani and A. S. Posen, eds., Japan's Financial Crisis and Its Parallels to U.S.
Experience, Washington: Institute for International Economics..

Bernanke, B. and A. Blinder, 1988, Credit, Money and Aggregate Demand, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 78: 435-38.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and S. Gilchrist, 1999, The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework, in J. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.)
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Blanchard, O., 1990, Why Does Money Affect Output? A Survey, in B. Friedman and
F. Hahn (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Blanchard, O. and J. Gali, 2005, Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,
NBER Working Paper 11806, November.

Blinder, A., 1999, Central Banking in Theory and Practice, MIT Press.

Brainard, W., 1967, Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy, American Economic
Review, 57: 411-425.

Brunner, K. and A. Meltzer, 1972, Money, Debt and Economic Activity, Journal of
Political Economy, 80: 951-77.

Brunner, K. and A. Meltzer, 1993, Money and the Economy: Issues in Monetary
Analysis, The Raffaelle Matioli Lectures, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                                                                   25
Calvo, G., 1983, Staggered prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 12: 983-98.

Castelnuovo, E., S. Nicoletti-Altimari and D. Rodriguez-Paluenzuela, 2003,
Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets: the Anchoring of
Long Term Inflation Expectations, in O. Issing (ed) Background studies for the ECB’s
evaluation of its monetary policy strategy, Frankfurt: European Central Bank.

Cecchetti, S. and L. Li, 2005, Do Capital Adequacy Requirements Matter for
Monetary Policy, NBER Working Paper 11830, December.

Cecchetti, S., Flores-Lagunes A, and S. Krause, 2006, Has Monetary Policy Become
More Efficient? A Cross-Country Analysis, Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Chiodo, A. and M. Owyang, 2002, A Case Study of a Currency Crisis: The Russian
Default of 1998, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Review, 7-17,
November/December.

Christiano, L.J., Eichenbaum E., and C. Evans, 2005, Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy. Journal of Political Economy.

Christiano, L.J. and M. Rostagno, 2001, Money Growth Monitoring and the Taylor
Rule, NBER Working Paper, 8539.

Christiano, L.J., Motto, R. and M. Rostagno, 2005, Financial Factors in Business
Cycles, mimeo, ECB.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, 1999, The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynsian Perspective, Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4), 1661-707.

Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler, 2001, Optimal Monetary Policy in Open vs.
Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach, American Economic Review, 91, 2: 248-
52.

Cochrane, J. and M. Piazzesi, 2005, Bond Risk Premia, American Economic Review,
95:1: 138-60.

Coulombe, S., 1997, The Intertemporal Nature of Information Conveyed by the Price
System in Price Stability, Inflation Targets and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of a
Conference held by the Bank of Canada.

Dixit, A. and J. Stiglitz, 1977, Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity, American Economic Review, 67, 3: 297-308.

Dugay, P., 1994, Some thoughts on Price Stability vs. Zero Inflation, paper presented
at a conference on Central Bank Independence and Accountability, Bocconi.



                                                                                  26
Duisenberg, W., 1999, Economic and Monetary Union in Europe: the Challenges
Ahead, in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, a Symposium sponsored by the
Federal Reserve of Kansas City.

Dynan K., Elmendorf, D. and D. Sichel, 2006, Can Financial Innovation Help to
Explain the Reduced Volatility of Economic Activity?, Journal of Monetary
Economics (forthcoming).

ECB, 1998, A Stability Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy for the ESCB, ECB Press
Release, 13 October, http://www.ecb.int/

ECB, 1999, The Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy of the Eurosystem, Monthly
Bulletin, January, 39-50.

ECB, 2003a, The ECB’s Monetary Policy Strategy, Press release, 8 May.

ECB, 2003b, The Outcome of the ECB’s Evaluation of Its Monetary Policy Strategy,
Monthly Bulleting, June.

ECB, 2004, The Monetary Policy of the ECB, Frankfurt: European Central Bank.

Fabiani, S., 2005, The Pricing Behaviour of Firms in the Euro Area: New Survey
Evidence, ECB Working Paper 535, October.

Federal Open Market Committee Meeting Transcripts, September 29, 1998, available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/transcripts/1998/980929meeting.pdf

Friedman, M., 1970, A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis, Journal of
Political Economy, 78: 193-238.

Gaspar, V., 2003, The Conduct of Monetary Policy under Uncertainty, in Monetary
policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, a Symposium sponsored
by the Federal Reserve of Kansas City.

Gaspar, V., G. Pérez Quirós and J. Sicilia, 2001, The ECB monetary policy strategy
and the money market, by V. Gaspar, International Journal of Finance and
Economics, 6 (4): 325-42

Gaspar, V. and F. Smets, 2000, Price Stability: Some Issues, National Institute
Economic Review, 174: 68-79.

Gertler, M. and J. Leahy. 2006, A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation, NBER
Working Paper 11971.

Golosov, M. and R. Lucas, 2005, Menu Costs and Phillips Curves, NBER Working
paper 10187, revised.

Goodfriend, M., 2002, Monetary Policy in the New Neoclassical Synthesis: a Primer,
International Finance, 5 (2): 193-212.



                                                                               27
Goodfriend, M., and R. King, 1997, The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the role of
Monetary Policy, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 231-83.

Goodfriend, M., and R. King, 2001, The Case for Price Stability, in A. Garcia-
Herrero, V. Gaspar, L. Hoogduin, J. Morgan and B. Winkler (eds), Why Price
Stability?, Frankfurt: European Central Bank, 53-94.

Goodhart,. C., 1981, Problems with Monetary Management: the UK experience, in A.
Courakis (ed.), Inflation, Depression and Economic Policy in the West, London:
Mansell.

Humphrey, T., 1997, Fisher and Wicksell on the Quantity Theory, Federal Reserve of
Richmond Economic Quarterly, 83/4, Fall: 71-89.

International Monetary Fund, 2002, Japan: Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV
Consultation, Washington, DC.

Issing, O., 1995, The Role of the Central Bank and its Responsibility, in F. Frowen
and F. Mc Hugh (eds.), Financial Decision-Making and Moral Responsibility,
Basingstoke.

Issing, O., 1997, Monetary targeting in Germany: The stability of monetary policy
and of the monetary system, Journal of Monetary Economics, 39, 67-79.

Issing, O., 1999a, The monetary policy of the ECB in a world of uncertainty,
contribution to the policy panel at the conference on Monetary policy-making under
uncertainty, organised jointly by the European Central Bank and the Center for
Financial Studies of the University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 3 December.

Issing, O., 1999b, The Eurosystem: Transparent and Accountable or Willem in
Euroland, Journal of Common Market Studies, 37, 503-19.

Issing, O., 2000, The ECB’s Monetary Policy: Experience After the First Year,
Journal of Policy Modeling, 22 (3): 325-43.

Issing, O., 2001a, The single monetary policy of the European Central Bank: one size
fits all, International Finance, 4: 441-62.

Issing, O., 2001b, Why Price Stability? In A. Garcia-Herrero et al. (eds), Why Price
Stability?, First ECB Central Banking Conference.

Issing, O., 2001c, The euro – the experience of the past 2 years, Journal of Asian
Economics, 12: 1-20.

Issing, O., 2002, Monetary Policy in a Changing Economic Environment, in
Rethinking Stabilization Policy a Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve of
Kansas City.




                                                                                 28
Issing, O., 2003a, Monetary and Financial Stability: Is there a Trade-off?, Remarks at
Conference on Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and theBusiness Cycle, Bank
for International Settlements, Basle, March 28-29, 2003.

Issing, O., 2003b, Introductory statement at the ECB Workshop on Asset prices and
monetary policy, European Central Bank, Frankfurt, December 11-12, 2003.

Issing, O., 2004, Inflation persistence in the euro area, contribution to the ECB
conference ‘Inflation persistence in the euro area’; Frankfurt am Main, 10 December
2004.

Issing, O., 2005, The ECB and the euro – the first 6 years: A view from the ECB,
Journal of Policy Modeling, 27: 405-20.

Issing, O., V. Gaspar, I. Angeloni and O. Tristani, 2001, Monetary Policy in the Euro
Area: Strategy and Decision-Making at the European Central Bank, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Issing, O. et al., 2003, eds., Background studies for the ECB’s evaluation of its
monetary policy strategy, Frankfurt: European Central Bank.

Issing, O., V. Gaspar, D. Vestin and O. Tristani, 2005, Imperfect Knowledge and
Monetary Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Klenow, P. and O. Kryvtsov, 2005, State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
Does it Matter for Recent US Inflation, NBER Working Paper 11043.

Kohn, D., 2006, Monetary policy and asset prices, at Monetary Policy: A Journey
from Theory to Practice, a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of
Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany.

Kydland, F. and E. Prescott, 1977, Rules Rather than Discretion: the Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, 85: 473-92.

Lucas, R., 1976, Econometric Policy Evaluation: a Critique, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 29: 173-204.

Lucas, R. and N. Stokey, 1983, Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
without Capital, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12: 55-93.

Masuch, K., 2005, Price Stability and Macroeconomic Volatility in the euro area – the
Positive Supply-Side Effects of Credible and Predictable Monetary Policy, in M.
Heise and V. Wieland (eds.), Capital Markets in the Long Term: Demography,
Economic Developments and Funded Pension Systems, Center for Financial Studies.

Moneta, F., 2005, Does the Yield Spread Predict Recessions in the Euro Area?,
International Finance, 8:2, 263-301.

Nelson, E., 2003, The future of monetary aggregates in monetary policy analysis,
Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 1029-59.


                                                                                    29
Obstfeld, M., 1998, EMU: Ready, or Not?, Princeton Essays in International
Economics, 209, also available as http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~obstfeld/graham.pdf


Patinkin, D., 1965, Money, Interest and Prices, 2nd Edition, New York: Harper &
Row.

Patinkin, D., 1968, Wicksell’s Cumulative Process in Theory and Practice, Banca
Nationale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, 85, June: 120-31.

Ramsey, F., 1927, A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation, Economic Journal, 37:
47-61.

Rogoff, K., 1985, The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary
target, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 1169-90.

Shiller, R., 1997, Public Resistance to Indexation: a Puzzle, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1, 159-211.

Simon, H., 1956, Dynamic Programming under Uncertainty with a Quadratic
Criterion, Econometrica, 24: 74-81.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters, 2003, An Estimated Stochastic General Equilibrium Model
for the Euro Area, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 5: 1123-75.

Steinsson, J., 2003, Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation
Persistence, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 7.

Svensson, L. and M. Woodford, 2003, Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy, Journal
of Monetary Economics, 50: 621-50.

Svensson, L. and M. Woodford, 2005, Implementing Optimal Policy Through
Inflation-Forecast Targeting, in B. Bernanke and M. Woodford (eds.), The Inflation
Targeting Debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Theil, H., 1954, Econometric Models               and    Welfare    Maximization,
Weltwirtschaftigsches Archiv, 72: 60-83.

Theil, H., 1957, A Note on Certainty Equivalence in Dynamic Planning,
Econometrica, 25: 346-49.

Tinbergen, J., 1952, On the Theory of Economic Policy, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Tobin, J., 1969, A General equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 1, 15-29.

Vestin, D., 2006, Price Level Targeting vs Inflation Targeting in a Forward-Looking
Model, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.



                                                                                30
Walsh, C., 1995, Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers, American Economic Review,
85, 1: 150-67.

Walsh, C., 1998, Monetary Theory and Policy, Cambridge, MIT Press.

Wicksell, K., 1935, Lectures on Political Economy: volume two – Money, London:
Routledge & Keegan Paul.

Woodford, M., 2003, Interest & Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                                               31
                                   Chart 1: Inflation in the euro area.


6
                                                                                             HICP
                                                                                             HICP ex food and energy
                                                                                             HICP 10% trimmed mean


5




4




3




2




1




0
1991   1992   1993   1994   1995     1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003       2004     2005     2006




                                                                                                                       32
           Chart 2: Long run inflation expectations in the euro area.

2,5

                                             SPF 5 years ahead
                                             10y break even inflation rate




2,0




1,5




1,0
  1999   2000        2001        2002        2003                 2004       2005   2006




                                                                                     33
              Chart 3: Money market and policy interest rates

7                                                               Marginal lending rate
                                                                Deposit rate
                                                                Main refinancing rate
                                                                EONIA overnight
6




5




4




3




2




1




0
1999   2000        2001        2002       2003       2004         2005                  2006




                                                                                        34
Chart 4: The ECB’s Stylized Depiction of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism




                                                                           35
