NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN DOES DOMESTIC SAVING MATTER
FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH?
Philippe Aghion
Diego Comin
Peter Howitt
Working Paper 12275
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12275
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

We would like to thank the comments and suggestions of Daron Acemoglu, Pol Antras, Tim Besley, Raquel
Fernandez, Mark Gertler, Avner Greif, Elhanan Helpman, Greg Mankiw, Joel Mokyr, Fabrizio Perri, and
seminar participants at Harvard and Stern, and the excellent research assistance of Juan Diego Bonilla and
Victor Tsyrennikov. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Philippe Aghion, Diego Comin and Peter Howitt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

When Does Domestic Saving Matter for Economic Growth?
Philippe Aghion, Diego Comin and Peter Howitt
NBER Working Paper No. 12275
May 2006, Revised September 2006
JEL No. E2, O2, O3
ABSTRACT
Can a country grow faster by saving more? We address this question both theoretically and
empirically. In our model, growth results from innovations that allow local sectors to catch up with
the frontier technology. In relatively poor countries, catching up with the frontier requires the
involvement of a foreign investor, who is familiar with the frontier technology, together with e ort
on the part of a local bank, who can directly monitor local projects to which the technology must be
adapted. In such a country, local saving matters for innovation, and therefore growth, because it
allows the domestic bank to cofinance projects and thus to attract foreign investment. But in
countries close to the frontier, local firms are familiar with the frontier technology, and therefore do
not need to attract foreign investment to undertake an innovation project, so local saving does not
matter for growth. In our empirical exploration we show that lagged savings is significantly
associated with productivity growth for poor but not for rich countries. This effect operates entirely
through TFP rather than through capital accumulation. Further, we show that savings is significantly
associated with higher levels of FDI inflows and equipment imports and that the effect that these
have on growth is significantly larger for poor countries than rich.
Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Diego A. Comin
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 725
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu
Peter Howitt
Department of Economics
Brown University, Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
peter_howitt@brown.edu

1

Introduction

Can a country grow faster by saving more? The relationship between saving and growth plays
a central role in the neoclassical growth models of Solow (1956) and Cass (1965), Koopmans
(1965) and Ramsey (1928). It also features prominently in the AK models starting with
Harrod (1939) and Domar (1946), and then more recently by Frankel (1962) and Romer
(1986). All these growth models emphasizing capital accumulation as the source of growth,
tell us indeed that higher saving rates should foster growth because higher savings imply
higher capital investment. But these are closed economy models, and extending them to the
case of small open economies with international capital markets would eliminate the eﬀect
of local saving on growth. More recent models emphasizing innovation as the main engine
of growth (Romer, 1990; and Aghion and Howitt, 1992), either ignore capital accumulation,
in which case there is no role for saving even in a closed economy, or they emphasize the
complementarity between capital accumulation and innovation (Howitt and Aghion, 1998),
in which case the equilibrium growth rate depends positively upon domestic saving. But
even in the latter case the theory does not apply to the case of an open economy with capital
mobility.
Thus existing growth theories appear to have little to say about the eﬀect of saving on
growth in the global economy, and yet this question is raised recurrently by policy makers,
for example when discussing the contrast between the high growth in East Asia and the
slow growth in Latin America, two middle-income regions with comparable levels of per
capita GDP in the 1960s. This contrast could hardly be explained by diﬀerences in property
right protection or in financial development. Moreover, most Latin American countries have
subscribed to the so-called Washington consensus policies (namely, the idea of combining
macroeconomic stability, trade and financial liberalization, and privatization), but so far
to little avail. On the other hand, if one looks at saving rates in the two regions, we do
see a sizeable diﬀerence, with East Asian rates being much higher than Latin American
rates. Specifically, for the East Asian countries in the sample described in Section 4 below
the average private saving rate from 1960 to 2000 was 25%, whereas for Latin American
countries in the same sample the average saving rate was only 14%.1
In this paper, we develop a theory of local saving and growth in an open economy
with domestic and foreign investors. In our model, growth in relatively poor countries
results mainly from innovations that allow local sectors to catch up with the current frontier
technology. But catching up with the frontier in any sector requires the involvement of a
foreign investor, who is familiar with the frontier technology, together with eﬀort on the part
of a local bank, who can directly monitor local projects to which the technology must be
adapted. Local saving matters for innovation, and therefore growth, because it allows the
domestic bank to cofinance projects and thus to attract foreign investment; more specifically,
cofinancing encourages local bank monitoring eﬀort by giving the local bank a stake that it
will lose if the project fails for want of eﬀort on its part, and therefore raises the expected
rate of return to the foreign investor.
1

One exception in terms of growth performance in Latin America has been Chile. The average growth
rate of GDP per worker in Chile between 1960 and 2000 has been almost 2 percent a year. Interestingly, its
average saving rate has been 20 percent. See Prescott (2006) for more on the role of savings in the positive
growth experience of Chile.

1

The theory also delivers predictions on when domestic saving should matter most for
economic growth. In particular it focuses on the interaction between saving and the country’s
distance to the technological frontier. The main prediction of our model is that saving aﬀects
growth positively in those countries that are not too close to the technological frontier, but
does not aﬀect it at all in countries that are close to the frontier. The reason is that
in a relatively poor country higher saving increases the number of projects that can be
cofinanced by the local bank on terms that give the bank an incentive to monitor while
guaranteeing a suﬃcient share of profits for a foreign investor to participate. However, in
countries suﬃciently close to the frontier the local firms are more likely themselves to be
familiar with the frontier technology, and therefore do not need to attract foreign investment
in order to undertake an innovation project; in such a case every ex ante profitable innovation
project will be undertaken regardless of the level of domestic saving because there is no need
for cofinance when there is just one agent participating in the project.
In the second part of the paper, we confront the above theory with empirical evidence.
Houthakker (1961, 1965), Modigliani (1970) and Carroll and Weil (1994) have shown that
there is a large and highly significant positive correlation between saving and growth in the
cross-section of countries. However, there is little agreement as to how one should interpret
this correlation. Given the diﬃculty of providing a causal link from saving to growth in a
world of capital mobility, several observers have sought to explain the correlation as reflecting
an eﬀect of growth on saving. But this interpretation runs counter to mainstream economic
theory in which the representative household’s consumption-Euler equation implies that
growth should have a negative eﬀect on saving. Thus for example Carroll, Overland and
Weil (2000) depart from convention by developing a model of habit persistence which they
argue is consistent with a wide body of evidence to the eﬀect that increases in growth precede
increases in saving.
In our empirical exploration we provide evidence of the causal link running from saving
to growth, namely the one that our theory implies should operate even in a world of capital
mobility. We first explore various case studies of Asian countries. In the growth episodes of
these countries, we observe the importance of policies that tried to increase private savings
to provide liquidity to the banking system. Further, the liquidity of the domestic banking
system helped attract foreign investors that brought in the frontier technology that triggered
TFP and productivity growth. After this informal exploration, we explore econometrically
the reduced form predictions of the model and its mechanisms. Specifically, using the within
country variation in a panel of 118 countries over the 1960-2000 period, we show that the
average saving rate in the last five years positively aﬀects growth in productivity during the
decade going forward in poor countries, while in rich countries the eﬀect is smaller and often
not significant. In line with the model, private saving is entirely responsible for the eﬀect
of saving on growth. Further, the connection between lagged saving and subsequent growth
operates exclusively through TFP growth. This finding is relevant because it diﬀerentiates
our model from others that emphasize a connection between saving and future investment
through the financial accelerator (e.g. Bernanke and Gertler, 1989).
To gain further insight into the mechanisms that drive the connection between saving and
growth, we explore the relationship between FDI, equipment imports, saving and growth.
We find that lagged average saving is highly correlated with FDI and equipment import
intensity, especially in poor countries where both FDI and equipment imports enter positive
2

and significantly in the panel growth regressions. In addition, the inclusion of either FDI
or equipment investment reduces significantly the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on the
productivity growth and the TFP growth of poor countries but not in rich countries.
Cofinancing is formally equivalent to posting collateral. Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and
Garber (2004) also stress the role of collateral in the growth process of some countries.
Specifically, they argue that capital flows from poor to rich countries may partly reflect poor
countries’ choices to transfer wealth to a “center or reserve currency country” in order to
make it easier for foreigners to get their hands on that wealth should the poor countries
expropriate the foreigners’ capital; this in turn should encourage foreign direct investment
in poor countries, thereby fostering development. However, Dooley et al. do not explore
this idea in the context of a full-fledged endogenous growth model. Nor do they analyze
its implications for the relationship between local saving and growth across countries with
diﬀerent levels of technological development.
Our theory relates not only to the growth literature but also to an important debate in
international finance around the so-called “Lucas puzzle”, namely why poorer countries or
regions, where capital is scarce and therefore the marginal productivity of capital should
be high, do not attract investments that would make them converge towards the frontier
countries or regions. Lucas (1990) points to the role of human capital externalities that would
favor capital investments in richer countries. However, Gertler and Rogoﬀ (1990), and more
recently Banerjee and Duflo (2005), point to the importance of contractual imperfections
(whether these result from local contractual enforcement problems or from ex ante moral
hazard on the part on local investors). Gertler and Rogoﬀ provide supporting evidence in
favor of the contracting explanation, in particular the positive and significant correlation
between the volume of private external debt and the log of per capita income in a crosscountry regression. More recent evidence in Alfaro et al (2003) to the eﬀect that private
lending by foreign investors is correlated with various institutional indicators, in particular
with a lower degree of corruption, is consistent with the contracting explanation, as is the
evidence in Reinhart and Rogoﬀ (2004) that poorer countries exhibit a higher rate of defaults
on their foreign debt. The relationship between financial constraints and foreign investment
flows is also emphasized in recent work by Antras, Desai and Foley (2005) that explains why
we observe large and two-way FDI flows between countries with high levels of development,
whereas capital flows between countries with uneven degrees of financial development are
small and unbalanced. Also closely related to our analysis in this paper is Alfaro et al
(2004) which shows, based on a cross-country sample, that FDI is more positively correlated
with growth in countries with higher financial development. Our paper contributes to this
literature by developing an endogenous growth model that shows how local saving impacts
on foreign investment and thereby on growth in an economy with contractual frictions, and
by confronting the predictions of this model with cross-country panel data.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops a model embodying our theory and
derives the prediction to the eﬀect that saving has a positive eﬀect on growth in all but the
most technologically advanced countries. Section 3 discusses anecdotal evidence from East
Asia. Section 4 presents our empirical evidence. Section 5 concludes.

3

2

A simple model

2.1

Basic environment

We consider a discrete-time model of a small open economy, populated by two-period lived
individuals. Individuals work and save when young to invest in innovation and consume
when old, and we denote by σ their saving rate when young. Instead of modelling saving as
resulting from intertemporal utility maximization we simply take σ as given.
A financial intermediary (a bank) can use local savings to attract foreign investment. (It
cannot use foreign savings because of the diﬃculty that foreigners would have in monitoring
the local bank.) The bank can monitor innovation projects, and we implicitly assume that
it cannot monitor foreign projects; conversely, foreign banks financed with foreign savings
are unable to monitor local projects.
There is a unique final good, which is produced using labor and a continuum of intermediate inputs, according to the production function:
Z 1
1−α
α
yt = L
A1−α
it xit di,
0

where L is the supply of labor, taken as an exogenous constant, and Ait is the productivity
of the current input i at time t.
Intermediate goods are produced by local monopolists, using final good as capital with
one unit of capital producing one unit of intermediate input. The amount of intermediate
input xit is chosen by producer i to maximize monopoly profits
pit xit − xit
subject to the inverse demand schedule
pit =

∂yt
= α(Ait L/xit )1−α ,
∂xit

where the marginal cost of the intermediate good has been normalized to 1. This yields
1

xit = Ait L(α2 ) 1−α ≡ Ait Lκ,
with equilibrium profits equal to
π it = α(1 − α)κα LAit ≡ θAit .
Moreover, assuming perfect competition in the labor market yields an equilibrium wage:

where At =
2

R1
0

wt = (1 − α) κα At = ωAt .
Ait di is average productivity.2

Substituting from the above expression for xit back into the aggregate production function shows that
per-capita GDP is strictly proportional to productivity:
yt /L = κα At .

4

2.2

Innovation technology

Our theory of productivity growth takes into account that every sector in every economy
has access to a global stock of technological knowledge. As in Howitt and Mayer-Foulkes
(2005), we assume that local firms can access the frontier technology on their own, although
at a cost which increases with the distance between the local and the frontier productivities.
In addition, we introduce the possibility for local entrepreneurs to turn to a foreign investor
who has mastered the frontier technology in order to access that technology at a potentially
lower cost. Both accumulated savings and the country’s distance to the technological frontier
will aﬀect the feasibility or the attractiveness of this latter type of arrangement relative to
the former innovation technology.
Suppose accordingly that at any point in time in each sector there is one old person who
can act as the local entrepreneur, and who has the potential to displace the incumbent by
innovating and thus being able to produce a superior intermediate product in that sector.
Specifically, a successful innovator in any sector i can produce with a productivity parameter
At that embodies the current global frontier technology. Suppose that the frontier technology
At grows at the constant rate g, which depends on the pace of innovation in the richest
countries. (For our purposes we can take g as given.)
There are three inputs to the innovation process: first, a costless input from a local entrepreneur; second, an unobservable eﬀort e on the part of the bank to monitor the entrepreneur
and make sure she does not run away with the money; and third, an investment f that is
needed to transfer the frontier technology. To innovate, the entrepreneur must undertake a
project, either with a foreign investor or without.
2.2.1

Innovation with a foreign investor

If the entrepreneur undertakes a project with a foreign investor, then the probability μ that
the project will succeed (i.e. that the bank and the foreign investor will receive a positive
return) is:
⎧
⎨ μ if f ≥ ftmin and e = 1
μ if f ≥ ftmin and e = 0 ,
μ=
⎩
0 otherwise
where:

μ > μ = qμ > 0,

with μ being the actual probability of innovation and q < 1 being the probability that the
entrepreneur will not be able to hide her cash returns in the absence of monitoring by the
bank, and where:
ftmin = φAt
denotes the minimum investment that must be made by the foreign investor at date t for
that sector to innovate with positive probability.
The cost of the investment f is just f itself. The cost Ct of monitoring by the bank in a
given sector is proportional to the frontier level of productivity:
Ct = e · (c/u) · At ,
5

where c is a random variable, independently and identically distributed across sectors, uniformly between zero and one, and u is a (positive) parameter that measures the eﬃciency of
financial intermediation.
We also assume that the bank’s monitoring eﬀort cannot be observed by anyone else.
This means that the bank will choose to shirk on monitoring a project, setting e = 0, unless
it has enough at stake in the success of the project. As we show below, this implies that
it may have to cofinance the foreign investment f , or equivalently to post collateral which
accrues to the foreign investor in the event the project does not succeed.
2.2.2

Innovation without a foreign investor

If the entrepreneur undertakes a project without a foreign investor, then she does not need
any monitoring eﬀort, since she is not going to run away from herself. In this case the
probability of success is just the probability of innovation, μ. Assume that the cost of the
investment f , which must be undertaken by the entrepreneur herself, depends inversely upon
how familiar she is with frontier technology last period, which in turn we assume depends
positively on how close the country was to the frontier last period. That is, the cost is:
(φ/ψ (at−1 )) At
where at−1 measures the country’s distance to the frontier:
at−1 ≡ At−1 /At−1 ,
and ψ is a continuous function with:
ψ 0 (a) > 0, ψ (0) = 0 and ψ (1) = 1.

2.3

Equilibrium innovation

Let Vt denote the value of an innovation at date t. Since the entrepreneur is in her last
period of life, under the simplifying assumption that in the event of no innovation next
period control of the incumbent firm will fall randomly to someone of the next generation,
the monopoly rents from a successful innovation will last for one period only, so we have:
Vt = θAt .
We then make the following assumptions:
1. Innovation at rate μ is always worth the innovation cost when undertaken with a foreign
investor, even when the monitoring cost is at its maximal value 1/u:
μθ − φ ≥ 1/u,

(1)

2. No innovation project is worth the innovation cost without the local bank’s monitoring:
μθ < φ.
6

The equilibrium rate of innovation in the economy at date t will equal the innovation
probability μ times the fraction of sectors λt in which a project is undertaken. To determine
λt , first note that a project undertaken without a foreign investor will yield a non-negative
expected return to the entrepreneur (μθ − φ/ψ (at−1 ) ≥ 0) if and only if the country is close
enough to the frontier; that is, if and only if at−1 ≥ b
a, where b
a is defined by:3
ψ (b
a) =

φ
.
μθ

Accordingly every entrepreneur will undertake a project when a country is closer than b
a to
the frontier, so:
λt = 1 if a ≥ b
a.
(A1)

In a country further from the frontier, with a < b
a, the only projects that will be undertaken are those that involve a foreign investor. The fraction λt will be the fraction of sectors
in which a project could possibly yield non-negative expected surpluses to the bank, the
entrepreneur and the foreign investor, while at the same time giving the bank an incentive
to monitor. For purposes of determining λt we assume with no loss of generality that all
the expected surplus accrues to the bank, with the entrepreneur receiving nothing and the
foreign investor receiving precisely the opportunity cost of that part of his investment f that
is not financed by the bank.
The expected surplus to the bank on a given project with a foreign investor equals
(S − c/u) At
where the “primary surplus” S is defined as:
S = μθ − φ
Condition (1) above guarantees that the expected surplus is always positive, and hence that
all investors can receive a non-negative expected surplus. Hence λt will be the fraction of
projects on which the bank can be given an incentive to monitor.
Whether or not the bank has an incentive to monitor a particular project will depend
on how much of the initial cost φ it has financed. Consider a project in which the bank has
financed the amount yAt , and the foreign investor has put up the remaining (φ − y) At . Let
xAt (resp. (θ − x) At ) denote the foreign investor’s (resp. the bank’s) reward in the event
of a successful innovation in the corresponding sector. The bank’s incentive-compatibility
constraint is:
¡
¢
μ − μ (θ − x) ≥ c/u

That is, the increased expected payoﬀ cannot be less than the monitoring cost. This can be
turned into a constraint on the amount of finance yAt by taking into account our assumption
that the expected surplus of the foreign investor [μx − (φ − y)] At equals zero:
3

y ≥ −S + ∆ · (c/u)

It follows (1) and the conditions imposed above on ψ that b
a lies strictly between zero and one.

7

(2)

where
∆=

μ
> 1.
μ−μ

The right-hand side of (2) shows the minimum cofinancing (normalized by At ) that needs
to be made by the local bank in order for a project to be undertaken with a foreign investor.
The maximum cofinancing she can provide in total across all sectors is equal to:
σωAt−1
where ω is the productivity-adjusted wage rate derived above. A higher saving rate σ will
thus facilitate innovation by allowing the bank to cofinance more projects. If total finance
is a constraint, then the bank will finance all projects up to some threshold value of c (since
lower monitoring costs yield a higher expected surplus to the bank and use up less financing
according to (2)). That threshold will be the fraction λt of projects that are undertaken,
given that c is uniformly distributed over the unit interval.
In sectors where the eﬀort variable c is less than
c = uS/∆
no cofinancing is required by the incentive-compatibility constraint (2); all such projects will
be financed. Accordingly, λt is determined by the “finance constraint”:4
Zλt ³
σωat−1
c´
dc =
,
−S + ∆
u
1+g
c

in which the two sides represent respectively the amounts of finance required and available,
both normalized by At . Solving the integral and making use of the above definition of c
yields:
√
λt = c + k cσat−1 if a < b
a.
(A2)

where k is a constant.5 .
According to (A1) and (A2), when a country is close to the frontier saving has no eﬀect
on innovation because local finance is not needed to attract foreign investment, whereas
when the country is far enough from the frontier the saving rate σ increases innovation by
increasing the number of projects for which local finance can attract foreign investment.

2.4

Equilibrium dynamics and theoretical predictions

Productivity in any sector i that undertakes a project at date t increases randomly according
to:
½
At with probability μ
,
Ait =
Ait−1 with probability 1 − μ
4

For simplicity we assume that λt ≤ 1. Relaxing this assumption would strengthen our result because
it would add another reason why increased saving would have no eﬀect on a country close enough to the
frontier (in this case close enough that the solution to the integral equation is λt > 1); that is, when
a country becomes rich enough then its savings will already enough to attract foreign investment on all
possible √
profitable
p projects.
5
k = 2ω/ S (1 + g)

8

whereas sectors that do not undertake a project do not grow. Integrating over i, we find
that aggregate productivity evolves according to:
At = λt μAt + (1 − λt μ)At−1 .

¡
¢
Dividing both sides by At , we obtain a simple dynamic equation in at = At /At , namely:
at = λt μ +

1 − λt μ
at−1
1+g

(Dist)

This “distance” equation describes the current dynamic evolution of the country’s distance to
the world technological frontier, given the current fraction of sectors λt that have undertaken
an investment project and hence are capable of innovating with positive probability.
Our primary interest is in the equilibrium growth rate gt , defined by:
1 + gt =

At
at
=(
)(1 + g),
At−1
at−1

or, using (Dist):
1+g
− 1)λt μ.
(3)
at−1
We are also interested in the relationship between the saving rate and the total amount
of FDI, namely
f λt .
gt = (

Proposition 1 (i) The eﬀects of a higher saving rate σ on total FDI and on growth are
both strictly positive when at−1 < b
a and zero otherwise; (ii) for at−1 < b
a, the positive eﬀect
of σ on growth increases with u and decreases with at−1 .

Proof. Part (i) follows immediately from results (A1) and (A2). To show part (ii) note
that
µ
¶
1+g
√
− 1 (c + k cσat−1 ) μ
gt =
at−1
Then
√
μk cat−1
∂gt
1+g
√
− 1)
=(
∂σ
at=1
2 σ
which is increasing in u (since c is proportional to u) and decreasing in at−1 .
Part two of this proposition is fairly intuitive. A more eﬃcient financial system (larger
u) is going to make better use of any increased saving. On the other hand, even though
being closer to the frontier increases the normalized productivity at−1 on which saving is
based, diminishing returns to saving (because c increases on the margin) means that this
eﬀect on the economy-wide frequency of innovations λt μ is oﬀset by the reduced average size
− 1), which falls more than in proportion to at−1 .
of innovations ( a1+g
t−1
Thus: in a country that is not too close to the frontier, growth and FDI respond positively
to an increase in the domestic saving rate, whereas in a country close enough to the frontier
growth is not significantly aﬀected by saving; moreover, the positive eﬀect of savings on
growth is enhanced by a higher degree of financial development. It is these predictions that
we shall explore in the next section.
9

3

Anecdotal evidence from East-Asia

Before presenting formal econometric evidence in support of the model’s predictions and
mechanisms in the next section, it is illustrative to study the process of technology upgrading
with the help of some case studies drawn from East-Asian experience.6
Japan in the post WWI period
Japan during the post WWI period illustrates (i) the importance of foreign involvement
for catching up with the technology frontier, (ii) the relevance of domestic savings for providing liquidity to the banking sector and (ii) how this financial liquidity enables transactions
with foreign technology suppliers.
Most of the new technology implemented in Japanese manufacturing during the 1920s
was of foreign origin. In many sectors, the usual practise was to buy the technology from a
domestic supplier and then to try to reverse engineer it. Technology transfer also took the
form of foreign direct investment. Most of the FDI was in capital and technology intensive
industries such as machinery, electrical goods, steel and iron goods, and rubber goods. In
these cases, a foreign firm would either set up a fully owned subsidiary or it would enter in
a joint partnership with an existing Japanese firm. These joint partnerships provided the
Japanese firms with the technology and capital they lacked to make a further expansion.7
By 1931, 50.5 percent of foreign direct investment was already in the form of joint enterprises.8 Japan in the 1920s lacked a broad stock market for publicly issued securities.
Individual savings were mobilized in the form of bank deposits. Big Japanese manufacturing
firms overcame the lack of financial markets by forming conglomerates that also controlled
big banks and trust companies. This provided ample liquidity to firms in metallurgy, equipment, chemicals, etc., that required large amounts of capital. In particular, this organizational arrangement allowed the firms that required more capital to access the individual
savings deposited in the banks. As it turned out, heavy industry sectors were at the center of
the financial conglomerates and also were the ones that received foreign technology transfer
through joint partnerships (Islam, 1960).
Korea in the 1960s
When Park took oﬃce in 1962, Korea was emerging from the 1958-62 recession period
where inflation had been high. In an eﬀort to reduce high inflation the government designed
the 1965 interest rate reform on the basis of the successful experience of Taiwan’s high
6

Of course, the mechanisms emphasized by our model hold more generally, as shown for example by
Nicholas (1974). This author conducted a study that covered 27 small- and medium-sized manufacturing
enterprises in Ghana and Senegal, two countries that are far from the technological frontier. He interviewed
the managers in each firm and asked them about the process of technology upgrading. In most cases, successful upgrading involved the help of foreign technicians that trained workers and guided local entrepreneurs
in acquiring machines. Though not covered by this study, the help of foreign entreprenurs and investors is
surely even more relevant for upgrading technology in large enterprises.
7
“As a matter of fact, the resort to foreign partnerships was most of the time precisely for technological
innovation in fields in which the Japanese did not have the adequate knowledge or resources.” Islam (1960)
8
This surge of joint partnerships with foreign firms started long before 1932 when the new military regime
imposed a minimum Japanese share in foreign corporations operating in Japan.

10

interest policy during 1950-58. The Monetary Board of Korea, a committee within the
central bank, announced that the ceiling rate on saving deposits was being raised from 15
percent per annum to 30 percent (Brown [1973], Kuznets [1977] and Kim [1991]). During
the 1960-1965 the inflation rate was 19 percent. As a result, the real return on savings was
negative before the interest rate reform. In particular, in 1964 the real annual interest rate
on savings accounts was -17 percent (Brown, 1973). After the 1965 reform, the real interest
rate on long term bank deposits was 11.2 percent in 1965.
The interest rate reform resulted in a rapid increase in bank savings deposits beginning
in the fourth quarter of 1965. The constant-price value of savings deposits rose nearly 50
percent in the final three months of 1965. The increase in interest rates raised savings
both because it increased the nominal rate and because the decline in demand reduced the
inflation rate. Hence the eﬀect of the reform was quite persistent and the constant-price
value of savings deposits rose by 110 percent in 1966, and by 80 percent and 100 percent in
1967 and 1968, respectively.9
During the period 1962-66, local authorities made the first noticeable eﬀorts to attract
foreign direct investment. These first took the form of new laws allowing for temporary
tax holidays, or for duty-free import of machinery and raw materials approved as investment requirements, or allowing for the remittance of principals and profits and protected
property against expropriation (Kuznets [1977], Kim and Roemer [1981]). In addition, various measures aimed at promoting exports made it more attractive for foreign investors to
transfer technology (Westphal, 1978). And in those, local credit features prominently. First,
credit subsidies provided low interest loans to exporters with letters of credit from foreign
importers. These credit lines provided liquidity to producers of goods that were suﬃciently
competitive to be exported. This helped them provide collateral to foreign investors that
helped them upgrade their technology. Second, the Korean Exchange Bank also provided
suppliers’ credit. Foreign suppliers of plant, equipment and raw materials to Korean exporters provided the largest source of funds for export. Interestingly, the credits and loans
provided by these foreign suppliers were secured by the Korean Exchange Bank (Kuznets,
1977). These credit policies in turn could be sustained thanks to the large amount of private
savings deposited in the government’s Bank in response to the interest rate reform.
These reforms surely helped solve the moral hazard problem associated to the international transfer of technology since the flow of technology transferred to Korea increased
substantially during the period 1962-73. One of the channels by which foreign technology
transferred is foreign direct investment. In August 1962, the first case of a direct foreign
private investment, a US-Korea joint-venture firm producing nylon filaments, was approved
by the Government of the Republic of Korea. In the next decade, foreign direct investment
flows increased very fast. In 1973, the number of projects approved reached 271 and the value
of foreign private investment $262 millions (Jo, 1980). A few facts indicate that FDI was an
active channel by which foreign technology was transferred to the Korean economy. First,
FDI was directed, disproportionately, to high-tech sectors such as chemicals, machinery and
machine parts, and specially to electric and electronic machinery. Second, foreign-invested
9

The post-1965 period was a period of rapid growth in Korea. Brown (1973), however, shows that the
increase in real interest rates that followed the 1965 reform had a very strong and significant eﬀect on the
private saving rate in Korea after controling for the eﬀect that private disposable income has on savings.

11

firms tended to import much more than local firms. Third, joint-venture firms tended to
import a substantial proportion of intermediate inputs from their foreign partner companies.
Fourth, foreign-invested firms had twice as much machinery and equipment per worker than
that of local firms and produce 80 percent more value added per worker. Finally, a larger
share of the output produced in foreign-invested firms was exported.
FDI is not the only channel by which foreign technology is transferred. Another channel
is technological licensing. Jo (1980) documents the ever-increasing trend in Korea’s technological licensing agreements with foreign firms. Most of these were made with Japanese and
US firms. In 1962 only 5 agreements were approved. In 1975, 93 new technology licensing
agreements were approved, and the total royalty payments in that year amounted to almost
$19 millions. As with FDI, most of the licensing agreements were signed by firms in high-tech
sectors such as electric and electronics, machinery and chemicals.
This increasing adoption of foreign technologies contributed to high and persistent growth.
During the recession period of 1958-62 the Korean economy did not experience any growth
in output per worker.10 During the period 1962-68 the average annual growth rate in output
per worker was 6 percent, while during the period 1968-74 it was 6.3 percent. Restoring
full capacity generated a significant part of the acceleration of growth during the 1962-68
period, but the continuous and increasing adoption of frontier technology helped maintain
the impressive growth rates once full capacity was restored.
This view of the growth experience in Korea is not undisputed. Carroll, Overland and
Weil (2000) have argued that growth in Korea started during the second half of the 50s, long
before the interest rate reform and the increase in domestic private saving. Indeed, output
per worker during the period 1953-58 grew at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent. This,
however, was the result of a neoclassical catch-up process after the destruction of capital
during the Korean War. During the war (1950-53), civilian casualties approximated one
million, including those killed, wounded and missing (Bank of Korea, 1955). War damage
to non-military capital and structures has been estimated at $3.1 billion at the implicit
exchange rate for 1953. The estimates of the Korean GDP in 1953 vary substantially. The
estimate of the Bank of Korea implies that non-military assets war damage was equivalent
to 86 percent of 1953 GNP. The estimate of Nathan Associates implies that the war damage
on non-military assets was twice the GNP in 1953. According to an estimate made by the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, war damage to manufacturing facilities was equivalent
to 42 to 44 percent of pre-war facilities (Hwang, 1971). It was not until 1960 that the
post-war reconstruction was completed (Kim and Roemer, 1981).11
Taiwan in the 1950s and 1960s
Taiwan oﬀers a very similar picture to Korea with just a few important diﬀerences with
respect to the development of financial markets. Taiwan showed a remarkable saving rate at
least since the early 50s. Despite very low income per capita levels ($100 in 1950) and coming
out of hyperinflation (annual percentage inflation rates of 3400, 305, 66 and 23 between 1949
10

The following computations use the Penn World Tables.
The post-war reconstruction of Korea was largely financed by the US and by the UN. During the period
1953-60, total assistance provided by the UN amounted to approximately $120 million, and oﬃcial IUS
assistance reached over $1.7 billion.
11

12

and 1952), the saving rate in 1952 was as high as 9.2 percent. As in Korea in the early 1960s,
the government promoted saving by pursuing a high interest rate policy. This interest rate
policy also led to a reduction in inflation which induced a further increase in the real interest
rate. The real interest rate averaged 17 percent between 1952 and 1958. In addition, private
savings were indirectly promoted by the government through complementary policies such
as a very low social security safety net, a limited availability of consumer credit, high down
payments for housing and a variety of favorable tax policies (Chiu 1992, Myers 1984, and
Stallings 1990). These policies resulted in an impressive increase in the saving rate, from 12
percent in 1962 to 22 percent in 1968 and 35 percent in 1973.
The Taiwanese financial system is dominated by the government-controlled local commercial banks and by the Central Bank which provide credit mostly to large firms. In addition,
small businesses could obtain resources from the “curb market”: “an unregulated, semi-legal
credit market in which loan suppliers and lenders can transact freely at uncontrolled interest
rates.” (Wade, 1985).
Taiwan’s link to international markets was restricted by the stringent capital controls that
were in place until the 1980s. The exception to this rule was FDI. In the early 1970s, one fifth
of manufacturing production came from fully or partially foreign-owned firms. FDI has been
concentrated in a few advanced manufacturing sectors. For example, between 1952 and 1979,
two thirds of FDI in Taiwan was concentrated in Electronics (48 percent) and Chemicals (15
percent). Foreign firms played a major role in the development of these industries and
helped upgrade the technologies used in these industries for example by producing advanced
synthetics (Clark, 1997).
One example of successful technology transfer is the case of the Singer Sewing Machine
Company that revolutionized the local industry in Taiwan. Before Singer arrived in Taiwan
in 1963, the sewing machine industry consisted of approximately 250 family-owned firms
assembling sewing machines and providing parts for the assemblers. Taiwan Singer started
production in 1964. It provided considerable technical assistance to its local suppliers, furnishing them with blueprints, providing training and technology transfer in production,
quality control, factory management and in standardizing parts. These gave a tremendous
impulse to the local producers, both to the suppliers that dealt directly with Singer and
to the rest which were able to improve their technologies by interacting with Signer’s direct suppliers. This resulted in a fifteen-fold increase in production between 1963 and 1973.
Furthermore, while Taiwan Singer played a major direct role in the initial increase in production, domestic firms soon dominated both the domestic and export markets. After 1968,
Taiwan Singer’s share of Taiwanese production dropped to about 10 percent. The upgrading
of Taiwanese technology to the world frontier occurred very quickly. The resources to finance
the technological upgrading for the hundreds of small domestic firms came mostly from the
curb market which was fed by-and-large by domestic private savings.
However, the lack of an eﬃcient formal financial market in Taiwan has been a constraint
for the acquisition of technologies that, because of the size of the necessary foreign investments, required larger amounts of collateral to enable the transfer. This was the case in the
automobile industry. All the various projects that were attempted to upgrade the automobile industry did not pass the planning stage. Though the threat of foreign entry stimulated
domestic producers to become more productive, these remained far from becoming internationally competitive.
13

4

Econometric evidence

We now confront the implications of our model to econometric analysis. Causality in macro
data is inherently hard to uncover, so the reader should interpret the correlations that follow
as suggestive. The main point obtained is that the many correlations we examine in the
data are consistent with the model, including the diﬀerential eﬀects between rich and poor
countries, and we are not aware of any alternative theory that would be consistent with all
these correlations.
Our exploration is based on a cross-country panel over the period from 1960 to 2000.
We use a sample of 118 countries, all those for which there exist data on per-worker GDP
and on the saving rate. Data on income per worker comes from the Penn World Tables 6.1.
For the saving rate we use both the series from the Penn world Tables and from the World
Bank. These measures diﬀer in that the former is measured in international prices while
the latter is measured using domestic prices. Hsieh and Klenow (2005) show that, unlike
the investment rate, the cross-country correlation of the saving rate with income per capita
is about the same whether the saving rate is measured in domestic or international prices.
Due to the larger data availability of the Penn World Table data we make this our primary
saving rate measure but we prove the robustness of our results to using World Bank saving
rate measures for some representative regressions. Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for
the variables used in our analysis.
The main empirical implications of our model concern the diﬀerential eﬀect of savings on
growth for countries that are far from the technology frontier (i.e. a < b
a). To implement the
test of this prediction, we classify countries each year in two groups depending on whether
the log-income gap with the highest income per capita country is above or below the median
gap (i.e. 1.8). That is, a country is poor if it has an income per capita below 16.5 percent
the income per capita of the richest country and it is rich if it has an income per capita
above this threshold.
Econometric specification
The specification used to investigate the relationship between savings and growth regression (4) - follows closely equation (3) in our model. In this specification, the dependent
variable is the growth rate of income per worker between year t and year t + 10. We choose
a diﬀerence of ten years because the mechanism embedded in our model is more relevant in
the medium term than in the very short term.
ln(yit+10 /yit )/10 = αi + ρ t + β ln yit + γsit,t−4 + ²it .

(4)

The independent variable of interest is the average saving rate in the five-year period
between t − 4 and t denoted by sit,t−4 . The saving rate variable, which includes public as well
as private saving, is defined as one minus the ratio of private consumption to GDP minus
the ratio of government purchases to GDP. Using a five-year average of savings instead of
the annual saving rate at t serves three purposes. First, it reduces the measurement error
present in annual data. Second, it better captures the notion that collateral is a stock not a
flow. We will explore below the robustness of the results to allowing for longer periods over
which savings are accumulated. Third, by using lagged measures of the independent variable
14

we reduce the possibility of reverse causality. Of course, the ideal empirical counterpart to
the saving rate in the model would be some measure of collaretabizable domestic assets.
Unfortunately, this variable is unavailable for a panel such as ours and we have to use a
noisy proxy such as the average saving rate for the last 5 years.
In our regressions, we follow the convergence literature (and equation (3)) and allow
for the initial log-level of income per worker (ln yit ) to have an eﬀect on the subsequent
growth rate. We also include a time trend and country fixed eﬀects to control for trends
and very persistent diﬀerences in productivity growth driven by factors not captured by our
theory. Countries may diﬀer, for example, in the degree of property right protection and this
may aﬀect the cross-country relation between lagged savings and growth. This relationship,
however, is orthogonal to our model’s mechanisms and we would like to filter it out from our
analysis with the country fixed eﬀects. Finally, in the robustness analysis, we verify that our
findings persist after including year fixed eﬀects that capture global annual fluctuations in
the variables.
Our empirical strategy consists in estimating regression (4) for three samples, the sample
of all countries, the sample of poor countries and the sample of rich countries. Therefore,
the speed of convergence and the time trends may in principle diﬀer by income group.
Recent studies by Carroll and Weil (1994) and Attanasio, Picci and Scorcu (2000) have
conducted Granger causality tests between growth and the saving rate in a panel of countries.
Our specification diﬀers from these studies in at least three respects. First, we are interested
in exploring the medium term eﬀect of savings on growth rather than the contemporaneous
and short term relationship between these variables. Second, unlike these statistical explorations, ours is model-guided investigation, and our model indicates that when estimating
the relationship between lagged savings and growth we should control for initial productivity. This control is missing from the specifications used to conduct Granger causality tests.
Third, our identification strategy focuses on the diﬀerential eﬀect of lagged savings on growth
in poor vs. rich countries and by estimating separately our specification in these samples we
are able to uncover some of the heterogeneity that exists in the relationship between lagged
savings and growth across countries.
Since the periods used to compute the growth rate of income per capita and the saving
rates overlap, the error terms may be autocorrelated. We use the Newey-West method to
obtain correct standard errors for the estimated coeﬃcients. To obtain some guidance on the
length of the truncation in the computation of the Newey-West standard errors, we apply the
rule of thumb proposed by Stock and Watson (2002) which suggests that we should truncate
after two lags. The statistical significance of our results, however, is robust to truncating
after much longer lags.12
Lagged savings and productivity growth
The first three columns in Table 2 report the estimates from (4) in our three samples.
Column 1 covers all the country-years; column 2 restricts the sample to country-year pairs
above the median income gap, that is, poor countries, while column 3 restricts the sample
to rich countries. In the full sample we observe the standard result of convergence in income
per worker after introducing country fixed eﬀects. As predicted by our model, we find a
12

We have experimented with up to 10 lags without any change in the significance of our findings.

15

significant positive association between savings and productivity growth in the ten years
going forward.
A more interesting prediction of our model is that the eﬀect of savings on growth should
be larger for countries far from the technology frontier than for countries close to the frontier.
This prediction is borne by the data. Comparing the coeﬃcients of savings in columns 2 and
3 we can observe how for poor countries the coeﬃcient of savings in the growth regression is
3.9 percent while for rich countries is less than half this magnitude. The association between
lagged average savings and productivity growth for poor countries is very significant while
for rich countries the t-statistic is just 1.67.13 The diﬀerence in the coeﬃcient of savings
between the two samples is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Note also that
the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on growth is of quantitative importance. An increase
in the average saving rate between t − 4 and t of 10 percentage points is associated with an
increase in the average growth rate in output per worker of four tenths of one percentage
point over the next ten years.
This diﬀerential eﬀect between rich and poor countries is the opposite of what we would
have expected to have resulted if measurement error was a major issue, given that the quality
of data in the Penn World Tables is generally lower for poor countries than rich. In particular,
higher measurement error in saving rates probably caused more attenuation of its estimated
eﬀect in poor countries than rich.
The remaining six columns in Table 2 check the robustness of these results. Columns 4
through 6 report the estimates of the following regression where the time trends are replaced
by year fixed eﬀects.
ln(yit+10 /yit )/10 = αi + ρt + β ln yit + γsit,t−4 + ²it .

(5)

Including year fixed eﬀect does not aﬀect very much the estimated association between
lagged average savings and subsequent productivity growth. The coeﬃcients of savings
decline a little both for rich and poor countries but the one for poor countries remains very
significant and the gap between the two persists after the inclusion of the time dummies.
Columns 7 through 9 of Table 2 include as control the degree of trade openness in the
economy at year t measured by the sum of the export and the import shares in GDP. This
variable has been identified by several authors (including Frankel and Romer, 1999) as an
important determinant of growth. In line with their results, we find that it is significantly
associated with subsequent growth. However, its inclusion does not aﬀect the relationship
between savings and growth. In particular, lagged average savings is strongly associated
with productivity growth in the whole sample and in the sample of poor countries while it
is not significantly associated with growth in the sample of rich countries. Note however,
that the diﬀerence in the eﬀect of lagged savings on productivity growth between poor and
rich countries in columns 4 through 9 is not statistically significant. As we show next, this
diﬀerential eﬀect of savings becomes very significant when looking at saving rates measured
in domestic prices and when decomposing the sources of growth.
Private vs. public savings
13

When using 10 lags to compute the Newey-West standard errors, the t-stat for the coeﬃcient of lagged
savings in poor countries is 2.2 while in rich countries it is 0.98.

16

In our model, savings matter only because of their role as collateral when undertaking technology adoption projects with a foreign investor. If public savings can be used as
collateral by private agents, then the model predicts that the eﬀect of private and public
savings should have a symmetric eﬀect on growth. However, if public savings cannot be
used as collateral for private projects, then the mechanisms presented in the model imply
that private savings should have a stronger eﬀect on growth than public savings. Further, to
the extent that government savings constitute a transfer of resources away from the private
economy and this may reduce private savings, our model may predict a negative eﬀect of
public savings in countries far from the technology frontier but no eﬀect in countries more
familiar with the frontier.
Next, we explore whether the positive association that we have found between lagged
savings and productivity growth operates through private or public savings. To do that, we
use World Bank data on savings that divides these between private and public. These data
also allow us to check the robustness of the results presented in Table 2 to measuring the
saving rate in domestic rather than in international prices.
The first three columns in Table 3 reestimate regression (4) with the World Bank savings
measures. The basic message from this exercise is that the diﬀerential eﬀect of savings on
growth for poor countries is robust to measuring the saving rate using domestic or international prices. Indeed, when using the World Bank saving rate measure we find that the eﬀect
of lagged savings on growth for poor countries is larger than when using saving rates from
the Penn World Tables. For rich countries, instead, the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on
growth is smaller when using the World Bank saving measure. Hence, when using saving rate
computed with domestic prices to estimate regression (4), the diﬀerential eﬀect of savings
on growth for poor vs. rich countries increases.
Columns 4 through 6 reestimate regression (4) for the subsample of countries for which
we have the decomposition of savings into private and public. Though the eﬀect of savings
on growth declines a little bit, its diﬀerential eﬀect on the growth rate of poor countries also
holds in this subsample.
Columns 7 through 9 estimate regression (6), where we allow for diﬀerent coeﬃcients on
WB
the growth eﬀects of average lagged private saving rate over GDP (sprivit,t−4
) and average
WB
lagged public saving rate over GDP (spubit,t−4 ).
WB
B
ln(yit+10 /yit )/10 = αi + ρ t + β ln yit + γ 1 sprivit,t−4
+ γ 2 spubW
it,t−4 + ²it .

(6)

The main finding from this exercise is that the diﬀerential eﬀect of savings on growth for
countries that are far from the frontier is completely driven by private rather than public
savings. A ten percentage points increase in the average private saving rate of poor countries
between t − 4 and t is associated with more than a half a percent increase in the average
productivity growth rate during the following decade. In contrast, the point estimate of the
eﬀect of public savings on growth is negative but insignificant.
Capital accumulation vs. TFP growth
Productivity growth can result from TFP growth or from capital accumulation. In particular, if the aggregate production function takes the standard Cobb-Douglas form we can

17

decompose the productivity growth measure over a ten year period as follows
ln(yit+10 /yit )/10 = ln(T F Pit+10 /T F Pit )/10 + α ∗ ln(kit+10 /kit )/10,

(7)

where k denotes capital per worker.
In our model, savings has a larger growth eﬀect for poor than for rich countries because
it allows them to build the collateral necessary to induce foreign investors to transfer frontier
technology. Therefore, our model predicts that the diﬀerential growth eﬀect of lagged savings
in poor countries operates through TFP growth. This implication is in contrast with most
existing models of savings and growth (e.g. Solow, 1956, Bernanke and Gertler, 1989) which
predict that the growth eﬀects of savings operate through capital accumulation.
To explore which channel is driving the relationship between savings and productivity
growth, we build measures of the growth in capital per worker over ten year intervals (t,
t + 10) using the same procedure as Hall and Jones (1999) to build aggregate capital stocks
and the Penn World Tables to obtain information on the number of workers. Then we
compute TFP growth over a ten year interval by assuming a capital share of one third and
sustracting one third times the growth rate of capital per worker from the growth rate of
GDP per worker.
We run the following two regressions in each of our three samples:
ln(kit+10 /kit )/10 = αi + ρ t + β ln yit + γsit,t−4 + ²it .

(8)

ln(T F Pit+10 /T F Pit )/10 = αi + ρ t + β ln yit + γsit,t−4 + ²it .

(9)

Table 4a contains the estimates from this exercise. Columns 4 through 6 correspond to
regression (8) while columns 7 through 9 correspond to regression (9). The main finding from
this exercise is that the positive association between lagged savings and growth observed in
the overall sample and in the sample of poor countries is entirely driven by the association
between lagged savings and TFP growth. For the entire sample, an increase in the average
savings rate between t − 4 and t by 10 percentage points is associated with an increase in the
average TFP growth rate between t and t+10 by four tenths of one percentage point. In poor
countries, a similar increase in the saving rate is associated to an increase in TFP over the
subsequent ten years by half of a percentage point. In contrast to this, lagged savings does
not have any significant eﬀect on TFP growth in rich countries. Further, the diﬀerence in the
eﬀect of lagged savings on TFP growth between poor and rich country, in addition to being
large - 3.7 percentage points- is statistically significant at the 1 per thousand significance
level.
Columns 4 through 6 in Table 4a show that lagged savings is insignificantly associated to
the growth in capital per worker between t and t + 10. This is the case in the whole sample,
in the sample of poor countries and in the sample of rich countries. Further, the diﬀerence
in the point estimates of lagged savings on growth in capital per capita between poor and
rich countries is statistically insignificant.
Columns 4 through 9 in Table 4b report the estimates of regressions (8) and (9) but now
we use the World Bank saving rate measure that uses domestic rather than international
prices to measure savings and income. All the findings from Table 4a hold a fortiori when
18

using the World Bank saving rate measures. In particular, an increase in the average saving
rate between t − 4 and t by 10 percentage points is associated to an increase in the average
TFP growth rate between t and t + 10 of almost seven tenths of one percentage point in
poor countries while it has no eﬀect on rich countries.
Before moving forward with our exploration it is convenient to make a remark about
what the Solow residual measures. Since we have not adjusted the residual for human
capital accumulation, it is going to be captured by our measure of TFP growth. However,
we know since the work of Islam (1995) and others that schooling does not have a significant
eﬀect on growth in panel exercises such ours. Therefore, controlling for human capital
accumulation would not change our finding that the association between lagged savings and
growth operates through TFP rather than through factor accumulation.14
Stock vs. Flow
One simple way to improve our measure of the collateral in the economy is to increase
the length of the interval over which we compute the average saving rate. Next, we consider
how the estimates of the eﬀect of lagged savings on growth change when we measured lagged
savings by the average saving rate between years t − 9 and t rather than the average saving
rate between t − 4 and t.15
Table 5 compares the estimates of lagged savings on growth when using 5 and 10 year
averages. The main conclusion from this exercise is that extending the period over which we
compute average savings does not aﬀect the eﬀect of savings on growth. This insensitivity
of the estimated eﬀect of average savings on growth to including lagged savings from the
period (t − 9 , t − 5) may provide some support for the role of savings as collateral since one
would think that savings at diﬀerent lags have a similar eﬀect on current collateral.
Reverse causality
A strand of the literature on growth and savings has emphasized that the causality does
not run from savings to growth but from growth to savings. Most prominently, Carroll,
Overland and Weil (2000) have argued that if consumers have internal habit, in response
to an increase in their income prospects they will tend to save more to avoid the negative
eﬀects of a higher habit. This mechanism could, in principle, be consistent with our findings
that lagged savings is positively associated to future productivity growth and to future TFP
growth.
Of course, it is not obvious why this would happen more in poor than in rich countries as
we have found in our analysis so far. Further, one would expect that the response to future
growth prospect would be larger the more immediate are the realizations of growth. That
would imply that we should observe a lower coeﬃcient of savings on growth when looking
14

In addition, recent work by Comin, Hobijn and Rovito [2006] shows that direct technology measures are
highly correlated to TFP.
15
The exclusion of the initial level of physical capital from this measure should not be a significant concern
since after 10 years most of the initial capital stock will be depreciated. In particular, with a reasonable 10
percent depreciation rate, only one third of the available capital at year t − 9 will remain at year t.

19

at savings between t − 4 and t than when looking at more distant savings. That is not what
we have found in Table 5.16
The reverse causality argument, however, may still be consistent with the insensitivity
to the lag of savings of the coeﬃcient of savings on growth if growth is very persistent. If
this was the case, future growth would be highly correlated to current growth which would
trigger very lagged savings. However, we know at least since Easterly, Kremer, Pritchett and
Summers (1993) that average growth over decades presents very low autocorrelation. We
also reach a similar conclusion when estimating the eﬀect of productivity growth between
t − 9 and t on productivity growth between t and t + 10 after controlling for log-productivity
at t and including the country fixed eﬀects.17
Finally, one way to evaluate the power of the reverse causality explanation is the following.
Let’s take an oﬀ-the-shelf model where the causality runs from future growth to lagged
savings, let’s simulate it and let’s run our regressions on the simulated data. Is the estimated
relationship between savings and growth similar to the one we estimate in the data?
A positive answer to this question does not imply that reverse causality is driving the
results presented so far because in the exercise we are posing a particular model that contains
habit. However, a negative answer will make hard to reconcile the evidence with the reverse
causation argument.
We consider two models for this calibration exercise. First, we simulate a standard real
business cycle model with standard CRRA preferences separable in consumption and leisure.
Then we simulate a model with internal habit for consumption with exogenous labor supply
and exogenous productivity shocks. This habit model is quite similar to the model presented
by Carroll, Overland and Weil (2000) and it is described in more detail in the Appendix.
Table 6 reports the results from various calibrations of these models. Columns 2 through
6 describe the model and the values used for the most relevant parameters. The Appendix
contains the values used for the calibration for the other parameters. For each of these
calibrations, we simulate 1000 50-year series and then for each simulated series we estimate
regressions (4) and (9). Column 7 contains the average estimate of the eﬀects of lagged
savings on subsequent productivity growth and the 95 percent confidence interval for this
average estimate. Column 8 contains the average estimate of the eﬀects of lagged savings on
subsequent TFP growth and the 95 percent confidence interval for this average estimate. In
addition, we also compare the relative volatility of investment and output in the model with
the data. In particular, we apply the Hodrick-Prescott filter to each simulated series and
compute the ratio of the relative standard deviation of simulated investment over the standard deviation of simulated output. Column 9 report the average ratio for each calibration
together with the 95 percent confidence interval of the average ratio.
Recall that the estimates from our regressions above are: (i) 3.9 and 4.6 percent for the
estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on productivity growth in poor countries depending on
whether we measure the saving rate in international or domestic prices, and (ii) 5.2 or 6.7
percent for the eﬀect of lagged savings on subsequent TFP growth in poor countries, also
depending on whether we use international or domestic prices to measure the saving rate.
16

If we look at the association between average savings between t − 9 and t − 5 and growth (between t and
t + 10) we observe that the coeﬃcients are very similar to what we obtain when having as regressor average
savings between t − 9 and t or average savings between t − 4 and t.
17
If we do not control for log productivity at t,the autocorrelation of productivity growth is even negative.

20

Finally, it is well known that in developed economies investment is about 3 times as volatile
as output, while in developing economies this ratio is about 4 (Gopinath and Aguiar, 2005).
The first two rows report the estimate of the eﬀect of lagged savings on subsequent growth
in the RBC model without habit. In this model we consider value for the annual autocorrelation of the TFP shocks equal to 0.8 (row 1) and 0.95 (row 2). As is well known, the
simulations from this type of models are consistent with the relative volatility of investment
and output observed in the data. However, we find that, irrespective of the calibration and
whether we look at the growth of productivity or of TFP, in this type of model lagged savings
is uncorrelated to subsequent growth.
Following the hypothesis of Carroll, Overland and Weil (2000), we simulate a model
with strong internal habit. In particular, a habit persistence parameter of 0.8 implies that
if the consumer does not change her consumption level from the previous period she will
just enjoy 20 percent of her total consumption. Introducing internal habit tends to increase
the consumer savings rate in response to expectations of higher income in the future. This,
however, does not have much impact on the estimated correlation between lagged savings
and subsequent growth once we control for the log-level of labor productivity at t. In rows
3 and 4 we observe how the average estimate of this conditional correlation in the data
simulated from the habit model is negative when the dependent variable is the growth rate
of labor productivity and very small average estimates when the dependent variable is the
growth rate of TFP. In particular, for this latter case, the average estimate is less than
one tenth the coeﬃcient estimated for the sample of poor countries (row 3). Further, row 4
illustrates one problem that sometimes arises in the model with habit. Namely, that volatility
of investment (relative to output) is too small. In this particular specification this results
from the combination of habit and a high auto-correlation of the TFP shock.18
We next try to correct both of these problems by increasing the capital share to 0.7, a
value often rationalized with a broad interpretation of the concept of capital (e.g. Mankiw,
Romer and Weil, 1992). A higher capital share increases the return to current investment
and consumers save more in response to a productivity shock. This tends to increase the
partial correlation between current savings and subsequent growth. However, it also reduces
the volatility of investment relative to output. In our parametrization in row 5, this relative
volatility is less than 1.8. Even in this case, the average estimate of the eﬀect of lagged
savings on subsequent productivity growth is still negative (though very small). For TFP
growth, this eﬀect is about 3 percent while in the data the estimated eﬀect ranges from 5.2
to 6.7 percent. Hence, it does not seem that the reverse causality of future growth on lagged
savings predicted by habit models is suﬃcient to rationalize the large observed correlation
between these two variables in the data. Row 6 tries to increase the relative volatility of
investment by reducing the auto-correlation of the TFP shocks to 0.5. This increases slightly
the relative volatility of investment but reduces to 2 percent the estimated eﬀect of savings
on TFP growth.
The last three rows of Table 6 explore the eﬀect of increasing the habit persistence. This
does not aﬀect significantly any of the previous observations. Hence, we conclude that reverse
18

This, and all the results discussed in this section are robust to varying the risk aversion coeﬃcient.
Typically, the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on subsequent growth declines with the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion.

21

causality is not responsible for a significant part of the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on
productivity or TFP growth in the countries that are far from the technology frontier.
Omitted variable bias
Both savings and productivity growth are endogenous variables. Therefore it is not
possible for us to rule out the possibility that the observed relationship between lagged
savings and productivity growth is not driven by a third variable that is omitted from our
analysis.19 Though this is certainly possible, there are a few hurdles that the omitted variable
must pass in order to drive our results.
First, the omitted variable cannot be very persistent or have a very persistent eﬀect
on growth because if this was the case its eﬀect would be captured by the country fixed
eﬀect and would not account for the positive estimates of lagged savings on subsequent
growth. Institutional and geographic variables are definitely rule out from the list of potential
suspects.
Second, if the eﬀect of the omitted variable on growth is very transitory, the exclusion of
the variable from regression (4) is still an unlikely source of bias because in our regressions
we control for the productivity level at the beginning of the period and this variable would
capture very transitory growth eﬀects from an omitted variable. Third, this restriction
becomes slightly more stringent from the fact that the coeﬃcient of savings on growth does
not decline when using the average saving rate between t − 9 and t as regressor.
Finally, and most important, the omitted variable should be more correlated with savings
in poor than in rich countries or alternatively aﬀect diﬀerentially growth in poor vs. rich
countries. Of course, it may be possible to find variables that satisfy these restrictions and
therefore we cannot rule out the possibility that our estimates are driven by omitted variable
bias. However, finding such a variable is not an easy task and our model provides an intuitive
explanation of these findings.
Savings, financial market development and growth
So far, we have classified countries according to their per capita income and used this as
a proxy to their distance to the technology frontier.20 However, it might be the case, that
our classification based on income per capita diﬀerences captures factors other than technology diﬀerences. One possibility is that the income gap reflects cross-country diﬀerences in
financial market development. Savings would then be more growth enhancing in low financially developed countries because would provide liquidity to the capital markets and enable
the development of profitable projects that would not be undertaken otherwise. Financially
developed countries may access more easily to international capital markets and, as a result,
the number of profitable projects undertaken would not be so sensitive to domestic savings.
19

An alternative approach consists on trying to instrument savings. Loayza, Schimdt and Serven (2000)
use dependency ratios, urbanization rates, income inequality, volatility growth and growth as instruments.
However, it is debatable whether these variables are exogenous.
20
The literature on development accounting (Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997 and Hall and Jones, 1999)
supports this exercise by finding that a very large fraction of cross-country diﬀerences in income per capita
can be attributed to TFP. Further, Comin, Hobijn and Rovito (2006) show that TFP diﬀerences are highly
correlated with cross-country diﬀerences in technology adoption.

22

This story is a valid alternative to ours and suggests that there may exist an omitted
variable in our analysis that operates through the classification of countries. This story however is significantly diﬀerent from ours because it would predict that savings is a substitute
for financial development while our model predicts that savings is complement to financial
development. To test which of these two alternatives holds in the data, we conduct the
following exercise. We classify countries by their financial market development measured,
as it is usually done in this literature, by the private credit to GDP ratio. Then we run
our growth regressions for productivity (4) and TFP growth (9) in the full sample, in the
sample of countries with financial development below the median financial development in
the year, and for the sample of countries with higher financial markets development than
the median. To reduce noise in the savings measure we use the private savings measure. In
particular, our regressor of interest is the average private saving rate between t − 4 and t.
Table 7 reports the estimates from this exercise.
Columns 1 through 3 and 7 through 9 in Table 7 show that the diﬀerential eﬀect of lagged
savings on the growth of poor vs. rich countries is robust to restricting the analysis to the
subsample of countries for which we have data on private credit. The main finding from
Table 7 is that the relative eﬀect of savings on growth by income gap is very diﬀerent from
the relative eﬀect by financial market development. When looking at productivity growth
over the next 10 years, savings is more productive for countries with high than with low
financial markets development. In particular, for the former the coeﬃcient of average lagged
private savings on productivity growth over the next 10 years is 0.03, while for the former is
-0.016. The diﬀerence between these two coeﬃcients is statistical significant at the 5 percent
level. This is illustrated by the last row where we report the p-value for the test of the
null hypothesis that the eﬀect of savings on growth is the same for high and low financially
developed countries. For TFP growth (columns 11 and 12), we also find that private savings
is associated with a larger growth eﬀect for highly financially developed countries than for
countries with low financial development. In particular, the coeﬃcient of lagged average
private saving rate for financially developed countries is 0.04 while for countries with low
financial development it is -0.008. The diﬀerence in the eﬀects of savings on TFP growth
for countries with high vs. low financial development is also statistically significant. Thus,
as predicted by our model, financial development is complementary to domestic private
savings.21

4.1

Evidence on the mechanisms

So far we have explored various predictions of our model using the reduced form relationship
between savings and growth. To build a stronger body of evidence in support of the mechanisms emphasized by our model we explore the role of savings on foreign direct investment
and on the imports of high-tech equipment. We also explore how including these variables
in our baseline regressions aﬀects the reduced form relationship between lagged savings and
growth.
21
Alfaro et al. (2004) also find that FDI and financial market development are complementary in a growth
regression. In particular, they find that, in a cross-sectional growth regression at the country level, the
interaction of FDI with financial market development enters positively.

23

FDI, savings and growth
Foreign technology is transfer through a variety of channels that include foreign direct
investment, technology licensing, imports of high-tech equipment, consulting/ advising services,etc. Next, we explore the relationship between the average saving rate and the average
FDI-to-GDP ratio between t and t − 2 for those country-years where FDI is non-negative
(equation (10)). The regression also includes a country specific constant and a time trend.
As in our previous analysis, we estimate the relationship between savings and FDI for the
three samples (full, poor and rich countries).
F DI/GDPit−2,t = αi + βsit−4.t + γt + ²it .

(10)

The first three columns in Table 8 contain the estimates from this regression. Two
observations are worth making. First, savings are positively associated with FDI inflows.
Second, the eﬀect of savings on FDI is very similar for poor and for rich countries. Columns
4 through 9 of Table 8 also control for log of GDP per worker and for trade openness both
in year t − 3. Introducing these controls does not aﬀect the positive relationship between
savings and FDI.
A second question that we can address is whether FDI accounts for some of the estimated
eﬀect of savings on the growth of poor countries. To this end we estimate our growth
regressions including the average FDI to GDP ratio between t − 2 and t as a control. In
Table 9 we can observe how the FDI to GDP ratio between t − 2 and t is positively and
significantly associated to both productivity growth and TFP growth in poor countries. In
rich countries, the estimated partial correlation between FDI and either productivity growth
or TFP growth is smaller than in poor countries (0.03 vs. 0.13 and 0.049 vs. 0.09) and
statistically insignificant. This finding is consistent with our theory since it predicts that
FDI in countries that are far from the frontier embodies a larger technology transfer than
for countries that are close to the technological frontier.
FDI is one of the possible ways in which the foreign entrepreneur can help domestic
producers catch up with the frontier. Therefore, since in our model savings matters for
growth because it facilitates this technology transfer, our theory implies that controlling for
FDI should reduce the estimated eﬀect of savings on growth. This prediction is also borne
by the data as is shown in Table 9. Controlling for FDI reduces the estimated eﬀect of
lagged savings on productivity growth of countries far from the frontier from 0.039 to 0.014.
This estimate is statistically insignificant. Similarly, FDI reduced the coeﬃcient of savings
on TFP growth in poor countries by 1 percentage points (from 0.052 to 0.043).
Finally, note that, the decline in the growth eﬀect of savings after controlling for FDI is
substantially smaller in rich than in poor countries (0.008 vs. 0.025 for productivity growth
and 0.002 vs. 0.009). All this seems to suggest that, as the model predicts, an important
part of the diﬀerential eﬀect of savings on growth for poor countries operates through the
inflow of FDI which has a much higher return for poor than for rich countries.
Equipment Imports, savings and growth
In our model, the input provided by the foreign investor helps domestic producers to
adopt better technologies. Many of these technologies are embodied in imported equipment.
24

Hence, we can test the prediction that domestic savings will have a diﬀerential positive eﬀect
in the import of high-tech equipment for poor vs. rich countries. Caselli and Wilson (2004)
have measured the technological sophistication of imports by the amount of R&D that they
embody. For each of nine categories of equipment, they measure the total R&D expenses in
the world and compute the share of total equipment R&D that corresponds to each category.
We follow their lead and come out with a measure of the equipment import share weighted by
R&D expenses. Formally, our measure of the equipment import share is defined as follows:
eimit =

9
X
j=1

R&Dj
imjit ,
P9
R&D
j
j=1

where imjit is the share in GDP of the imports of equipment type j in country i at year t,
and R&Dj denotes the total world R&D expenses in equipment type j.22 The share of R&D
expenses in a given equipment category in total R&D expenses is roughly constant since
1960. So we decide to use as weights the average share during the 1960-2000 period.
As with FDI, the first prediction of the model that we test is whether, the eﬀect of
savings on our measure of equipment imports is larger for poor than for rich countries. In
this regression it is very natural to control for the imports share since countries with a higher
import share will also tend to have a larger share of equipment imports in GDP.23
eimit−2,t = αi + βsit−4.t + ρ imit−2,t + γt + ²it

(11)

Table 10 reports the estimates from regression (11). As predicted by the theory, savings
in poor countries is positively associated with the R&D weighted share of equipment imports
in GDP. In particular, a ten percentage point increase in the average saving rate between
t − 4 and t is associated with an increase in our R&D weighted equipment imports share
measure by 8.5 percentage points in countries that are far from the frontier. This eﬀect is
also statistically significant. Interestingly, the eﬀect of savings on the equipment imports
share for rich countries is not only smaller than for poor countries but negative. Columns
4 through 6 of Table 10 report the estimates from regression (11) after including the log
of income per worker at t − 3. Controlling for initial income does not aﬀect the signs or
magnitudes of the association between savings and equipment imports for any of the three
samples.
Next, we reexamine the growth eﬀects of savings after controlling for our measure of
equipment imports. As discussed above, our theory predicts that the eﬀect of savings on
growth in countries far from the technological frontier operates in an important part through
the import of more sophisticated equipment. To explore whether this may be the case in the
data we include our measure of equipment imports weighted by R&D over GDP in the control
set for equation (4). A few interesting remarks are in place from the estimates reported in
Table 11. First, as with FDI, the growth eﬀect of equipment imports is larger for poor
than for rich countries. In particular, the association between our measure of equipment
imports between t − 2 and t and productivity growth between t and t + 10 is positive and
22

The results we report below are robust to replacing eimit by the share of equipment imports in GDP or
by the R&D weighted share of equipment imports in total imports.
23
We obtain very similar results if instead we control for the degree of trade openness.

25

significant for poor countries but negative (though insignificant) for rich countries. Columns
1 through 3 and 7 through 9 report the estimated eﬀect of lagged savings on productivity and
TFP growth in the subsample for which we have data on equipment imports. The inclusion
of equipment imports in the control set reduces by about a third the estimated eﬀect of
savings on the average productivity growth of poor countries (column 6). We take this as
indication that part of the eﬀect of savings estimated above operates through the import of
sophisticated equipment. Interestingly, controlling for equipment imports only reduces the
growth eﬀects of savings in poor countries. In rich countries, once we control for equipment
imports, the partial correlation between savings and growth increases. The fact that this
estimate does not decline, provides further support to the idea that the necessity of savings
as collateral to the import of sophisticated equipment holds only when countries are far from
the technology frontier. We reach very similar conclusions when the dependent variable in
our growth regressions is the average growth rate of TFP between t and t + 10 (columns 4
through 6).24

5

Conclusion

In this paper we have developed a theory according to which domestic saving aﬀects economic growth even in a world of capital mobility. The theory is based on the idea that
technological progress in relatively poor countries generally requires a mix of foreign investment and local entrepreneurial eﬀort, which eﬀort cannot easily be observed. The foreign
investment is needed in order to transfer frontier technological knowledge to local innovating sectors. Saving provides the local entrepreneurs with cofinancing (collateral) which may
give local interests enough of a stake in the innovation projects to induce the eﬀort needed
to make the foreign investment profitable. The theory predicts that saving should aﬀect
growth, but not so much in relatively rich countries that, due to their small distance to the
technological frontier, depend less on foreign investment to adopt new technologies. This
prediction is borne out by the panel of 118 countries for which we have data on savings over
the 1960-2000 period. In this sample we find a strong and robust eﬀect of lagged average
savings on productivity growth over the next decade for poor countries but a significantly
smaller eﬀect for rich countries. This eﬀect depends entirely on private savings, and operates
in part through the increase in FDI and the increase in R&D intensive equipment imports.
These findings have important implications for various related literatures. First, our
hypothesis provides a partial answer to the puzzling slow technology adoption process in
developing economies. Second, our model also explains when capital flows to poor countries
and therefore it can be used to understand why the overall flows of capital to poor countries
are so small. Finally, our model provides a rationale for the high observed correlation between
saving and investment in countries that are far from the technology frontier.
The theory and empirical analysis in this paper can be extended in several interesting
directions. One is to look at whether the observed relationship between saving and growth
24

After controlling for equipment imports, the coeﬃcient of lagged savings becomes negative and significant. The statistical significance of this coeﬃcient, however, is not robust to controlling for the degree of
openness (import plus export share) instead than by the import share.

26

for poor countries is aﬀected by other variables. For example, is the relationship stronger
or weaker in more volatile or in more stable developing economies? Another extension is
to develop explanations for the observed diﬀerences in saving rates across countries, that
would go beyond the diﬀerences in their growth rates and the causality from growth to
savings. For example, are the low saving rate in Latin America compared to East Asia, due
to higher income inequality in Latin America, or to the higher macroeconomic volatility that
has characterized this region since the 1980s, or to cultural factors to be unveiled? This and
other equally intriguing questions must await further research.

27

Appendix
This appendix describes the baseline models used to explore the reverse causality hypothesis that future growth prospects drive lagged savings. In section 4, we have calibrated two
models and run our growth regressions on simulated data. Next we describe these models.
The first is a standard RBC model with CRRA preferences and endogenous labor supply.
Specifically, the preferences of the representative consumer are:
U=

∞
X
t=0

β t (ln(ct ) + ψ(1 − lt )),

where β = 0.95, ψ = 0.35, and lt is the share of time spend by the consumer working.
The production function is a Cobb-Douglas with capital and labor with standard shares
(1/3-2/3) and TFP is exogenous and its log follows an AR(1).
In the model with internal habit the consumer supplies labor inelastically and her utility
function is:
∞
X
(ct − ρct−1 )1−σ
U=
,
βt
1
−
σ
t=0

where σ is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion and ρ is the habit persistence. The production function now is as follows:
Yt = At Ktα L1−α ,
where L is fixed, α is calibrated either at 1/3 or at 0.7 and the log of At follows an AR(1).

28

References
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
Econometrica 60 (March 1992): 323-51.
Aghion, Philippe, Marios Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee and Kalina Manova. “Volatility and
Growth: Credit Constraints and Productivity-Enhancing Investment”, mimeo Harvard,
2005.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita, Gopinath. “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the
Trend,” mimeo Harvard , 2005.
Alfaro, Laura; Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem; and V. Volosovych. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow
from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation.” mimeo Harvard Business
School, 2003.
Alfaro, Laura; Chanda, Areendam; Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem; and Selin Sayek, "FDI and
Economic Growth: The Role of local Financial Markets", Journal of International Economics, 64, (2004): 89-112.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Lucio Picci and Antonello Scurco. “Saving, Growth and Investment:
A Macroeconomic Analysis Using a Panel of Countries.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 82, N0. 2. (May, 2000), pp. 182-211.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development
Economics” In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N.
Durlauf. Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming, 2005.
Bank of Korea, Annual Economic Review, 1955 (Seoul).
Bernanke, Benjamin and Mark Gertler. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 1. (Mar., 1989), pp. 14-31.
Brown, Gilbert T. Korean Pricing Policies and Economic Development in the 1960s, The
John Hopkins University Press (1973).
Carroll, Christopher D., Jody Overland, and David N. Weil. “Saving and Growth with Habit
Formation.” American Economic Review 90 (June 2000): 341-55.
Carroll, Christopher D., and David N. Weil. “Saving and Growth: A Reinterpretation.”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40 (1994): 133-92.
Cass, David, ”Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation”, Review
of Economic Studies, 32 (1965): 233-240. Chiu, P. C. H. “Money and Financial Markets: the domestic Perspective.” in G. Ranis, ed., Taiwan: from Developing to Mature
29

Economy. Boulder, CO: Westview, (1992), 121-93.
Clark, Cal. “Taiwan’s Financial System: Prosperity from Countervailing Perversities?”
in Global Perspectives on Economic Development: Government and Business Finance.
Richard Bingham and Edward Hill Eds. Center for Urban and Policy Research, Rutgers,
New Jersey, (1997) pp. 116-65.
Comin, Diego, Bart Hobijn and Emilie Rovito. Five Facts You Need to Know about Technology Diﬀusion” NBER Working Paper No.11928 (2006).
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. “Private Credit in 129 Countries.”
NBER WP#11078, January 2005.
Domar, E, "Capital Expansion, Rate of Growth, and Employment", Econometrica, 14
(1946): 137-147.
Dooley, M, Folkerts-Landau, D, and P. Garber. “The US Current Account Deficit and
Economic Development: Collateral for a Total Return Swap.” NBER Working Paper No
10727, 2004.
Frankel, Marvin, "The Production Function in Allocation and Growth: A Synthesis", American Economic Review, 55 (1962): 995-1022.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey and David Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic Review, vol. 89 (1999): 379-399.
Gertler, M and K. Rogoﬀ. “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic Capital Market
Ineﬃciencies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 26 (October 1990): 245-66.
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, Vol. 114,
pp. 83-116.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. “An International Comparison of Personal Saving.” Bulletin of the
International Statistical Institute 38 (1961): 55-70.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. “On Some Determinants of Saving in Developed and Underdeveloped Countries.” In Problems in Economic Development, edited by E. A. G. Robinson.
London: Macmillan, 1965.
Howitt, Peter. “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences.” American
Economic Review 90 (September 2000): 829-46.
Howitt, Peter, and Philippe Aghion. “Capital Accumulation and Innovation as Complementary Factors in Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 3 (June 1998):

30

111-30.
Howitt, Peter, and David Mayer-Foulkes. “R&D, Implementation and Stagnation: A Schumpeterian Theory of Convergence Clubs.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (February 2005): 147-77.
Hwang, Pyŏng-jun. The Industrial Economy of Korea. Seoul, Korea University, Asiatic
Research Center, 1971.
Islam, Nurul. Foreign Capital and Economic Development: Japan, India, and Canada,
Prentice-Hall, London, 1960.
Jo, Sung-Hwan “Direct Foreign Private Investment.” in Macroeconomic and Industrial development in Korea edited by Chong Kee Park, Korea Development Institute, Seoul,
Korea, 1980.
Kim, Kwang Suk. “The Interest-Rate Reform of 1965 and Domestic Saving.” Economic
Development in the Republic of Korea Lee-Jay Cho and Yoon Hyung Kim Eds. EastWest Center, Hawaii, (1981) pp. 135-162
Kim, Kwang Suk, and Michael Roemer. Growth and Structural Transformation, Harvard
East Asian Monographs: 86, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, (1981).
Koopmans, T.C, ”On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth”, In The Econometric
Approach to Development Planning, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1965.
Kuznets, Paul. Economic Growth and Structure in the Republic of Korea, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1977.
Levine, Ross, Norman Loyaza, and Thorsten Beck. “Financial Intermediation and Growth:
Causality and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics (2000) 46, 31-77.
Loayza, Norman, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel and Luis Serven. “What Drives Private Savings
Across the World” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 82, No. 2 (May, 2000),
pp. 165-181
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. “Why doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80 (May 1990): 92-96.
Mankiw, Gregory, David Romer and David Weil. “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic Growth.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 107, No. 2 (May, 1992), pp.
407-437
Modigliani, Franco. “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Inter-Country Diﬀerences in
the Saving Ratio.” In Induction, Growth and Trade: Essays in Honor of Sir Roy Harrod,

31

edited by W. A. Eltis. London: Clarendon Press, 1970.
Myers, , R. H. “The Economic Transformation of the Republic of China on Taiwan.” China
Quarterly, (1984) 99: 500-28.
Nicholas, Henri. “General Observations and Presentation of a few Specific Studies in Ghana
and Senegal.” Transfer of Technology for Small Industries, OECD Monographs on Technology Transfer, 1974.
Prescott, Edward. “What a Country Must Do to Become Rich” Keynote Address, PREM
Conference 2006 and the World Bank.
Reinhart, C, and K. Rogoﬀ. “Serial Default and the ”Paradox” of Rich-to-Poor Capital
Flows.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 94 (May 2004): 53-58.
Romer, Paul M. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (October 1990): S71-S102.
Stallings, B. “The Role of Foreign Capital in economic Development.” in G. Gereﬃ and
D.L. Wyman, eds., Manufacturing Miracles: Paths of industrialization in Latin America
and East Asia. Princeton: Princeton University Press, (1990), pp. 55-89.
Stock, J. and M. Watson. Introduction to Econometrics, Addison Wesley (2002).
Wade, R. “East asian Financial Systems as a Challange to Economics: Lessons from Taiwan.”
California Management Review (1985) 27: 106-27.
Westphal, Larry, E. “The Republic of Korea’s Experience with Export-led Industrial Development.” World Development, 6 (1978), 3, pp. 347-82.

32

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable

Sample

Source
All

Poor

Rich

GDP per worker growth (t,t+10)

Penn World Tables

0.018
0.0259
4148

0.0147
0.0286
2030

0.0213
0.0226
2118

Growth in K per woker (t,t+10)

Penn World Tables

0.022
0.041
3230

0.025
0.047
1675

0.018
0.033
1555

Authors' calculations

0.008
0.021
3230

0.005
0.023
1675

0.011
0.016
1555

Penn World Tables

0.115
0.168
5850

0.025
0.161
2935

0.118
0.2057
2915

Nominal Savings/GDP

World Bank

0.168
0.145
5022

0.1223
0.156
2903

0.232
0.098
2119

Nominal Private savings/GDP

World Bank

0.163
0.099
2666

0.119
0.104
1345

0.208
0.069
1321

Nominal Public Savings/GDP

World Bank

0.026
0.073
2713

0.029
0.086
1367

0.023
0.058
1346

IMF

0.019
0.048
3977

0.017
0.051
2319

0.022
0.043
1658

Feenstra, Caselli and Wilson,
authors' calculations

0.002
0.005
6169

0.001
0.004
3941

0.0039
0.006
2228

Levine, Loayza and Beck (2000)

0.353
0.308
3602

0.214
0.188
1772

0.488
0.34
1830

Growth in TFP (t,t+10)

Savings/GDP

FDI/GDP

Equipment Imports
adjusted by R&D content
Private credit/GDP

For each column and variable, first figure is the average, the second is the standard deviation and the third is
the number of observations.
Nominal saving rate denote in domestic prices instead than in international prices.

Table 2: Savings and Growth
Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.039
(12.19)

-0.038
(7.54)

-0.049
(13.2)

-0.038
(11.18)

-0.04
(7.57)

-0.042
(10.01)

-0.042
(12.17)

-0.042
(7.51)

-0.045
(11.98)

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.036
(4.09)

0.039
(3.08)

0.0176
(1.42)

0.034
(3.93)

0.028
(2.28)

0.012
(0.96)

0.038
(4.44)

0.032
(2.5)

0.015
(1.36)

0.2
(5.34)

0.12
(1.38)

0.23
(5.19)

Trade Openness*10

Year*1000

Savings Measure
N
Sample
R2
Year Fixed Effects

-0.01
(0.12)

-0.14
(1.12)

0.32
(2.92)

Penn World Tables
3674
All
0.31
No

Test for equality of savings coefficients
p-value

1781
Poor
0.23
No

1893
Rich
0.42
No
0.09

Penn World Tables
3674
All
0.33
Yes

1781
Poor
0.27
Yes

1893
Rich
0.47
Yes

Penn World Tables
3674
All
0.35
Yes

0.2

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that savings has the same effect on growth for rich and poor countries.

1781
Poor
0.28
Yes

1893
Rich
0.51
Yes
0.15

Table 3: Private vs. Public Savings and Growth
Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)
-0.053
(8.67)

0.077
(8.85)

-0.039
(5.77)

Private Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.005
(0.32)

0.054
(2.97)

-0.034
(1.67)

Public Saving Rate (t-4,t)

-0.035
(1.7)

-0.017
(0.54)

-0.012
(0.54)

0.6
(4.2)

0.03
(0.14)

1
(5.89)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.045
(10.97)

-0.049
(8.63)

-0.044
(7.42)

-0.054
(8.91)

-0.076
(8.92)

-0.038
(5.6)

Nominal Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.03
(2.83)

0.046
(2.93)

-0.01
(0.88)

-0.01
(0.66)

0.033
(1.66)

-0.027
(1.42)

Year*1000

-0.1
(1.2)

Savings Measure
N
Sample
R2

-0.3
(2.54)

0.27
(2.04)

0.6
(4.72)

World Bank
2462
All
0.26

1272
Poor
0.3

0.02
(0.11)

0.96
(5.76)

World Bank
1190
Rich
0.25

Test for equality of Nominal saving rate/ private saving rate coefficients
p-value
<0.001

1563
All
0.23

684
Poor
0.32

World Bank
879
Rich
0.21

1563
All
0.24

0.002

Note: Nominal saving rate is saving rate at domestic prices. Private and public saving rate also computed at domestic prices.
t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.

R 2 corresponds to the within R 2 from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that private savings has the same effect on growth for rich and poor countries.

684
Poor
0.33

879
Rich
0.22

<0.001

Table 4a: Savings and Growth, Capital Accumulation vs. TFP growth

Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.039
(12.19)

-0.038
(7.54)

-0.049
(13.2)

-0.041
(8.55)

-0.032
(4.43)

-0.074
(10.54)

-0.034
(12.75)

-0.036
(9.11)

-0.03
(9.02)

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.036
(4.09)

0.039
(3.08)

0.0176
(1.42)

-0.023
(1.61)

-0.026
(1.48)

-0.014
(0.62)

0.042
(4.87)

0.052
(4)

0.015
(1.29)

Year*1000

-0.01
(0.12)

-0.14
(1.12)

0.32
(2.92)

0.08
(0.56)

-0.4
(2.73)

1.2
(5.86)

0.02
(0.36)

0.06
(0.62)

-0.04
(0.5)

Savings Measure
N
Sample
R2

Penn World Tables
3674
All
0.31

Test for equality of savings coefficients
p-value

1781
Poor
0.23

1893
Rich
0.42

0.09

Growth K/wkr (t,t+10)

Penn World Tables
3084
All
0.12

1552
Poor
0.1

1532
Rich
0.21

Growth TFP (t,t+10)

Penn World Tables
3084
All
0.26

0.56

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
R 2 corresponds to the within R 2 from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that savings has the same effect on growth for rich and poor countries.

1552
Poor
0.22

1532
Rich
0.31

0.003

Table 4b: Savings in domestic prices and Growth, Capital Accumulation vs. TFP growth

Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.045
(10.97)

-0.049
(8.63)

-0.044
(7.42)

-0.034
(5.21)

-0.031
(3.39)

-0.062
(7.18)

-0.037
(10.25)

-0.042
(7.97)

-0.027
(6.15)

Nominal Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.03
(2.83)

0.046
(2.93)

-0.01
(0.88)

-0.026
(1.51)

-0.038
(1.72)

-0.03
(1.31)

0.044
(4.07)

0.067
(4.05)

0.002
(0.11)

Year*1000

-0.1
(1.2)

-0.3
(2.54)

0.27
(2.04)

0.02
(0.15)

-0.6
(3.94)

1.3
(6.28)

-0.06
(0.76)

0
(0.07)

-0.17
(1.64)

World Bank

Savings Measure
N
Sample
R2

Growth K/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth TFP (t,t+10)

World Bank

World Bank

2462
All

1272
Poor

1190
Rich

2291
All

1197
Poor

1094
Rich

2291
All

1197
Poor

1094
Rich

0.26

0.3

0.25

0.08

0.12

0.19

0.22

0.22

0.22

Test for equality of savings coefficients
p-value

<0.001

0.73

Note: Nominal saving rate is the saving rate in domestic prices
t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that savings has the same effect on growth for rich and poor countries.

<0.001

Table 5: Savings and Growth, Stock vs. Flow
Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.039
(12.19)

-0.038
(7.54)

-0.049
(13.2)

-0.045
(11.95)

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.036
(4.09)

0.039
(3.08)

0.0176
(1.42)

Saving Rate (t-9,t)

Year*1000

Savings Measure
N
Sample
R2

-0.01
(0.12)

-0.14
(1.12)

0.32
(2.92)

Penn World Tables
3674
All
0.31

1781
Poor
0.23

Test for equality of savings coefficients
0.045
p-value

1893
Rich
0.42

-0.047
(7.98)

-0.054
(12.47)

0.033
(3.02)

0.036
(2.49)

0.008
(0.44)

0.01
(0.16)

-0.18
(1.24)

0.37
(3.33)

Penn World Tables
3089
All
0.3

1476
Poor
0.27

1613
Rich
0.37

0.049

Growth TFP (t,t+10)
-0.034
(12.75)

-0.036
(9.11)

-0.03
(9.02)

0.042
(4.87)

0.052
(4)

0.015
(1.29)

0.02
(0.36)

0.06
(0.62)

-0.04
(0.5)

Penn World Tables
3084
All
0.26

1552
Poor
0.22

1532
Rich
0.31

<0.001

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that savings has the same effect on growth for rich and poor countries.

Growth TFP (t,t+10)
-0.035
(12.83)

-0.039
(9.39)

-0.033
(9.33)

0.049
(4.93)

0.052
(3.76)

0.034
(2.26)

0.056
(0.77)

0.096
(0.86)

0.03
(0.35)

Penn World Tables
2869
All
0.27

1373
Poor
0.22

0.147

1496
Rich
0.32

Table 6: Reverse Causality?
Model

habit

autocorrelation risk aver.

k-share

effect of savings on Y/L growth

effect of savings on TFP growth

std(I)/std(Y)

1 RBC

-

0.8

3

0.33

1.75E-05
(1.9992e-006 , 3.2990e-005)

2.98E-06
(-4.0253e-006 , 9.9934e-006)

3.6958
(3.6915 , 3.7)

2 RBC

-

0.95

3

0.33

3.80E-04
(1.7423e-004 , 5.8542e-004)

1.75E-04
( 1.0353e-005 , 3.3871e-004)

3.1175
(3.1135 , 3.1214)

3 Habit

0.8

0.8

3

0.33

-0.0054
(-0.0072 , -0.0037)

0.0083
(0.0067 , 0.0098)

3.2192
(3.2178 , 3.2206)

4 Habit

0.8

0.95

3

0.33

-0.0363
(-0.0433 , -0.0293)

-0.0039
(-0.0098 , 0.0019)

1.6706
(1.6704 , 1.6709)

5 Habit

0.8

0.8

3

0.7

-0.0024
(-0.0074 , 0.027)

0.0312
(0.0269 , 0.0355)

1.778
(1.7775 , 1.778)

6 Habit

0.8

0.5

3

0.7

-0.0055
(-0.0086 , -0.0024)

0.0209
(0.018 , 0.0238)

2.1124
(2.1119 , 2.1130)

7 Habit

0.95

0.8

3

0.33

-0.0064
(-0.0077 , -0.0051)

0.0099
(0.0087 , 0.011)

3.7958
(3.7949 , 3.7967)

8 Habit

0.95

0.8

3

0.7

-0.0172
(-0.0218 , -0.0126)

0.0297
(0.0259 , 0.0334)

1.8692
(1.8688 , 1.8695)

9 Habit

0.95

0.5

3

0.7

-0.0106
(-0.0134 , -0.0078)

0.02
(0.0173 , 0.0227)

2.164
(2.1636 , 2.1644)

Each line correspond to a calibration of either a standard RBC model or a model with internal habit. Columns 2-6 describe calibration.
Columns 7 and 8 report the average estimate of the effect of lagged savings on productivity (7) and TFP growth (8) and its 95 percent
confidence interval for the model calibration. Column 9 contains the average of the ratio of the standard deviation of the H-P filtered investment
to the standard deviation of the H-P filtered output across the simulations and the 95 percent confidence interval for the ratio.

Table 7: Private Savings, Financial Development and Growth

Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.049
(8.95)

-0.061
(6.85)

-0.037
(5.1)

-0.049
(8.95)

-0.061
(7.47)

-0.045
(5.43)

-0.039
(7.91)

-0.043
(5.37)

-0.031
(4.71)

-0.039
(7.91)

-0.04
(6.1)

-0.029
(3.8)

Private Saving/GDP (t-4,t)

0
(0.15)

0.055
(2.94)

-0.045
(2.41)

0
(0.15)

-0.016
(0.85)

0.031
(1.31)

0.01
(0.52)

0.059
(2.85)

-0.03
(1.59)

0.01
(0.52)

-0.008
(0.37)

0.04
(1.69)

Year*1000

0.77
(6.38)

0.23
(1.1)

0.9
(7)

0.77
(6.38)

0.4
(1.95)

1
(6.22)

0.47
(4.03)

0.22
(0.95)

0.5
(4.19)

0.47
(4.03)

0.5
(2.65)

0.27
(1.71)

N
Sample

1222
All

498
Poor

724
Rich

1222
All

600
LFD

622
HFD

1195
All

486
Poor

709
Rich

1195
All

589
LFD

603
HFD

R2

0.18

0.2

0.2

0.18

0.24

0.16

0.13

0.11

0.14

0.13

0.15

0.1

Test for equality of savings coefficients
p-value

<0.001

0.028

TFP (t,t+10)

TFP (t,t+10)

<0.001

Note: All samples restricted to country-year observations with data on private credit.
LFD (low financial development) are countries with private credit to GDP ratio below the median ratio in the year.
HDF (high financial development) are countries with private credit to GDP ratios above the median ratio in the year.
t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
R 2 corresponds to the within R 2 from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction
p-value reports the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis that savings has the same effect on growth for high and low financially developed countries.

0.035

Table 8: FDI and Savings

Dependent Variable

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

FDI/GDP (t-2,t)

0.12
(3.44)

0.14
(2.61)

0.1
(3.61)

log GDP/wkr t-3

FDI/GDP (t-2,t)

FDI/GDP (t-2,t)

0.11
(2.95)

0.11
(2.04)

0.14
(4.85)

0.11
(2.9)

0.11
(2.16)

0.13
(4.55)

-0.018
(2.67)

-0.016
(2.44)

-0.019
(2.69)

-0.015
(2.87)

-0.017
(2.7)

-0.022
(2.71)

0.18
(4.18)

0.2
(3.86)

0.21
(3.48)

Trade Openness (t-3)*10

Year*1000

1
(9.24)

0.92
(5.45)

1.02
(6.52)

1.1
(8.21)

0.87
(5.11)

1.3
(6.4)

0.96
(6.47)

0.7
(3.25)

1.3
(6.04)

N
Sample
R2

2905
All
0.09

1520
Poor
0.08

1385
Rich
0.12

2702
All
0.14

1431
Poor
0.14

1271
Rich
0.15

2702
All
0.15

1431
Poor
0.16

1271
Rich
0.16

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction

Table 9: Savings, FDI and Growth

Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth TFP (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.065
(11.94)

-0.061
(8.67)

-0.066
(9.46)

-0.051
(12.15)

-0.048
(9)

-0.048
(7.09)

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.022
(1.84)

0.014
(0.82)

0.009
(0.55)

0.036
(3.03)

0.043
(2.39)

0.013
(0.83)

FDI (t-2,t)

0.09
(2.08)

0.13
(2.23)

0.035
(0.58)

0.07
(1.95)

0.09
(1.63)

0.049
(0.84)

Year*1000

0.3
(2.62)

-0.2
(1.3)

0.9
(6.32)

0.37
(3.54)

0.2
(1.33)

0.5
(3.97)

N
Sample
R2

1847
All
0.28

951
Poor
0.29

896
Rich
0.3

1714
All
0.23

898
Poor
0.21

816
Rich
0.2

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction

Table 10: Equipment Imports in GDP and Savings

Dependent Variable

Equipment imports/GDP (t-2,t)

Equipment imports weighted by R&D/GDP (t-2,t)

Savings Rate (t-4,t)*100

-0.42
(1.13)

0.85
(2.57)

-1.1
(1.89)

-0.46
(1.31)

0.84
(2.42)

-1.2
(2.21)

Imports/GDP (t-2,t)

0.012
(6.96)

0.015
(4.95)

0.011
(4.72)

0.012
(6.55)

0.016
(5.1)

0.01
(4.3)

0.3
(0.49)

-0.01
(0.09)

0.14
(1.25)

log GDP/wkr t-3*100

Year*1000

-0.13
(9.01)

-0.1
(5.21)

-0.14
(7.19)

-0.13
(9.25)

-0.1
(3.63)

-0.17
(8.1)

N
Sample
R2

2021
All
0.12

786
Poor
0.19

1235
Rich
0.11

1990
All
0.11

776
Poor
0.2

1214
Rich
0.1

Note: t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.
2
2
R corresponds to the within R from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction

Table 11: Savings, equipment share in imports and Growth
Dependent Variable

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

Growth GDP/wkr (t,t+10)

log GDP/wkr t

-0.056
(10.89)

-0.052
(5.69)

-0.065
(10.88)

-0.056
(10.4)

-0.052
(5.64)

-0.063
(9.88)

-0.043
(9.96)

-0.057
(7.54)

-0.035
(7.83)

-0.051
(9.73)

-0.057
(7.48)

-0.033
(6.84)

Saving Rate (t-4,t)

0.041
(2.42)

0.042
(1.46)

0.036
(1.61)

0.041
(2.35)

0.027
(0.9)

0.037
(1.64)

0.061
(3.81)

0.063
(2.89)

0.054
(2.54)

0.06
(3.63)

0.05
(2.25)

0.054
(2.54)

-0.11
(0.06)

0.92
(2.13)

-0.22
(1.18)

0.18
(1.09)

0.78
(2.43)

-0.14
(0.8)

Equipment share in imports (t-2,t)
(R&D weighted)

Growth TFP (t,t+10)

Growth TFP (t,t+10)

Import share (t-2,t)

-0.008
(0.92)

-0.013
(0.93)

0.002
(0.23)

-0.008
(0.87)

-0.03
(1.88)

0.004
(0.37)

0.008
(1.04)

0.009
(0.7)

0.009
(1.06)

0.006
(0.75)

-0.006
(0.44)

0.01
(1.12)

Year*1000

0.37
(2.49)

0.39
(1.72)

0.55
(3.05)

0.37
(2.42)

0.46
(1.96)

0.49
(2.66)

0.14
(1.14)

0.66
(3.44)

-0.06
(0.45)

0.17
(1.34)

0.7
(3.71)

-0.1
(0.67)

N
Sample

1574
All

647
Poor

927
Rich

1574
All

647
Poor

927
Rich

1528
All

631
Poor

897
Rich

1528
All

631
Poor

897
Rich

R2

0.36

0.25

0.44

0.36

0.27

0.44

0.33

0.26

0.36

0.33

0.28

0.38

Note: The samples are restricted to the countries for which we have data on Equipment share in imports between t-2 and t, weighted by the R&D content of the imports.
t-stats in parenthesis. Errors corrected by Newey-West. All regressions include country dummies.

R2 corresponds to the within R2 from the fixed effects regressions without the error correction

