                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DOES CORRUPTION PRODUCE UNSAFE DRIVERS?

                                           Marianne Bertrand
                                            Simeon Djankov
                                              Rema Hanna
                                          Sendhil Mullainathan

                                         Working Paper 12274
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12274


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2006




This project was conducted and funded by the International Finance Corporation. We thank Anup Kumar
Roy for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to Abhijit Banerjee, Gary Becker, Ryan Bubb, Anne
Case, Angus Deaton, Luis Garicano, Ben Olken, Sam Pelzman, Andrei Shleifer, Jakob Svensson and to
seminar participants at Harvard, MIT, Princeton, University of California at Berkeley, University of Chicago
GSB, LSE, Yale University, NYU, Ohio State University, University of Florida and the ASSA 2006 meeting
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Marianne Bertrand, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Corruption Produce Unsafe Drivers?
Marianne Bertrand, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 12274
May 2006
JEL No.

                                             ABSTRACT

We follow 822 applicants through the process of obtaining a driver’s license in New Delhi, India.
To understand how the bureaucracy responds to individual and social needs, participants were
randomly assigned to one of three groups: bonus, lesson, and comparison groups. Participants in the
bonus group were offered a financial reward if they could obtain their license fast; participants in the
lesson group were offered free driving lessons. To gauge driving skills, we performed a surprise
driving test after participants had obtained their licenses. Several interesting facts regarding
corruption emerge. First, the bureaucracy responds to individual needs. Those who want their license
faster (e.g. the bonus group), get it 40% faster and at a 20% higher rate. Second, the bureaucracy is
insensitive to social needs. The bonus group does not learn to drive safely in order to obtain their
license: in fact, 69% of them were rated as “failures” on the independent driving test. Those in the
lesson group, despite superior driving skills, are only slightly more likely to obtain a license than the
comparison group and far less likely (by 29 percentage points) than the bonus group. Detailed
surveys allow us to document the mechanisms of corruption. We find that bureaucrats arbitrarily fail
drivers at a high rate during the driving exam, irrespective of their ability to drive. To overcome this,
individuals pay informal “agents” to bribe the bureaucrat and avoid taking the exam altogether. An
audit study of agents further highlights the insensitivity of agents’ pricing to driving skills. Together,
these results suggest that bureaucrats raise red tape to extract bribes and that this corruption
undermines the very purpose of regulation.

Marianne Bertrand
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagogsb.edu

Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
Littauer 208
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mullain@fas.harvard.edu
Introduction


The provision of public services in many developing countries is rife with corruption. Some argue that such

corruption is socially beneficial (Leff, 1964; Huntington, 1968; Lui 1985). For example, Huntington (1968)

remarks that “[I]n terms of economic growth, the only thing worse than a society with a rigid,

overcentralized, dishonest bureaucracy is one with a rigid, overcentralized, and honest bureaucracy.” Others

argue that corruption is harmful for society (Myrdal 1968; Rose-Ackerman, 1978; Klitgaard, 1991; Shleifer

and Vishny, 1993; Djankov et al., 2002). This disagreement is linked to differing views on which parts of

regulation corruption circumvents. Does it allow the circumvention of the privately noxious, but socially

unimportant components of regulation? For example, bribes may serve as “speed money” when there are

administrative delays, moving those citizens with the highest willingness-to-pay to the front of the queue. If

so, then corruption merely “greases the wheels” of the bureaucracy by cutting through red tape. Or, does it

allow the circumvention of the socially useful components of regulation? If so, corruption can be costly to

society.2

        This debate can be understood easily in the context of our study: obtaining a driving license.

Individuals must go through various bureaucratic hurdles to obtain the license. Some are less important for

society, such as having applications processed in the order they were received. Others are much more

important and socially useful, such as passing a driving test. Which rules does corruption bend? Do

bureaucrats simply allow some individuals to cut the queue and/or get a license despite not having some of

the necessary (but, essentially unimportant) paperwork? Or do they allow some who are incapable of safe

driving to get a license? More importantly, what are the magnitudes of these bureaucratic “responses”?

Answers to these questions are central to the debate on the efficiency of corruption.3                  Beyond these

questions, our understanding of the process of corruption is also limited. How do bribes actually take place?

How does corruption affect the bureaucratic process? In particular, one strand of the theoretical literature has


2
  We rely on two definitions of corruption. The first defines corruption as the mis-application or non-application of
regulations by a bureaucrat. The second defines corruption as the use of public office for private gain. For the bulk of
the paper, we focus on the regulatory definition of corruption, studying how regulations are being applied without
articulating the bureaucrat’s private gain. Section V, however, suggests a private-gain interpretation of our results.
3
  Arguments about second-best, political economy or general equilibrium also determine corruption’s overall efficiency.
The macro-empirical work has focused on these arguments using aggregate data (see for example Mauro, 1995).

                                                           1
emphasized that most bureaucratic rigidities are the result of rent-seeking by bureaucrats (for example,

Myrdal, 1968; and Svensson, 2005). In these theories of “endogeneous red tape,” bureaucrats may introduce

socially unnecessary rigidities in order to extract bribes from citizens (see e.g. Shleifer and Vishny 1993,

Banerjee 1997).

        We collect detailed micro-data on a specific bureaucratic process—granting of drivers’ licenses in

New Delhi, India—to answer these questions. Our methodology gives a detailed snapshot of how corruption

operates, something that has usually been hard to quantify.4 We use the resulting data to address five

questions: Do people pay bribes to get a license? Can corruption be used to speed up the process of getting

a license? Do bad drivers use bribes to get a license? Do bureaucrats raise hurdles to extract bribes? Finally,

how does corruption take place?

        Between October 2004 and April 2005, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) followed 822

individuals through the process of getting a driver’s license in New Delhi, India. Data were collected on each

individual’s expenditures to obtain a license (if they were able to), each procedural step undertaken, tests

taken, and time spent. At the end of the process, the IFC also administered a surprise road test to determine

whether those individuals who were granted a license could drive safely. All participants were offered free

driving lessons upon completion of the final survey and driving test.

        Further, the IFC created exogenous variation in both the private incentives and the quality of each

driving license candidate. Specifically, survey participants were randomly assigned to one of three groups.

The IFC offered one group of participants (“the bonus group”) a large financial bonus if they were able to

obtain a license in 31 days, one day longer than the statutory minimum time of 30 days. This group allows us

to test the sensitivity of the bureaucracy to an individual’s desire to speed up the process. Another group of

participants (“the lesson group”) was offered free driving lessons, to be taken up immediately after

recruitment into the survey. This group allows us to test the sensitivity of the bureaucracy to an individual’s

driving skills. The rest served as the comparison group, and were simply asked to participate in the survey.




4
  Notable exceptions of micro-empirical approaches to corruption are Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003) and Olken
(2005).

                                                      2
         Corruption was rampant. Participants paid on average more than twice the official fees to obtain a

driving license. Consistent with the “grease the wheels” view, individuals who wanted to obtain a license

faster did so. Those in the bonus group were about 20 percentage points more likely to obtain a license, and

obtained it nearly 40% faster than those in the comparison group.5 Corruption, however, allowed the

circumvention of socially useful rules. Many unsafe drivers were given licenses. In fact, 69 percent of those

in the bonus group failed the independently administered, surprise road test at the end of the project—where

failing meant that the individual knew so little about the workings of the car that the test-giver refused to take

him on the road.

         Moreover, being a good driver barely increased one’s likelihood of obtaining a license. Despite a

high take-up of the free driving lessons, those in the “lesson group” were not statistically more likely to

obtain a license than those in the comparison group. These results suggest that corruption was used to bend

the most socially useful aspect of regulation: the driving test. Corruption, therefore, undermines the very

reason for the regulation: to ensure safe drivers. These results do not immediately imply that incompetent

drivers will be on the road. They do mean that there is no longer effective regulation of who can drive.

People will choose whatever level of driving skill is privately, not socially, optimal.6

         The survey also reveals how corruption works. There are two main ways for people to obtain a

license. The first route is the expected one, where an individual completes the bureaucratic process without

outside help. The alternative is hiring an agent who guides you through the various steps of the bureaucratic

process. This second route is the more popular choice in New Delhi, with close to 75% of the participants

eventually using an agent to obtain a license. Correlations show a strong relationship between agent usage

and speed of the process. Those with an agent take fewer trips to the Regional Transport Office (RTO), speak

to far fewer bureaucrats and save two hours in total time at the RTO. Using an agent also allows one to

circumvent the official driver’s test. Nearly all of those who never used an agent took the official driver’s

test, as compared to only 12% of those who used an agent. This difference is not explained by better driving

5
  Of course, it is also possible that the individuals who were given a greater incentive to get the license faster simply did
so by exerting greater effort. Yet, the exact actions the bonus group undertook to procure a license are more suggestive
of corruption.
6
  This is especially important since everyone obtains a license for the purpose of driving. Driving licenses in India are
not used as a primary form of identification.

                                                             3
ability. Quite the opposite: hiring an agent is strongly correlated with failing the surprise driving test. These

results suggest that corruption does not simply speed up the process. Instead, the agent helps one avoid

taking the test of driving skills altogether.

           Even more importantly, the data suggest that bureaucrats may create red-tape for private gains,

consistent with Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 1993) and Svensson (2003). The bureaucrats appear to use the

driving test not to screen unsafe from safe drivers, but to arbitrarily fail some people. Examining the subset

of participants who begin the process by taking the driving test once, we find that a substantial percentage of

them (about 35%) fail and must resort to retaking the test or hiring an agent. This percentage is unrelated to

the actual ability to drive: it is constant across the lesson, bonus and control groups. It is also constant across

scores on the ex-post driving test.7

           We find no direct bribing. Most of the extra-legal expenditures individuals come from the hiring of

agents. While a higher fraction of those in the bonus group than in the comparison group start the process

without an agent, the eventual rate of agent usage is about the same across these two groups since as many in

the comparison group end up using an agent. Not surprisingly then, participants in these two groups end up

paying roughly the same amount (Rs1,130) to obtain their license. A higher fraction of those in the lesson

group complete the process without an agent and therefore end up paying slightly less, on average, for their

license. However, this only measures the financial costs and ignores other costs such as time and hassle

costs. Our survey also allows some measurement of time costs. While these estimates are noisy, we find

suggestive evidence that the bonus group incurs the lowest time cost (most likely because a higher fraction of

them start the process with an agent rather than switching to one at a later date). In contrast, those in the

lesson group interact with more RTO staff, spend more time at the RTO and take a longer time to obtain the

license.

           Finally, to better understand how corruption works, the IFC performed a simple audit of agents.

Specifically, we sent trained actors to agents to elicit the prices and feasibility of obtaining a license under


7
  This finding of endogenous red tape is interesting because red tape here is a public good. Every bureaucrat benefits
from another bureaucrat’s willingness to fail applicants at random. This suggests some form of collusion or other-
regarding preferences. The potential for collusion or other-regarding preferences is implicit in previous empirical work
on corruption (Wade, 1982).

                                                           4
different pretexts. These pretexts corresponded to bending various official rules of the licensing process. In

this way, we could learn in greater detail which constraints corruption can loosen up and which ones it

cannot. Confirming the results from the main study, agents were able to procure a license despite lack of

driving skills. All actors who said they did not have the time to learn how to drive were told by the agent that

he could get them a license. In fact, the prices quoted were no different from a control set of actors who did

not mention inability to drive.

         Yet, it also appeared from the audit that there are constraints in the system that corruption cannot

circumvent. Agents were much more likely to turn away individuals that could not provide proof of age or

residence. Almost no agent could assist an actor who needed their permanent license in less than 30 days of

getting their temporary license (30 days being the official minimum limit). Conditional on being able to

provide assistance in these cases, the price quotes actors received were much higher than under the control

script. These results suggest that bureaucrats do not have the ability to distort all rules. It is possible that

verifiability determines which rules can be bent. While those monitoring the bureaucrats can cross-check

certain things (e.g. age or residential proof), they are not be able to cross-check the ability to drive, at least

before a road accident occurs.

         As a whole, while corruption does “grease the wheels” by being responsive to individual needs, it

does so at a large social cost. In this particular context, the single key feature of the licensing process

(verifying that license applicants know how to drive) is being circumvented.8 The audit study hints at the

generalizability of these results. Other bureaucratic processes could show similar results depending on the

verifiability of the socially important components of regulation.

         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section I discusses the process of obtaining a driving

license in India, while Section II describes the data collection effort and lays out the experimental design.

The results are presented in Section III. Section IV describes the audit results and Section V discusses

interpretation of the results. Section VI concludes.


8
 These results do not show that corruption is inefficient per se. Such a statement does not make sense without some
notion of what exact tools would be used to reduce corruption and what distortions they might cause in turn. Several
authors have argued alternatives to corruption may create enough distortion that corruption is a second-best (e.g. Tirole
1997 or Acemoglu and Verdier 2000).

                                                           5
I.      Getting a Driver’s License in New Delhi, India

The Motor Vehicle Act of 1988 and its subsequent amendments stipulate the official licensing process in

India. State governments are responsible for administering this national transport policy. In New Delhi, the

setting for this project, licenses are issued at nine Regional Transport Offices (RTOs). The jurisdiction of

each office coincides with the corresponding police district, and an individual can only obtain a license from

his or her particular RTO. Between December 2001 and December 2002, the New Delhi Motor Vehicle

Department authorized 313,690 licenses.

        To be eligible for a license, an individual must be at least 18 years of age. He or she must first obtain

a learner's (or temporary) license, which grants the right to practice driving under the supervision of a

licensed individual. To obtain the learner's license, proof of residence, proof of age, a passport size photo

and a medical certificate must be submitted to the RTO along with an application form. There is an

application fee of Rs360 ($8). After this paperwork is submitted, the applicant must take a color blindness

test and a written exam with 20 multiple choice questions on road signs, traffic rules, and traffic regulations.

Upon passing these, the learner's license is processed on the same day. If the applicant fails the exam, he or

she can reapply after a 7-day waiting period.

        After 30 days (and within 180 days) of the issuance of the learner's license, the individual may apply

for a permanent license. The applicant must submit proof of age, proof of residence, a recent passport size

photo, and his or her learner's license. The applicant must also pass a driving road test at the RTO. A Rs90

fee is charged for the photograph and lamination of the license. If the applicant fails the road test, he or she

can reapply only after a 7-day waiting period.



II.     Survey and experimental design

The IFC recruited and observed individuals through the process of applying for a four-wheeler license.

Survey participants were randomly allocated to one of three experimental groups in order to create

exogenous variation in the willingness to pay for a license and the quality of their driving. One group was

offered a bonus for getting the license as fast as is legally possible. A second group was offered free driving

                                                       6
lessons to improve the quality of their driving skills. The remaining group was told to simply obtain a

license. At the end of the project, all participants were offered free driving lessons and a financial reward for

their time. The three project phases—recruitment, randomization and follow-up—are described below (see

also Figure 1).



Recruitment

Recruitment began in June 2004, and continued through November 2004. Recruiting occurred on a two-

week cycle. During each cycle, recruiters intercepted individuals who were entering one of the following

four Regional Transport Offices (RTOs) in New Delhi: Southwest, Northwest, South or New Delhi.9 The

IFC gave recruiters guidelines regarding the type of person to approach for the project. First, to reduce

attrition, recruiters were instructed to approach only men (in a pilot study, 60% of men remained in the

project, while 100% of the women dropped out). Second, they were asked to identify individuals that had not

previously had a driving license, but wanted to obtain one. Finally, and in order to comply with government

regulations, only individuals over age 18 were allowed to participate.

        The recruiters provided each potential participant with a short explanation of the project, offered an

information sheet outlining the time frame and payment structure for the project, and invited interested

people to attend an information session to learn more about the project. Over the course of each two week

cycle, the recruiters collectively spoke with about 150 potential participants.



Initial Session and Randomization

An initial session was held at the end of each two-week recruiting cycle, near the RTO from which the

subjects were recruited. On average, 36 individuals participated in each of the 23 sessions, for a total of 822

project participants (see Figure 1). Participation was restricted to individuals who had been officially

recruited and up to one of their friends. To further limit attrition, the project team undertook several steps:

first, they rejected any individual whose phone number could not be verified prior to the session; second,

9
  Recruiting people directly standing in the line to obtain a temporary license is the simplest method to identify such
individuals. However, in order to comply with government regulation, recruiters were instructed to stand outside the
RTO compound.

                                                          7
they required formal identification (student identification, ration card, etc); third, they turned away a few

individuals who were rude to surveyors or who acted rowdy during the session.

        To begin, the survey team administered an introduction survey. The first section of the survey

collected demographic information on the participants while the second section detailed their previous

driving experiences (Can you drive a 2-wheeler vehicle? Have you driven without a license?). The third

section focused on the participants’ previous experiences in obtaining government services, and the fourth

section documented the participants’ beliefs on the necessary steps to obtain a driving license (How much

will it cost? How long will it take?). The survey concluded with a series of questions regarding driving laws

and practices; these questions were drawn from a sample of practice test questions published by the New

Delhi RTO.10

        After the survey was completed, the team randomly allocated each participant to one of the

following three groups: a comparison group, a bonus group and a lesson group.                      Individuals in the

comparison group were simply asked to return for a second survey—documenting their experiences— upon

acquiring a permanent license. As an inducement to return, each subject was offered Rs800 (roughly $17)

upon completion of the final survey.11

        Individuals in the bonus group were given the same information and set of instructions as those in

the comparison group. However, in order to generate a higher incentive for obtaining a license, participants

in this group were also offered a bonus of Rs2,000 (on top of Rs800 for completing the surveys) if they could

obtain their permanent license within 31 days of obtaining their temporary license (one day over the official

minimum wait time). Rs2,000 was chosen to ensure a large enough treatment effect. The monthly gross

salary for the 380 employed individuals in our sample is Rs5,446, and thus, the bonus is roughly equivalent

to one-third of an individual's monthly income.




10
   For example: You are driving in heavy rain. Your steering suddenly becomes very light. You should: (1) Steer
towards the side of the road, (2) Brake firmly to reduce speed, (3) Apply gentle acceleration, (4) Ease off the
acceleration, (5) Do not know.
11
   Since all subjects in the control group received a cash payment, they may not be representative of how the population
as a whole would behave. Specifically, the control group may spend more on acquiring a license in the presence of the
payment than they otherwise would. Still, this does not compromise the internal validity of the difference between
treatment and control.

                                                           8
        Finally, in addition to being given the same set of instructions as the comparison group, individuals

in the lesson group were provided with access to free driving lessons, to be taken immediately. Accredited

driving schools were hired to provide up to 15 lessons (half an hour each).12 Individuals in this group were

also promised a payment of Rs800 upon completion of the surveys.

        At the end of this initial session, the project team paid all participants Rs200 ($4.25). This was done

to help alleviate possible credit constraints in acquiring a license. This upfront payment was also made in

order to increase the credibility of the final payment. Unlike in the United States, behavioral studies of this

type are not typical in India. Participants in the pilot (who did not receive this upfront payment) harbored

suspicions about whether the final payment would be made.

        While the project team tried to isolate the three groups from each other, we cannot rule out the

possibility that individuals in different groups communicated with each other during this process. To

increase transparency, each of them was informed that several groups existed in the study, and that some

participants were randomly chosen to win additional payments.



Follow-up

It may take as little as 30 days or as many as 180 days to obtain a license.13 During this period, the project

team kept in close contact with each participant to remind them about the project and maintain the credibility

of the final payments. Extensive phone calls were made (and logged) to ensure that people understood the

instructions and payments schemes, to arrange lessons for subjects in the lesson group, and to remind

subjects in the bonus group about the bonus scheme and deadlines.

        Upon obtaining a learner's license (temporary license), the survey team administered a short phone

survey regarding the subject’s experiences in the bureaucratic process so far: number of trips made to the

RTO, breakdown of the payments made so far, questions regarding the written exam, etc. As shown in

Figure 1 (and, in more detail, in Appendix 1A), 73% of the sample tried to obtain a temporary license.


12
   We picked a number of reputable driving schools to provide only training to the participants. These schools did not
include the school that administered the final road test.
13
   The 180 day cutoff was designed to have a finite end to the experiment. By that point, it was felt that all who were
going to get the license had gotten it.

                                                          9
         Upon earning a permanent license, each subject was invited to a final session. Half of the original

set of participants both obtained a final license and returned for the final survey. At the final session, the

survey team questioned each individual regarding his experiences with the bureaucratic process, tested his

driving skills, made the final payment and, for those in the comparison and bonus groups, offered free

driving lessons.14 Attrition was low, as only 4% of those who obtained a permanent or temporary license did

not return for the final survey (Appendix 1A).15

         Under the supervision of the project team, an accredited driving school administered the practical

driving test. It was designed to test the skills required to obtain a license under the Motor Vehicle Act of

1988. The driving test came as a surprise to all participants. To preserve the integrity of the test, the test-

givers did not know which experimental group a given test-taker belonged to.

         The driving exam consisted of two parts. First, the test-giver administered an oral exam intended to

judge whether a subject could safely operate a car. This included distinguishing between the accelerator and

the brake, showing the location of the clutch, and describing the gears. If a subject was unable to answer

each of these questions correctly, he was deemed incapable of taking the practical driving test and

automatically failed. If the subject adequately answered all questions, the test-giver administered a road test.

The test-giver awarded subjects a series of points for satisfactorily illustrating that they could properly start a

car, change gears, use indicators, complete turns, and park.

         Finally, to understand why some individuals were unable to obtain a license, we administered a

series of dropout surveys. The first survey was targeted at participants who had not obtained a temporary

license by the end of the project. The survey team found 235 of the 325 participants who did not receive a

temporary license (Appendix 1A).16 A second survey was targeted to individuals that had obtained, by the


14
   Upon earning a permanent license, an individual is required to relinquish his temporary license back to the RTO. As
proof of date, subjects in the bonus group were required to bring a photocopy of their temporary license. It is possible
that this “proof” could be faked, i.e. it took 40 days for the participant to obtain a license, but he paid the bureaucrat
extra to make it appear as if it took 30 days. However, this behavior would not change the central results of the paper.
15
   Appendix 1B studies differences between attritors and non-attritors in terms of socio-economic characteristics,
driving experiences, past bribing experience and beliefs regarding procedures (as collected in the initial survey). While
there does not appear to be large differences overall, a few characteristics (mainly marital status, wealth, minority status
and beliefs regarding procedures) do not appear balanced between attritors and non-attritors. All the results reported
below are robust to controlling for these characteristics.
16
   There are no systematic differences between attritors and non-attritors among those that did not obtain a temporary
license except for: religion, government connection, and past experience driving a 2-wheeler.

                                                            10
end of the project, a temporary license but no permanent license. These individuals were asked to come to a

final survey session and to take the practical driving exam at that session. As an inducement to come for the

final session, they were paid Rs500. Twenty-six of the 71 individuals who got a temporary license but no

final license returned for that session.



III.   Empirical results

We begin by presenting basic correlations in the data. Next we present the main experimental results with

regard to outcomes: the likelihood of obtaining a license and driving skills conditional on obtaining a license.

The section concludes by documenting the process participants faced in order to obtain their license.



Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 provides an overview of the licensing process for individuals in the comparison group. Surprisingly

few individuals—37 percent—were able to obtain a license (Panel A). This low success rate cannot solely

be attributed to the difficulty of getting a license. The project team lost track of some of the original

participants and another subset of participants reported not having tried to get a license (see Appendix 1A).

Excluding these 2 subsets, the fraction that obtained a permanent license was 59%.

        Panel B summarizes the main features of the bureaucratic process for the individuals in the

comparison group who obtained a license. On average, it took 48 days to obtain the license. In the initial

survey, individuals tended to overestimate what the bureaucratic process would entail: they thought, for

example, that the entire process would take over 6 ½ trips to the RTO (not reported in the table).17 In

practice, they only spent 3 ½ hours (206 minutes) over 2 ½ trips to complete the bureaucratic process.

Individuals interacted with 5 different bureaucrats, and waited in 2.5 lines. Most importantly, the

participants’ experience indicates that the actual process differed from the official process. Specifically, 70%

of the participants reported obtaining a permanent license without taking the mandatory practical test at the




17
  There is no significant difference in the predicted number of trips and predicted time it takes to obtain a license
between those who obtained a license and those who did not.

                                                         11
RTO. Finally, while the official cost of a license is Rs450 in total, the average participant in the comparison

group spent Rs1,127 to complete the process, or more than twice the official amount.

           Table 2 explores the relationship between total expenditures to get a license, driving knowledge prior

to starting the licensing process, and various procedural outcomes for the comparison group. Each cell in

Table 2 presents the coefficient estimate from a separate regression where the dependent variable is the one

listed in that column and the independent variable is the one listed in that row. For example, Row 1, Column

2 models the relationship between individual i’s total expenditures (in logs) to get a license and the number

of days it took individual i to obtain a license:

                                Daysi=β0 + β1Log(Expenditures) i+ β2Session i+ β3X i+ ei

Indicator variables for the initial session the individual attended (Sessioni) are included to absorb the

unobserved heterogeneity in the procedural outcome across initial sessions. This is important for two

reasons. First, we ended the study three months after the last initial session. Thus, individuals who attended

the first initial session in July 2004 had more time to obtain a license than those who attended the last initial

session in November 2004. Second, because individuals were recruited geographically for each session,

everyone at a given initial session was required to obtain a license from the same RTO. Controlling for

initial session fixed effects, therefore, also nets out any differences in outcomes between RTOs. Finally, we

include demographic controls (Xi) to account for differences in outcomes that could be attributed to religion,

minority status, employment status, education, income, age, marital status, and wealth.18

           Overall, higher payments to get a license are associated with fewer delays (Row 1). Individuals who

paid more took fewer trips to the RTO, spoke with fewer officials and spent less time at the RTO. For

example, a 10% increase in payment is associated with 16 fewer minutes at the RTO. Paying more is also

correlated with a higher avoidance of the (legally required) practical licensing test. A 10% increase in

payment results in a 7.5-percentage point decrease in the probability of taking the test; this is statistically

significant at the 1% level.19




18
     The basic findings from these regressions are robust to the exclusion of all controls.
19
     Participants’ salaries are uncorrelated with their expenditures on obtaining a license.

                                                               12
        While paying more is associated with an easier process, having a better knowledge of driving prior to

starting the licensing process (as measured by a series of questions on road signs and rules that were asked at

the initial session) is not.20 First, better prior knowledge does not increase one’s ability to obtain a license

(Row 2, Column 1). Also, conditional on obtaining a license, the better the prior knowledge, the longer it

takes to get a license (Column 2) and the more trips are required (Column 3).

        In summary, Table 2 provides evidence on how corruption may operate. The fact that higher

payments are associated with a lower likelihood to take the required test could mean that paying more is a

way to get a license without knowing how to drive. However, it is also possible that the individuals who

make higher payments are tested through some alternative, quicker and cheaper means. We address these

interpretational issues next by turning to the experimental results.



Experimental Results

Table 3 describes the main characteristics of the participants in this study. Besides providing background on

the average participant's characteristics, the table also reports whether any systematic differences exist across

participants in the three experimental groups and serves as a check of the randomization design. Column 1

presents the mean for the full sample, while Columns 2 through 4 present means at the group-level. The stars

indicate whether a given group’s mean is significantly different from the two other groups’, after controlling

for session fixed effects.

        Panel A and B document the participants’ socioeconomic background and their past driving

experience. Individuals tend to be young (24 years of age) and many are high school or college students

(48%). Seventy-nine percent are Hindu, while 18% are Muslim; 36% have minority status (Other Backward

Castes, Scheduled Caste, or Scheduled Tribe). Many have driven a two-wheeler at least once (88%), yet

only 3% report having a two-wheeler license. Close to a quarter reports having driven a four-wheeler at least

once while, by sample construction, none of them have a four-wheeler license. As Delhi is the capital city, it




20
  In the initial survey, all participants were asked 9 questions on driving procedures. The “pre-experiment driving
knowledge score” measures the percentage of questions answered correctly.

                                                        13
is unsurprising that a fair number of individuals have government connections: 41% have at least one family

member (usually a parent) employed by the government.

         The characteristics summarized in Panel A and B appear well-balanced across the three groups.

There are no significant differences across groups in age, education levels (as measured by percentage of

people with less than a primary school education), employment status, wealth (as measured by the number of

durable goods owned by the family), income, or likelihood to have driven a two-wheeler or have a two-

wheeler license. There are some exceptions. First, individuals in the comparison group are less likely to be

married and more likely to be Hindu. Second, a larger fraction of those in the bonus group and a lower

fraction of those in lesson group report having driven a four-wheeler at least once in the past. However,

conditional on having driven a four-wheeler, there are no systematic differences across groups in the tenure

of driving a four-wheeler.

         Survey participants talk openly about bribes. First, to capture attitudes toward bribing, the project

team posed the following hypothetical scenario to individuals: “You are driving without a license, and are

pulled over by a policeman. The policeman offers you a choice of paying a Rs500 fine or a Rs300 bribe.”

Sixty-one percent of the sample indicates that they would pay the bribe, and there are no significant

differences in the propensity to bribe across the three groups (Panel C). Participants have some distaste for

paying bribes, as evidenced by the fact that when the cost of the fine relative to the bribe increases, more

individuals are willing to pay the bribe (for example, 83% of the sample stated that they would pay the bribe

if the fine was Rs3000 and the bribe remained Rs300). Second, the project team asked individuals whether

they had paid a bribe in the past (Panel D). Conditional on having obtained a service, 20% of individuals

paid a bribe.21 There are no systematic differences in past bribing behavior across the three groups.

         The last panel explores the participants’ beliefs regarding the process they will face. Individuals

think that the entire licensing process will take on average 6.8 trips. This is more trips than what it will take

the average participant in practice. There are no systematic differences in beliefs across the three

experimental groups.

21
   The list of services covered in the initial survey was: ration card, passport, land title, building permit, electricity,
water, voter’s card, personal account number (which is equivalent to a social security number). Highest likelihood of
bribe payment was with regard to ration cards, followed by land titles and building permits.

                                                           14
        In summary, the pre-characteristics are well-balanced across the three groups. We have, however,

uncovered some systematic differences, and therefore, in the analysis that follows, we will directly control

for those characteristics (marital status, religion fixed effects, and having driven a 4 wheeler in the past).



Who gets a license?

We begin by focusing on the two final outcomes for our survey participants: their ability to get a license and,

conditional on getting a license, their ability to drive. With respect to these, the questions we address relate to

allocative efficiency: are those with a higher willingness-to-pay able to get their license faster and at a higher

rate? And if yes, how does this affect their ability to drive? Also, are better drivers able to get their license at

a higher rate?

        Table 4 provides answers to these three questions. Each column reports, for the dependent variable

listed in that column, the coefficient estimates on dummy variables for the bonus group and the lesson group:

                         Outcomesi=β0 + β1Bonus i+ β2Lesson i+ β3Session i +β4X i+ ei

We include session fixed effects as controls in each regression. Demographic variables—marital status,

religion fixed effects, and a dummy variable for having driven a four-wheeler prior to the experiment—are

used to control for differences in pre-experimental characteristics (see Table 3). Standard errors are reported

in parentheses under each estimated coefficient. Below the coefficient estimates, the F-statistic and p-value

for the joint significance of β1 and β2 are listed. For ease of interpretation, the mean of the dependent variable

for the comparison group is listed in the first row of each column.

        Consistent with the view that the bureaucracy is responsive to individual needs, we find that those

participants who have a higher willingness-to-pay for a license (the bonus group) are more likely to obtain

their final license and also obtain it faster. Individuals in the bonus group were 28 percentage points more

likely to obtain a permanent license than those in the comparison group, and this difference is significant at

the 1% level (Column 1). While it is true that individuals in the bonus group are also more likely to have

tried to obtain a license (see Figure 1), their higher success rate stays large (17 percentage points) and

statistically significant at the 1% level even after limiting the sample to individuals who reported having tried



                                                        15
to obtain a license (Column 2). In addition to having a higher success rate in terms of obtaining a license, the

bonus group was also able to obtain the license 18 days faster than the comparison group (Column 3).

        These differences do not imply that the bonus group resorted to corrupt measures to obtain a license;

it is possible that they simply exerted more effort or practiced more to become better drivers. However, the

evidence that we collected from the survey and driving test conducted at the final session does not support

this view. First, among those that obtained a license, 77 percent in the bonus group, compared to 49 percent

in the comparison group, report not having been taught how to drive by anybody (e.g. neither by a driving

school, nor by a friend, relative or other driver; Column 6). Column 8 shows that, among those who obtained

a license, 39 percent in the bonus group report not being confident in their driving skills, compared to 23

percent in the comparison group. These differences are also reflected in the bonus group’s relative

performance on the surprise driving test performed at the end of the project. They are worse drivers than the

comparison group (although this is not significant at conventional levels): they are 8 percentage points (69%

vs 61%) more likely to fail the independent driving test. They also score 0.17 standard deviations less than

the comparison group on the driving test (Columns 9 and 10).22 In other words, individuals with higher

private needs for a license get their license at a higher rate but this is not because they put more effort in

learning to become good drivers: willingness-to-pay and driving ability are not complements.

        A study of outcomes for the lesson group also shows that driving ability is at best a weak substitute

for willingness-to-pay in order to get a license. Specifically, we find that individuals who were given free

driving lessons upfront were only slightly more likely (5%; Column 2) to obtain a license relative to the

comparison group (conditional on having attempted to get a license). Yet, 60% of those in the lesson group

who obtained a license took the free lessons. Conditional on take-up, they attended, on average, 12 classes.

The independent driving test results also confirm the lesson group’s superior driving skills and the fact there

is a treatment:   conditional on obtaining a license, only 11% of the individuals in the lesson group

automatically failed the driving test (compared to 61% and 69% in the comparison and bonus groups,




22
  The score is comprised of the individuals’ score on the 5 oral questions and on 23 aspects of driving. Thus, the
highest possible score is 28. We subtracted the mean score from the comparison group, and divided by the standard
deviation of the comparison group.

                                                       16
respectively; Column 9).23 Individuals in the lesson group scored over one standard deviation more than the

comparison group on the surprise driving test (Column 10).

         In summary, the evidence reported in Table 4 suggests that corruption allows individuals who are in

a hurry to get a license faster. But most importantly, the evidence suggests that it comes at a social cost.

First, many unsafe drivers get licenses. As a result, learning how to drive is not the way to get a license if in a

hurry. Corruption appears to substitute for actual driving skill. Second, and conversely, knowing how to

drive does not help to obtain a license. This suggests a particularly perverse form of corruption in which the

socially useful part of the regulation is completely ignored.



Processes

What is the bureaucratic process that generated these outcomes? To address this question, we turn to the

information collected on the experiences of all the participants, including the number of trips they had to

make and lines they had to wait in, the number of bureaucrats they had to speak with, the amount of

paperwork they had to fill in, the number of times they had to take the legally required test, etc. Such an in-

depth look into processes is of interest in itself since few existing studies give us detailed information on the

actual mechanisms of corruption. Moreover, it also helps us examine the extent of endogenous red tape.

Specifically, we ask whether there is any evidence that the bureaucrats are using their discretion over the

implementation of the bureaucratic process in order to extract higher bribes.

         Our first finding is that there are two routes by which people obtain their license. In the first route

(the one we had anticipated), individuals directly go to the local RTO and deal with the bureaucrats there. In

the second (and most common) route, individuals hire an agent to help them navigate the bureaucracy. More

than 70% of the participants in our study who obtained a license hired an agent. The existence of agents has

been documented before in other settings.24 Yet, there is little understanding on exactly how agents interact

with the bureaucracy. Although agents are technically illegal in India, the fact that so many participants in

23
   We also tested driving ability among the set of participants that had only obtained a temporary license but agreed to
come back for a final survey. As expected, even in that group, driving ability was higher in the lesson group than in the
comparison and bonus group. Only 26% of the lesson group automatically failed the test, compared to 40% and 50% in
the comparison and bonus groups, respectively.
24
   Rosenn (1984) describes the role of facilitators ("despachantes") in obtaining various public services in Brazil.

                                                          17
our study hire agents to assist them in the process of getting a license confirm that they are a well-established

institution.25 In fact, from a set of questions asked in the initial survey, we learned that agent usage is also

quite prevalent in the procurement of many other government services in India. For example, of the 155

participants who obtained a ration card, 54% reported being helped by an agent in that process. Similarly,

47% of the 47 individuals who obtained a land title, 15% of the 104 who obtained a passport, and 20% of the

58 who obtained a personal account number reported hiring an agent in those instances. For driving licenses,

it was quite easy for participants to find an agent. As reported in the final survey, agents approached 86% of

the participants who eventually obtained a license and, on average, individuals were approached by 2.7

agents.

          How does hiring an agent affect a participant’s experience with the bureaucracy? Are agents simply

a time-saving device, for example hired to stand in line and pick up documents on behalf of their “client?” Or

do they play a more central role in driving some of the outcomes reported in Table 4? We address these

questions in Table 5 through simple OLS regressions. Specifically, we report the means of a set of process-

related variables for individuals not using an agent, and the difference in means for those using an agent. We

find that hiring an agent leads to a much shorter process. To complete the licensing process, those that did

not use an agent spent on average 306 minutes at the RTO, took more than 3 trips to the RTO and spoke with

close to 8 bureaucrats (Columns 5, 2, and 3, respectively). Hiring an agent reduces the total length of the

bureaucratic process by about 130 minutes; on average, it also reduces the number of trips to the RTO by

nearly one, and the number of bureaucrats one faces in half (4 instead of 8).

          However, besides making the process less time-consuming, hiring an agent also affects the level of

testing at the RTO. While 94% of those that do not hire an agent took the legally required RTO practical test

at least once, only 12% of those that hired an agent took that test (Column 6). While this is consistent with

the hypothesis that hiring an agent is the main channel through which bad drivers can end up with a license,

it is also theoretically possible that only the best drivers, for which testing would be unessential, hire agents.




25
  During a fact-finding trip in a mid-scale Indian city, one of the co-authors instructed a rickshaw-driver to take her to
the "place to get a driving license." Rather than take her to the RTO, the rickshaw-driver took her directly to an agent.

                                                           18
This alternative hypothesis is hard to sustain in light of Columns 8 and 9 of Table 5. Individuals that hire an

agent to get their license are about 38 percentage points more likely to fail the surprise driving test.

        In summary, the role of agents in this process is more than simply “standing in line” for their client.

Instead, agents appear to be the main channel through which unsafe drivers obtain a license and the means

through which corruption occurs. This intuition is confirmed in Column 7 of Table 5, where we compare the

average expenditures to obtain a license for those that hired agents and those that did not. For those without

agents, the total expenditures were Rs580. In contrast, those hiring an agent paid about Rs720 more to obtain

their license. The main driver of this higher level of expenditures is the fee paid to the agent.

        We next study differences in processes across the three experimental groups (Table 6). The first

finding that emerges is that about the same fraction of participants in the bonus and comparison group end up

using an agent to obtain their license (about 78%). A lower, but still quite substantial, fraction of those in the

lesson group (59%) also relied on an agent to complete the licensing process (Column 1).

        Even more interesting are differences across experimental groups in how they ended up using agents

(Column 2). While two-thirds of those in the bonus group that ended using an agent started the process with

an agent, a much higher fraction of those in the comparison and lesson groups started the process without an

agent but ended up using an agent. Specifically, between 55% and 60% of those that ended up using an agent

in the comparison and bonus groups tried to complete the process without an agent. In other words, many

participants went to the RTO on their own discovered or learned something that made them decide to switch

to using an agent. Of course, it could be that they discovered that they would have to learn how to drive to

pass the practical test, decided that this was too costly for them, and hence switched to using an agent.

However, this interpretation does not seem fully satisfactory given the high level of switching even among

those that we know to be better drivers (e.g. the lesson group). This suggests that something beyond having

to learn how to drive explains the switching behavior.

        One possibility is that those individuals that go to the RTO on their own are faced with various

“pressures” (or red tape) from the bureaucrats that lead them to eventually switch to using an agent. One

specific source of red tape that our data allow us to examine relates to the behavior of the bureaucrats with

regard to the determinants of whether someone has passed or not passed the official practical driving test.

                                                        19
Consider an individual going to the RTO and being asked to take the test. What affects the likelihood that

this individual will succeed and be awarded a driving license? One clear determinant of success ought to be

one’s ability to drive. However, bureaucrats may strategically manipulate the passing rule in order to extract

higher bribe payments. At the extreme, bureaucrats may fail all test takers independently of how well they

perform on the test, thereby forcing them to pay extra to obtain their license. The fact that a fraction of the

participants in our study did manage to obtain their license without hiring an agent (Column 1 of Table 6)

already indicates that such extreme behavior is not taking place. However, the bureaucrats may still be able

to manipulate the passing rule in such a way that would discourage even good drivers from attempting to get

their license without an agent. This is the possibility that we consider in the remaining columns of Table 6.

        In Columns 3-9, we restrict the sample in each experimental group to the subset of individuals who

started the process without an agent and either completed it without an agent or eventually switched to using

an agent. In other words, we exclude from each experimental group the subset of individuals that hired an

agent from the start. We then compute, for each experimental group, the fraction of those who, conditional

on taking the official test once, did not have to retake it and did not have to revert to hiring an agent to obtain

their license. This roughly corresponds to individuals that went to the RTO, took the test and successfully got

their license. The findings in Column 4 indicate that this success rate does not differ across the three

experimental groups. Sixty-eight percent of those in the lesson group succeed, compared to 67% in the bonus

group and 65% in the comparison group. Of course, we are considering for this analysis non-random sub-

samples of the three experimental groups. Maybe there are no systematic differences in driving ability across

the three experimental groups in these sub-samples of the data. Columns 5 and 6 suggest otherwise. In

column 6, we report the rate of failure in our surprise driving test among those that did not start the process

with an agent. There is a clear ranking across the 3 experimental groups: in the lesson group, only 13% failed

the surprise driving test, compared to 54% in the comparison group and 58% in the bonus group. In Column

7, we further restrict the sub-samples to those that did not start the process with an agent and took the official

test at least once (e.g. the denominators for the fractions computed in Column 4). Again, we find a clear

ranking across the three experimental groups: only 12% automatically failed the surprise driving test,

compared to 35% in the comparison group and 44% in the bonus group.

                                                        20
        In Panel B of Table 6, we replicate the same exercise on additional cuts of the data. First, we look

only at those participants that took the free driving lessons: this is the sub-sample of the lesson group where

we expect driving ability to be even higher than for the average individual in the lesson group (and indeed,

only 5% of these failed the surprise driving test). Strikingly, these individuals are only slightly more

successful on the official test (70% versus 65% in the comparison group). Following a similar logic, in the

last two rows of Panel B, we break the full data set into two subgroups: those that failed our surprise test and

those that did not. Again, we find that success on the official exam does not greatly differ across these two

groups. In fact, the point estimates indicate a slightly higher chance of passing among those that failed our

surprise test (74%) than among those that passed our surprise test (65%). In summary, whether or not one

knows how to drive does not affect the likelihood that one will pass the official RTO test. Because failing is

costly (among other things, one has to wait 7 days before being able to retake the exam), this apparent

arbitrariness in the system may force even some of the good drivers to hire agents (red tape creation) and

may also discourage people from learning how to drive.

        In the remaining columns of Table 6 we show systematic differences between the 3 experimental

groups in how much persistent there are in trying to obtain a license without an agent. Specifically, a higher

fraction of those in the lesson group persist in completing the process without an agent. Fifty-eight percent of

those in the comparison group, compared to 49% in the bonus group and 39% in the lesson group switch to

hiring an agent even before taking the RTO exam (Column 7). More than half of those in the lesson group

take the official test once before switching to an agent (compared to 38% in the comparison group; Column

8). About 10% of those in the lesson group take the official test more than once before switching to an agent

(compared to less than 5% in the comparison group; Column 9).

        Complementing the evidence above, Figure 2 documents the various reasons participants reported

for switching to an agent. Across the entire sample, the two most commonly cited reasons for switching to an

agent were confusion and failure on a test. Confusion was mentioned by about 30% of all the switchers. A

higher fraction of individuals in the lesson group (42%) and bonus group (33%) than in the comparison

group (13%) reported switching because of failing the temporary or final license test at the RTO. These

differences are statistically significant at the 5-percent level. Speeding up the process was less likely to be

                                                      21
mentioned as a reason for switching in the lesson group than in the comparison group. None of the other

differences across groups reported in Figure 2 are statistically significant.



Monetary and Time Costs

What are the implications of these differences in processes across the three experimental groups in terms of

costs? The participants were asked to report their financial expenses throughout the process and to break

them down into specific items. We can also measure, although less precisely, some of the time cost

associated with obtaining a license (such as total time spent at the RTO, etc). We report the financial and

time costs in Tables 7 and 8, respectively. The format of both tables is identical to Table 4.

        The evidence in Table 7 confirms what we had already inferred from Table 5: there is little direct

bribing of bureaucrats and all the extra payments are due to the hiring of agents. Only 7 individuals (2% of

those that obtained a license) paid a bribe directly to an RTO official to obtain their license, and these were

equally distributed across the three experimental groups (Column 1). Overall, direct bribe payments are small

(Column 5).

        Next, we turn to studying the differences in payment across the three experimental groups. We find

that there are no systematic differences in payment between the bonus group and the comparison group. On

average, individuals in the comparison group paid Rs1,127 to obtain their final license, or about Rs650 more

than the official cost. Individuals in the bonus group only paid slightly more than those in the comparison

group to complete the licensing process. Specifically, they spent about Rs16 more to obtain a license during

the process, but this difference is not statistically significant (Column 2). This similarity is as expected given

that these two groups do not differ in their eventual rate of agent usage and given that all the extra payments

in this process are linked to hiring agents. They are inconsistent however with a common assumption in

many theoretical models of corruption that bureaucrats are able to price-discriminate and offer a differential

speed of service based on the applicants’ valuations of time (see e.g. Liu 1985). In contrast, higher quality

drivers—the lesson group—paid on average Rs180 (about 15%) less to obtain a license.

        Table 8 considers differences in delays across the 3 groups. Based on our discussion of processes

above, we would expect time costs to be the lowest for the bonus group, given that they are more likely to

                                                        22
hire an agent from the start and, therefore, are less exposed to the bureaucracy. We would also expect time

costs to be highest for the lesson group since more of them stick to not using an agent. The evidence

reported in this table is qualitatively consistent with these expectations, even though the differences across

groups are not as striking as one might have expected. Those with a higher willingness to pay—the bonus

group—faced a somewhat easier and hence shorter process: for example, they spoke with slightly less

officials than the comparison group (Column 3), waited in 0.2 less lines (Column 4), and spent 14 minutes

less in total at the RTO (Column 5). None of these differences are statistically significant. The only

dimension over which the bonus group had an easier time than the comparison group is with respect to how

helpful they found the RTO staff. While 62% of the comparison group found the RTO staff unhelpful, only

50% of the bonus group shared this view (Column 1). Combining the evidence of Table 7 and Table 8,

individuals in the comparison group do not pay less to get their license than the bonus group and in fact may

spend more overall if one accounts for the opportunity cost of their time.

        In contrast, the lesson group faced a slightly longer and more difficult process than the comparison

group. They interacted with one more bureaucrat than the comparison group (Column 3), and were

significantly more likely to take the formal test at the RTO (Column 6). They spent more time at the RTO

than the comparison group but the difference is not economically large and is statistically insignificant

(Column 5).



IV.    What (else) do agents do?

The motivation for the random assignment in the initial study was to understand which elements of

individual abilities (e.g. lesson group) and needs (e.g. bonus group) a corrupt bureaucracy responds to. Based

on our gained understanding of the central role of agents in the process of corruption, it became apparent that

a direct study of agents could provide additional insights. Hence, the IFC performed an audit study of agents

involved in the provision of driving licenses in New Delhi. This audit study took place after the main project

was completed. The structure of the audit is simple. Trained actors were sent to talk to agents under different

pretexts. For example, an actor would be sent to an agent saying that he would like to obtain a license but did

not know how to drive and did not have the time to learn how to drive. The actor would then record whether

                                                      23
the agent said a license could be obtained under this pretext and if so, at what price. The actors were college-

aged, Hindu men. They were required to be of similar height and weight, and to wear similar types of

clothing. In total, 224 agents were approached by 6 different actors.

        Each day, a given actor was randomly given one of 6 scripted pretexts to approach the agents with.

For the first script, the actor had to learn what the agent could do for him if he had all the right paperwork

and could drive (comparison group). The second and third scripts focused on what would happen if the

actors were missing residential proof or age proof respectively, two of the required documents to obtain a

license. The fourth script focused on whether the actor could obtain a license if he could not drive (and did

not have time to learn how to drive). The fifth script focused on what would happen if the agent could not

come back to the RTO to obtain a license. Finally, the last script focused on what would happen if the actor

needed a license in less than 30 days, in other words less than the officially required time between the

temporary license and the final license.

        The results, reported in Table 9, confirm the previous analysis. To start, the prices quoted by the

agents were of similar magnitude to those in the main experiment. In the comparison group (Row 1), agents

asked for Rs1,330 in total to complete the process, but reduced the price to Rs1,280 after bargaining. The

variance of quoted prices was relatively low, with the final price ranging from Rs1,000 to Rs1,700 in the

comparison group. Also, agents saw no problem in helping actors who stated they did not know how to drive

and did not have time to learn how to drive. One hundred percent of actors that approached an agent with a

“cannot drive” pretext were told that the agents could help them in getting their license (Row 4). Strikingly,

the prices quoted under that script are only Rs60 larger than those quoted to the comparison group. In other

words, there was no pricing of driving (in)ability.

        In contrast, there are some constraints in the system that corruption cannot circumvent. For example,

only 50% of agents reported that they could procure a license if the actor lacked residential proof (Row 2)

and only 80% if the actor lacked age proof (Row 3). Only 5% of agents could procure a license if the actor

stated that he could not come back to hand in forms and take the picture at the RTO (Row 5). Also, in the

cases of missing residential proof or age proof, the prices quoted by the agents conditional on being able to

help were statistically significantly larger than in the comparison group. Finally, only 8% of agents said they

                                                      24
could assist someone that needed a license in less than the official 30-day minimum, and conditional on

being to assist, quoted a much higher price for rendering this service.

         These results indicate that bureaucrats do not have the ability to distort all rules. The patterns we

observe suggest that verifiability might be an important determinant of which rules can or cannot be bent.26

While it might be easy for the bureaucrats’ superiors to cross-check whether a valid proof of age and proof of

residence were submitted by a license candidate, and to monitor the dates at which these documents were

submitted, it might be harder to cross-check whether the candidate took a test and how well he did.

Corruption circumvents rules that are harder to verify.



V.       Interpretation

The results so far support a simple model. Bureaucrats make it hard for individuals to pass the driving exam

by failing individuals arbitrarily, irrespective of their skill. This “red tape” in turn implies that applicants

often turn to an agent to facilitate the process. Because of the connections between the bureaucrat and the

agent, the applicant that hires an agent can avoid taking the test. Working through the agent system might

reduce the bureaucrat’s chance of being caught extracting bribes. Perhaps bribery on-site is too visible or

perhaps the possibility of being reported by an irate applicant is too high. By relying on agents, these risks

are minimized. As a whole, this arrangement produces a system which circumvents the primary motive for

the regulation: producing good drivers.

         Should we call this corruption? We do not observe any direct transfers between individuals and

bureaucrats, although we have some evidence from the audit study that agents do transfer payments to the

bureaucrats.27 One alternative interpretation is that the money paid to the agent is merely to provide a time-

saving service much like one might use a travel agent to book tickets that could otherwise be booked directly.

Several findings speak against this interpretation. First, recall that those who use an agent hardly ever take

the driving test. Thus, while there may be some time saving, there is another important form of saving: not

taking the test. Second, if the agent is providing only a time-saving service, he is doing so at a very high cost.

26
    Reinikka and Svensson (2005) illustrate this in the context of Uganda, where a newspaper campaign aimed at
reducing corruption in schools by providing parents with information to monitor local officials was highly successful.
27
   In the audit study, agents told the actors they would handle all bribes to the bureaucrats in 81% of the interactions.

                                                          25
Our data suggest that the agent saves about two hours of time for the applicants. Given an average hourly

wage of about 40 Rupees in our sample, this would suggest the agents’ time-saving service is worth only

about 80 Rupees. In contrast, people spend about 600 Rupees on hiring an agent.28 These calculations also

imply that the money extracted by the agent could not simply account for his time costs if he does little more

than wait in line for an applicant. Thus, while we do not have direct evidence of private gains for the

bureaucrats, this indirect evidence suggests money is changing hands between bureaucrats and agents. Our

evidence is therefore supportive of regulatory corruption—non-application or mis-application of

regulation—and of private gain corruption—the use of public office for private gain.

         Given the existence of corruption, are we sure that the bureaucrats are raising red tape—failing

applicants randomly—to extract greater bribes? Alternatively, are they simply lazy and the bribes are used to

get them to work? The most salient evidence against this interpretation is that absent intervention by the

agent, the bureaucrats actually work more, not less: absent agents, the bureaucrat actually puts forth effort to

administer the test. A related alternative interpretation is that the random passage on the exam we have

observed is also simply “laziness” on the part of the bureaucrat. This interpretation does not fit well the

qualitative aspects of the situation. Once a person is being tested, the additional “effort” required to pass the

correct person is minimal. The bureaucrat is sitting in the car, and even paying a small amount of attention to

the applicant would allow far greater differentiation of good and bad drivers than we are finding. These facts

suggest that random failures are likely red tape creation by the bureaucrat.

         Finally, could our results be driven by selective attrition? As we see in Table 1A, the attrition rate

(defined as those participants we are unable to track and whose final license status we are thus unsure of) is

15.4% in the lesson group and 13.4% in the comparison group, while it is only 4.4% in the bonus group.

Given that participants in the bonus group had a higher incentive to stay in the study, perhaps many with a

license in the comparison and lesson groups simply did not return for the follow-up surveys. This could

affect one of our results: the higher license-getting rate in the bonus group. To quantify the magnitude of this

concern, assume conservatively that the license-getting rate amongst those we cannot track in the lesson and

28
  Contrast this with the cost of learning how to drive. Driving lessons take roughly 20 hours and cost Rs800 in time, not
to mention the Rs1000 in fees. This suggests that an agent is preferred to learning how to drive within the rules,
assuming no private benefit of being a better driver.

                                                          26
comparison groups is the same as the license getting rate in the bonus group as a whole (65%) and assume

further that none of those we were unable to track in the bonus group obtained a license. This would imply a

license getting rate of 45% in the comparison group and 54% in the lesson group, both of which are still

lower than the 65% in the bonus group. This suggests that the attrition is not quantitatively large enough to

affect this result. Furthermore, attrition cannot affect our other core results, such as the arbitrary failure

policy by the bureaucrats and the use of agents to circumvent the legally required exam.



VI.        Conclusion

Corruption in this setting undercuts the primary social purpose of regulation. Moreover, as the bureaucracy is

quite unresponsive to actual driving skills, individuals have little incentives to learn how to drive. Hence, the

overall cost of corruption is larger than simply allowing some unsafe drivers through. The findings also

suggest an interesting mechanism for red tape and bribery. The agent system allows bureaucrats to avoid

direct bribery, and the bureaucrats use arbitrary failures on the driving exam to entice individuals to use

agents. This industrial organization of corruption is intriguing and is largely ignored by the theoretical

literature.

           The audit study speaks to the generalizability of the findings. One interpretation of the audit results is

that the verifiability of a particular regulatory requirement determines the ease with which corruption can

overcome it. This suggests that the social inefficiency results would generalize most readily to other contexts

where the socially useful part of the regulation is non-verifiable by the bureaucrats’ principals. Of course, it

is possible that even verifiable elements of a regulation could be overcome through collusion between the

principals and the bureaucrats. While we do not have a direct measure of the extent of collusion between the

bureaucrats and higher-up officials, the audit results suggest that there was not complete collusion in this

setting.

           The central role of agents suggests the need for more theoretical and empirical work. How do agents

manage to develop their contacts with the bureaucrats? How do bureaucrats maintain their relationship with

agents? Why is the provision of agents apparently so plentiful, rather than having their numbers be



                                                          27
restricted? Does the agent system limit the ability of the bureaucrat to more finely price discriminate between

time-rushed and non-rushed individuals, as seems to be the case here?

        While corruption is much discussed, little empirical work exists on how it works. Our paper offers

the promise that such work might deliver powerful insights. The experimental designs developed here are

highly portable. Both the detailed surveys of individuals’ experiences through a bureaucratic system and the

agent audit study can be performed at low cost in different areas of the world and can easily be extended to

the provision of other goods or services. Reproducing these experimental designs in other contexts could lead

to a deeper understanding of the nature of corruption and enable more empirically grounded theories of

corruption.




                                                      28
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Thierry Verdier (2000). “The Choice Between Market Failures and Corruption,”
American Economic Review, 90 pp.194-211.

Banerjee, Abhijit (1997). “A Theory of Misgovernance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, pp. 1289-
1332.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2003). “The Role of Wages and Auditing During a Crackdown
on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2002). “The Regulation
of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 1-37.

Huntington, S.P. (1968). “Modernization and Corruption.” Political Order in Changing Societies, (New
Haven: Yale University Press), 59-71. Reprinted in A. Heidenheimer, M.Johnston and V. LeVine, Political
Corruption - A Handbook, (New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers), 1989.

Klitgaard, Robert (1991). “Gifts and Bribes,” in Richard Zeckhauser, ed., Strategy and Choice, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Leff, N.H. (1964). “Economic Development Through Bureaucratic Corruption.” American Behavioral
Scientist, VIII (3), 8-14. Reprinted in A. Heidenheimer, M. Johnston and V. LeVine, Political Corruption - A
Handbook, (New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers), 1989.

Lui, Francis (1985). “An Equilibrium Queuing Model of Bribery,” Journal of Political Economy, 93, pp.
760-781.

Mauro, Paolo (1995). “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3), 681-712.

Myrdal, Gunnar (1968). Asian Drama. Vol. II., (New York: Random House).

Olken, Benjamin (2005). “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” mimeo,
MIT.

Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson (2005). “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a
Newspaper Campaign in Uganda,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3), 259-267.

Rose-Ackerman, Susan (1978). Corruption: A Study in Political Economy. New York: Academic Press.

Rosenn, Keith (1984). “Brazil’s Legal Culture: The Jeito Revisited,” Florida International Law Journal,
1(1), 1-43.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1992). “Pervasive Shortages under Socialism,” Rand Journal of
Economics, 23(2), 237-246.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1993). “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 599-617.

Svensson, Jakob (2003). “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from a Cross Section of Firms,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 207-230.

Svensson, Jakob (2005). “Eight Questions about Corruption,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3), 19-
42.


                                                    29
Tirole, Jean (1992). “Collusion and the theory of organizations.” In J.-J. Laffont (ed.), Advances in
Economic Theory. Sixth World Congress. Cambridge University Press.

Wade, R. (1982). “The System of Administrative and Political Corruption: Canal Irrigation in South
India.” Journal of Development Studies, 18(3):287–327.




                                                      30
                                               Figure 1: Project Summary

                                                                                                                Dropout
                           Initial Session: 822 participants                                                    survey:
                                                                                                              Documented
                           1. Initial Survey: Collected demographics                                         experiences of
                           and attitudes on bribes                               Attempt to Obtain
                                                                                                             those that were
    Recruitment:                                                                    Temporary
                           2. Randomly assignment:                                                         unable to obtain the
Individuals intercepted                                                               License
                              * Comparison: no instructions                                                   temp license
   outside RTO and                                                                  Total: 73%
                              * Bonus: Rs 2000 bonus if obtain
  invited to come to                                                             Comparison: 63%
                                license in 31 days or less
    Initial Session                                                                 Bonus: 84%
                              * Lesson: free lessons upfront
                                                                                    Lesson: 70%
                           3. Payments: Rs200 upfront. Promised
                           another Rs800 if return for final survey.




                                                                                        Final (In Person) Session for
                                                           Obtain                       Those That Obtained License:
                                                         Permanent
                                                                                        Total: 50%    Comparison: 37%
                                                           License
  Obtain Temporary                                                                      Bonus: 64%    Lesson: 45%
                                                         Total: 52%
       License               Individuals               Comparison: 39%                  1. Final Survey: Experiences
       Total: 60%          Learn to Drive                Bonus: 65%                     2. Independent Driving Test
    Comparison: 49%        60% of Lesson                 Lesson: 48%                    3. Payment: Rs800 (Rs2000 extra
      Bonus: 69%             Group who                                                  for bonus group)
      Lesson: 60%           obtain license
                               take free             Final (In Person) Session If Did
    Phone survey on
                                lessons              Not Obtain License:
   experiences (no of
   trips, time per trip,                             Total: 3% Comparison: 2%                             Free Surprise
  cost, agent use, etc.)                             Bonus: 1% Lesson: 6%                                Driving Lessons
                                                     1. Final Survey: Experiences                             for all
                                                     2. Independent Driving Test
                                                     3. Payment: Rs500
         Table 1: Summary Statistics on the Bureaucratic Process for the
                             Comparison Group
Variable                                                                      Mean
                                 A. Final License Status
Obtained a final license                                                      37%

Obtained a final license conditional on both having tried to                  59%
obtain a license and having not left the study

                             B. The Process
Number of days between temporary and final license                             48.0
                                                                              (29.1)

Number of trips                                                                2.5
                                                                              (0.7)

Minutes spent at RTO (across all trips)                                        206
                                                                              (112)

Number of officials spoke with                                                 4.7
                                                                              (2.9)

Lines waited (final license)                                                   2.5
                                                                              (1.1)

Took RTO licensing exam                                                        0.30
                                                                              (0.46)

Total expenditures in Indian Rs.                                              1127
                                                                              (378)
Notes:
1. This table describes the licensing process for the comparison group.
2. Panel A includes all individuals in the comparison group, while Panel B includes all
individuals in the comparison group who obtained a final license.
3. Standard errors are in parenthesis.
                                   Table 2: OLS Estimation of Licensing Status and Procedures
                                                                                 No of                                                  Took
                                                                                Officials                                 Total         RTO
                                               Obtained              No of       Spoke                                   Minutes      Licensing
                                                License    Days       Trips      With      Lines                          Spent         Exam
                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                            (6)           (7)
Log(Expenditures)                                                   6.41        -0.59        -4.34          -0.76        -164.14    -0.75
                                                                  (10.87)     (0.23)**     (0.91)***      (0.32)**     (35.47)*** (0.14)***
Pre-Experiment Driving Knowledge Score                 0.00        0.48         0.01          0.02           0.01          0.81          0.01
                                                      (0.00)     (0.23)**     (0.01)**       (0.02)        (0.01)*        (0.94)        (0.00)
Notes:
1. Each cell gives the results of a separate OLS regression where the independent variable is listed in the row and the dependent variable is
listed in each column. All regressions include session fixed effects and controls for demographics (age, marital status, minority status, religion
fixed effects, education status, employment status, salary if employed, and number of durable goods owned).

2. The sample in Column 1 includes all individuals who were assigned to the comparison group. The sample in columns 2-7 is restricted to
the individuals in the comparison group who obtained a permanent license.

3. "Log(Expenditures)" measures the total expenditures (both official and unofficial) the subject made during the licensing process. "Pre-
Experiment Driving Knowledge Score" measures the percentage of 9 questions on driving procedures that the subject answered correctly in
the introduction survey.

4. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
               Table 3: Socioeconomic Characteristics, Past Driving Experiences, and Beliefs on Process
                                                        Full Sample     Comparison        Bonus      Driving Lesson
                                                             (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
                                        A. Socioeconomic Characteristics
Age                                                        24.23           23.57          24.61          24.31

Married                                                             0.25                0.18      **      0.27             0.28

Students                                                            0.48                0.50              0.46             0.49

Employed                                                            0.47                0.44              0.50             0.47

Less than primary education                                         0.08                0.07              0.07             0.09

Number of items owned by household                                  3.31                3.19              3.44             3.27

Minority                                                            0.36                0.44              0.32             0.34

Hindu religion                                                      0.79                0.85      **      0.78             0.77

Muslim religion                                                     0.18                0.15              0.19             0.20

Salary (if employed)                                                5447                5643              5601            5184

Know someone in government (including self)                         0.41                0.39              0.44             0.41

                                                    B. Driving Experiences
Have 2 wheeler license                                           0.03                   0.03              0.03             0.02

Have driven a two wheeler                                           0.88                0.86              0.92             0.86

Have driven a 4 wheeler                                             0.23                0.25              0.35     ***     0.11     ***


Months known how to drive a 4 wheeler (given drive)                 3.56                3.36              3.88             2.94

                               C. You are caught driving without a license. Would you bribe…..
If the fine is 500 and bribe is 300?                           0.61              0.63          0.61                        0.60

If the fine is 3000 and bribe is 300?                               0.83                0.86              0.81             0.82

                       D. Ever Bribe in the Past (conditional on having tried to obtain a public service)
Paid Bribe                                                      0.20               0.22            0.23                    0.17

                                                 E. Beliefs Regarding Procedures
Total trips to obtain license                                    6.82            7.27                     6.77             6.59

Total time at RTO                                                   1119                1180              1147            1154
Notes:
1. This table reports the mean demographics, driving experiences and beliefs regarding the license process for the 822 individuals that
completed the introduction survey.
2. Column 1 presents the means for the full sample, while columns 2 - 4 report the means by the three experimental groups:
comparison, bonus, and lesson.
3. Stars indicate a significant difference from other two groups, after controlling for session fixed effects.
4. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
                                                      Table 4: Experimental Evidence on Outcomes
                                   Final License Status                           Learning to Drive                                           Independent Exam
                                   Obtained a                                 Relatives,                                  Not
                                       final                                   Friends,                      Took time confident
                         Obtained license/tried                      Driving   Family            No one       off from   with
                          Final    to obtain a                        School    Driver           Taught     work/school driving             Automatic
                         License     license            Days        taught me Taught me           me         to practice skills              Failure         Score
                           (1)          (2)              (3)            (4)       (5)             (6)            (7)      (8)                  (9)            (10)

Comp. Group Mean            0.37         0.59            48            0.05          0.45          0.49          0.20          0.23             0.61          0.00

Bonus Group                0.28           0.17         -17.88          0.01     -0.29      0.28                  -0.03         0.16             0.08          -0.17
                        (0.04)***      (0.05)***     (3.05)***        (0.05)  (0.06)*** (0.06)***               (0.06)      (0.06)***          (0.06)        (0.13)
Lesson Group               0.08           0.05          5.42           0.55     -0.24     -0.29                  -0.03         -0.07            -0.5          1.14
                         (0.04)*         (0.05)       (3.20)*       (0.05)*** (0.06)*** (0.06)***               (0.06)        (0.06)         (0.06)***     (0.13)***

Fstat                      23.03         6.77           46.80        110.95         13.08         67.70          0.14          11.72           77.53         84.64
P-value                     0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00          0.87          0.00             0.00          0.00
Notes:
1. This table reports on the subjects' ability to obtain a license and their driving ability, by experimental group. Each column gives the results of an OLS
regression of the dependent variable listed in that column on indicator variables for belonging to the bonus and lesson group. All regressions include session
fixed effects, religion fixed effects, an indicator variable for marital status, and a dummy variable for whether the individual had ever driven a four-wheeler prior
to the project. For ease of interpretation, the comparison group mean of the dependent variable is listed in the first row. The last two rows report the Fstat and p-
value for a test of the joint significance of the bonus and lesson group indicator variables.

2 The sample in Column 1 includes all individuals at the Initial Session. Column 2 includes all individuals who tried to obtain a license and could be tracked by
the program staff. Column 3-10 includes all individuals who obtained a license and returned for the final survey.

3. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
                             Table 5: OLS Estimation of Agent Use on Outcomes for Comparison Group
                                           Procedures                                                Independent Exam
                                                                             Took
                                                                   Total     RTO
                                  No of No Officials              Minutes Licensing      Total     Automatic   Driving
                        Days      Trips Spoke With      Lines      Spent     Exam     Expenditures  Failure      Score
                         (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)
Constant               54.44         3.19         7.69           2.88        306.06          0.94           563.13           0.31        15.44
                       (7.28)       (0.15)       (0.61)         (0.27)       (24.81)        (0.08)          (58.84)         (0.12)       (2.50)

Hired Agent             -8.23      -0.85     -3.77               -0.46       -127.58    -0.82               719.46           0.38         -8.83
                       (8.23)    (0.17)*** (0.69)***            (0.30)     (28.03)*** (0.09)***           (66.47)***      (0.13)***     (2.82)***
Notes:
1. Each column reports the result of an OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in that column on an indicator for agent use.
2. The sample is restricted to the individuals in the comparison group that obtained a permanent license.
3. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
                                            Table 6: Agent Usage and Exam Outcomes
                  Full          Of those who
                 Sample         used an agent                            Of those that do not start with an agent
                                                                                                                              Took
                                                  Percent of    Success                       Auto Failure Did not       Took RTO
                                                  those that conditional                      Conditional   take         RTO Exam >
                  Hire           Use Agent          end up     on taking    Auto               on Taking    RTO          Exam than
                  Agent          From Start      hiring agent exam once Failure               Exam Once Exam             Once Once
                   (1)              (2)               (3)         (4)        (5)                  (6)        (7)          (8)  (9)
                                                     A. Experimental Groups
Comp Group         0.78              0.45            0.67        0.65       0.54                  0.35           0.58    0.38      0.04
Bonus Group        0.78              0.67               0.54           0.67           0.58        0.44           0.49    0.47      0.04
Lesson Group       0.59              0.41               0.44           0.68           0.13        0.12           0.39    0.52      0.09

                                                            B. Other Groups
Took Lessons       0.60              0.41               0.45         0.70             0.05        0.06           0.39    0.54      0.07
Passed Exam        0.61              0.48               0.43           0.65           0.00        0.00           0.37    0.53      0.10
Failed Exam         0.84           0.60             0.67         0.74        1.00           1.00       0.62      0.37     0.01
Notes:
1. This table reports on mean agent usage. Panel A presents the data for the three experimental groups. The first row of
Panel B presents the data for individuals in the lesson group who took the initial driving lessons. The last two rows of Panel
B present the data by whether or not the individual passed the independently administered driving exam.

 2. The sample in Column 1 includes all individuals who obtained a license. Sample in Column 2 includes all individuals
who used an agent. Sample in Column 3-9 includes individuals who did not start with an agent, i.e. those who never used an
agent or who did not use an agent at the start of the process.
3. "Success" (Column 4) implies that the individual only took the RTO exam once and did not hire an agent. "Auto Failure"
(Columns 5 and 6) implies the individual automatically failed the independently administered driving exam.


                                                Figure 2: Reasons for Switching


      50%

                                                                                                                         42%

      40%
                                                                 35%
                                                                                                                   33%
                                                31%

      30%
                                                        27%

                  22%                                                           22%

      20%                 18%


                                                                                      12%                  13%

      10%                                                                                    8%

                                4%


       0%
                    Agent Faster                      Confused          Friends and Family Suggested Failed Test (Either Road or
                                                                                                           Written Exam)

                                                          Comparison    Bonus     Lesson


        Notes: Sample includes individuals who started without an agent, and then hired an agent during the process.
                  Table 7: Experimental Evidence on Expenditures for the Permanent License
                                                                   Expenditure Breakdown
                                                                                   Payment to
                                             Total                                 agent above                       Other
                            Bribe         Expenditures          Official Fees      official fees      Bribe        Payments
                             (1)              (2)                    (3)                (4)            (5)            (6)

Comp. Group Mean             0.02            1127.03               460.61            658.24            0.00           1.35

Bonus Group                  0.01              15.98                3.91              -52.32          40.65          11.71
                            (0.02)            (59.16)              (13.82)           (63.03)         (30.54)         (9.09)
Lesson Group                 0.00             -180.17               -5.26            -252.05          49.27           3.72
                            (0.02)          (62.26)***             (14.54)         (66.34)***        (32.14)         (9.56)

Fstat                        0.34              8.76                  0.32             10.01            1.25           1.04
P-value                      0.71              0.00                  0.72              0.00            0.29           0.35



                                     Table 8: Experimental Outcomes on Procedures

                          Thought                                             Lines waited Minutes                Took RTO
                          RTO was                               No Officials (Only for Final Spent at             Licensing
                          unhelpful        No of Trips          Spoke With      License)      RTO                   Exam
                             (1)               (2)                  (3)            (4)         (5)                   (6)

Comp. Group Mean             0.62              2.49                  4.73              2.51            206            0.30

Bonus Group                  -0.13              -0.01               -0.38              -0.23          -13.12          0.06
                           (0.07)*             (0.11)              (0.41)             (0.20)         (13.89)         (0.07)
Lesson Group                 -0.04               0.1                0.99               0.11            7.83           0.21
                            (0.07)             (0.12)             (0.43)**            (0.22)         (14.62)       (0.07)***

Fstat                        2.07              0.76                  8.38              2.14            1.72           5.61
P-value                      0.13              0.47                  0.00              0.12            0.18           0.00
Notes:
1. In both Tables 7 and 8, each column gives the results of an OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in that column
on indicator variables for bonus and lesson group. All regressions include session fixed effects, religion fixed effects, an
indicator variable for marital status, and a dummy variable for whether the individual had ever driven a four-wheeler prior to
the project. For ease of interpretation, the comparison group mean of the dependent variable is listed in the first row. The
last two rows report the Fstat and p-value for a test of the joint significance of the bonus and lesson group indicator variables.


2 The sample includes all 409 individuals who obtained a license.
3. In Table 7, a zero is included if the individual did not make a particular type of payment.
4. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
                            Table 9: Payments in Audit Study
                                   Original Price         Able to Get
                                   Quote Before         License Despite Final Price Quote
Group                                  Script              Hardship     if Can Get License
                                        (1)                   (2)               (3)
Comparison                            1327.84                                1277.89
                                     (136.53)                                (116.83)

No Residential Proof                   1417.10              0.50***               2563.16
                                     (306.35)**                                 (756.61)***

No Age Proof                          1327.03               0.81***               1606.90
                                      (140.73)                                  (232.89)***

Cannot Drive                          1286.22                  1.00               1340.54
                                      (135.57)                                    (241.42)

Cannot Come Back                      1351.05               0.05***               1595.00
                                      (176.42)                                    (134.35)

Need License Quick                    1386.22               0.08***               1975.00
                                      (193.24)                                  (607.59)***
Notes:
1. This table reports the audit study results. Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation
for the first price quoted by the agent. Column 2 reports the percentage of cases where the agent
stated that he was able to obtain the license for the individual, despite the listed hardship.
Column 3 reports the mean and standard deviation for the final price quoted by the agent.

2. Stars indicate a significant difference from the comparison group.
3. Significance at 10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by
***.
                               Appendix 1A: Final Project Summary, by Group
                                                            Total   Comparison                          Bonus         Lesson
                                                             (1)        (2)                              (3)           (4)
Individuals in Initial Session                               822        202                              295           325

Obtained Permanent License, Completed Survey                              409              74             189           146
Obtained Permanent License, Did Not Complete Survey                       17               5               3             9

Obtained Temp License, Completed Final Survey                              26               5              2             19
Obtained Temp License, Did Not Complete Final Survey                       45              14             10             21

Tried to Get Temp License, but failed                                     105              29             44             32
Did Not Try to Get Temp License                                           130              48             34             48
Unable to Track                                                           90               27             13             50
Notes:
1. This table reports the final project status for the original 822 individuals present at Initial Session. Column 1 presents the
data for the full sample, while Columns 2-4 present the data by experimental group.
                       Appendix 1B: Difference in Pre-Characteristics of Attritors vs. Non-Attritors
                                                  Those who obtained a final or           Those who did not obtain a
                                                       temporary license                      temporary license
                                               Comp.      Bonus        Lesson         Comp.       Bonus       Lesson
                                                 (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
                                           A. Socioeconomic Characteristics
Age                                             -1.36      -1.03         -0.83         0.11        0.17         2.17

Married                                            -0.19   **    0.06         0.10     *    0.01          0.03         0.21

Students                                           -0.01         0.03         0.02          -0.12         0.10         -0.02

Employed                                           -0.04         0.02         -0.07         0.08         -0.12         0.01

Less than primary education                         0.03         0.04         -0.08         0.02         -0.02         0.06

Number of items owned by household                  0.66    *    0.34         -0.58   **    0.13          0.31         -0.10

Minority                                            0.18   **    0.10         -0.16 ***     0.01          0.04         0.04

Hindu religion                                      0.05         0.14         0.14          0.17         -0.05   **    0.18

Muslim religion                                    -0.05         -0.12        -0.12         -0.14         0.07   **    -0.14

Salary (if employed)                               2367     *   -1468         -194          -1869         443          444

Know someone in government (including self)         0.15         -0.12        0.06          -0.23   **   -0.03         -0.03     **

                                                    B. Driving Experiences
Have 2 wheeler license                              0.00        0.05       -0.01            -0.02   **   -0.07         0.01

Have driven a two wheeler                           0.08         0.10         0.03          0.04          0.00         -0.04

Have driven a 4 wheeler                             0.09         0.17         -0.01         0.17         -0.06         -0.05

Months known how to drive a 4 wheeler (given -0.37             -0.41        0.19            0.39         -0.29         1.70
drive)
                 C. You are caught driving without a license. Would you bribe…..
If the fine is 500 and bribe is 300?               -0.12        0.07       -0.03            -0.12        -0.08         -0.04

If the fine is 3000 and bribe is 300?              -0.07         0.12         0.01          -0.02         0.08         0.06

                       D. Ever Bribe in the Past (conditional on having tried to obtain a public service)
Paid Bribe                                         0.11         -0.04        0.06          0.05         -0.01          -0.06

                                               E. Beliefs Regarding Procedures
Total trips to obtain license                      4.10 ** -1.07           -1.16       *    -0.14         2.10         2.14

Total time at RTO                                   595    **    -364         -121           57            55          383
Notes:
1. The sample includes all 822 individuals present at Initial Session.
2. Stars indicate a significant difference from other two groups, after controlling for session fixed effects. Significance at
10% level is represented by a *, at the 5% level by a ** and at the 1% level by ***.
