NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOME PRODUCTION AND THE MACRO ECONOMY– SOME
LESSONS FROM POLLAK AND WACHTER AND FROM
TRANSITION RUSSIA
Reuben Gronau
Working Paper 12287
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12287
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

A first draft of this paper was presented at the SITE conference on "The Nexus between Household
Economics and the Aggregate Economy", August 2005. Avivit Yemin and Riki Eliyahu gave excellent
research assistance. Special thanks are reserved for Andrei Rachkov who helped me in the final stages of the
empirical work. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Reuben Gronau. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Home Production and the Macro Economy-Some Lessons from Pollak and Wachter and from
Transition Russia
Reuben Gronau
NBER Working Paper No. 12287
June 2006
JEL No. D13, E32, J22, P36
ABSTRACT
Recent years witnessed a flourishing of literature on the implication of shifts from home- production
to market production on the macro economy, and in particular, the real business cycle. This literature
employs calibration techniques to emulate the fluctuations in market output, labor and capital inputs
and productivity over the business cycle, assuming a representative consumer and using stylized
parameters of the substitution elasticity between home and market goods, and of the home
production function. This paper argues that the parameters used in this literature cannot be verified
empirically because of econometric identification problems. Furthermore, using data from the late
90s from transition Russia, it is argued that one cannot capture the fluctuation between the home and
the market by using a representative consumer, since there is a distinct difference between males and
females in their reaction to loss of employment: men shift most of the time released from market
work to leisure while women divide it almost equally between work at home and leisure. Finally it
is shown that the switch from a controlled economy to a market economy resulted in significant
increase in home productivity and an increase in the free time enjoyed by both Russian men and
women.
Reuben Gronau
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus, Jerusalem 91905
ISRAEL
and NBER
msreuben@mscc.huji.ac.il

Home Production and the Macro EconomySome Lessons from Pollak and Wachter and from Transition Russia.
A. Introduction
The recognition that home production plays, even in developed economies, an
important role in macroeconomic activity antedates Becker’s 1965 seminal
paper by at least two decades. In his magnum opus “National Income and Its
Composition, 1919-1938” Kuznets (1944) estimated that home production
constitutes almost a third of GNP, admitting that this crude value is an
underestimate of the true share1. Becker’s paper triggered several studies that
tried to refine this estimate2, but its main impact was on the microeconomic
analysis of household behavior and the economics of human resources. The
balance started to shift with Becker’s 1987 AEA presidential address (1988),
where he pointed out the important implications of family economics and home
production for growth and the macro economy. The challenge was taken up by
Benhabib et.al. and by Hercowitz and Greenwood 1991 studies of the real
business cycle (RBC). The two teams enlisted shifts from the market to home
production to explain some irregularities in the traditional model of the RBC,
and this has become the theme of several sequels. The 1991 papers signaled the
start of a flood of papers invoking home production to explain a wide range of
macro phenomenon: capital formation, growth, development and the welfare
cost of inflation. Our paper tries to evaluate the new macro literature from an
(old-fashioned) micro viewpoint.
The new generation of studies is characterized not merely by its wide scope of
topics, but also by a change in research strategy. Whereas the first generation
of micro studies avoided, by and large, specifying the home production’s
technology, the new macro studies are based on an explicit calibrations of the

1

Kuznets estimate relate to 1929. His estimate includes the value of home services of full-time
housewives and the capital services of home durables other than houses.
2
The studies are discussed in detail in my 1986 and 1997 surveys.

3

home production function and the household preferences over work and goods,
using stylized estimates of the parameters of the these functions. Though
several authors bemoan the shaky basis of these parameters, only little has been
done to correct this shortcoming3.
It sometimes seems that in the rush of discovering new applications
macroeconomists have overlooked Pollak and Wachter’s (1975) warning
concerning the restrictive nature of Becker’s tool of analysis. Pollak and
Wachter point out that in the absence of an explicit measure of home output,
the standard procedures of estimation of the home production function are
inapplicable unless one is ready to assume that home production is subject to
constant returns to scale and that work at home does not generate any direct
utility. It will be shown that when these assumptions are not satisfied serious
problems of econometric identification arise, problems that have been ignored
in the new literature (and specifically in the empirical studies).
A second feature distinguishing the new literature from the old one is its
approach to data availability. While micro analysts tested their hypotheses
using detailed cross sections of time budget data, no attempt has been made to
reconcile the new macro theory with data on the aggregate economic activity at
home. In this case, however, one cannot blame the researchers. The time series
on the evolution of home production in the advanced economies is just not
available. In the U.S, for example, only five nationally representative time
budget studies have been conducted over the last forty years, and the data on
the changes in home production and work at home time has not yet been
summarized4. Nowhere is the data scarcity more acute than in the field of
research that started the new trend – the study of the business cycle. The only
component of the time budget observed fluctuating over the business cycle is
market work. The short-term fluctuations of home production remain
unobserved, rendering much of the new work to be of a speculative nature. One
team of researchers (Ingram, Kocherlakota and Savin, 1997) expressed a
3

McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright (1991) and Rupert, Rogerson and Wright (1995) are the exception.
The first study trying to establish the major trends in leisure and work at home for the last four
decades is still in the writing (Aguiar and Hurst, 2006).
4

4

common plight when they titled their paper “Using Theory for Measurement:
An Analysis of the Cyclical Behavior of Home Production”.
Unfortunately, this limitation is hard to overcome. Even countries that are
blessed with more detailed data on the allocation of time lack information on
changes in the allocation of home time over the business cycle. This scarcity
forces us to search for answers in an uncommon place - Russia during the
transition period.
The Russian economy went in the last 15 years through one of the most
tumultuous periods experienced by a modern economy since the early 30s.
Home production (and specifically tending one’s garden) has been claimed to
be a major channel of escape from the deteriorating market conditions.
Fortunately, Russia is unique in having a four-year panel, taken in the midst of
the depression, on the allocation of time. Hence the Russian experience can
serve as an indicator (perhaps, an upper bound) for changes taking place in
more advanced economies during recessions.
The analysis of the Russian data is of interest by itself. The time budget of the
typical Soviet Russian household thirty years ago reflected the burden imposed
by a centrally controlled, producer-oriented, regime on the home sector. It has
been claimed (Robinson and Godbey, 1997) that the last phases of the Soviet
era witnessed an alleviation of this burden and an increase in the free time of
the average Russian household, but that this trend has slowed down in the early
90s. It is worse exploring whether this halt was temporary or whether it lasted
throughout the transition period.
The paper opens with a short survey of the new macroeconomic literature. The
survey is followed by a general outline of a three-way allocation of time model
of work in the market, work at home and leisure, and examines some of its
restrictions in light of the Pollak-Wachter critique. The implications of these
restrictions for the macro literature are discussed. A section describing the
Russian data is followed with the analysis of these data. The final section
discusses the lessons one can derive from the Russian experience concerning

5

the changes in the allocation of time over the business cycle, and their
implication for the new macro literature on the topic.
B. Home Production and the Macro Economy- A Literature Review
In his 1944 study Kuznets noted “in the shorter term cyclical fluctuations,
expansion and contraction in general business activity mean expansion and
contraction in the importance of activities eventuating in a marketable product
relative to those within the family. It is especially noted that during severe
depressions a drastic contraction in employment and incomes is accompanied
by a significant expansion of activities within the household”. Kuznets was
worried of the implications of the substitution between market and home
activities for the accuracy of his measurement of total economic activity. The
motivation of the new macro literature is somewhat different, and has been
triggered by its failure to explain the fluctuations in economic activity (the
RBC) using a standard growth theory model subjected to technological shocks
(Cooley and Prescott, 1995).
Using stylized parameters to examine to what extent the standard growth
models can mimic the true time series data it was noted that the statistics
generated by the models failed to capture the volatility of output, investment,
consumption, and market work hours and the correlations between work hours
and productivity and between market and household investment5. Benhabib
et.al. (1991), recognizing the importance of household production in overall
economic activity, and noting the low intertemporal substation of leisure, tried
to improve on the performance of the model by introducing another margin of
substitution, namely the substitution between market and home goods triggered
by wage changes.

5

According to Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright (1995) output is found to be less volatile in the
model than in the data, investment in the model is too volatile, and consumption is not volatile enough
relative to output. Focusing on the labor market, hours worked, according to the model, are not volatile
enough relative to either output or productivity. Finally, the model generates wrong correlation signs:
hours worked and productivity are highly correlated in the model but not in the data; and the market
and household investment series are positively correlated in the data but not in the model.

6

Benhabib et. al study had several sequels (Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright,
1995; McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright, 1997; Ingram, Kocherlakota and
Savin, 1997; Perli, 1998; Campbell and Ludvigson, 2001), and so had
Greenwood and Hercowitz 1991 paper focusing on capital formation over the
business cycle (Gomme, Kydland and Rupert, 2001). The 1991 papers were
followed by several studies invoking home production and employing the RBC
calibration technique to explain a wide range of other macro phenomenon:
growth (Einarsson and Marquis 1997), development (Parente, Rogerson and
Wright 2000; Gollin, Parente and Rogerson 2004) and the welfare cost of
inflation (Marquis 2001).
The expansion of the model called for the specification of the preference
function, defined over market and home goods, the household production
function and the structure of technological shocks in the market and the
household sectors. Most studies followed Benhabib et. al.’s lead assuming a
CES preference function, differing in their specification of the production
function and the structure of shocks. A critical role in the calibration of the
model is assigned to the elasticity of substitution between market and home
goods. In the absence of any prior information on this parameter, the studies
relied on intuition, using estimates that vary between 1.66 and 5.0 .
Only few of the studies bothered to estimate this elasticity of substitution, the
exceptions being McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright (1997) and Rupert,
Rogerson and Wright (1995). The first study uses time series quarterly data for
the period 1947-1992. But in the absence of information on the key variablework at home, it is difficult to evaluate the validity of its results. The Rupert et.
al. paper stands out in being the only empirical paper of the new generation
using a cross-section sample containing information (though imperfect) on time
spent in work at home.
The authors use the standard framework: preferences are defined as a function
of consumption and work time, where consumption is a CES function of
market and home goods, and work is a CES function of market work and work
at home. An attempt is made to estimate all three parameters: the substitution

7

elasticities between market and home goods, and between market and home
work, and the production elasticity of home goods. The failure of this attempt
leads the authors to estimate a less ambitious model, where work at home and
work in the market are assumed to be perfect substitutes and where the
production elasticity of home goods is set at an arbitrary value, leaving only
one parameter to be estimated - the elasticity of substitution between market
and home goods.
Given the crucial role the elasticity of substitution between market and home
goods plays in the new macro models, and the wide range of estimates used in
the calibration, it is worth enquiring whether Rupert‘s failure to estimate the
full model should be blamed on faulty data or whether it suggests a more
fundamental problem. A corollary relates to the estimation of the restricted
model, and how dependent is the estimate of the elasticity of substitution on the
restrictions imposed on the other two parameters.
C. The Specification and Identification of the Household Production Model
An expansion of the model of the allocation of time from a two “sector” model
(i.e., market work and home time) to a three-way allocation (market work,
work at home and leisure) involves several complications. The simple
preference function defined over two variables – goods and home time, has to
be replaced by a specification of a preference function defined over two types
of goods (market and home goods) and three time uses. In addition, it requires
the specification of the home production function6.
Formally , the preference function is

U =U( Xm,Xh,Tm,Th,L ), where Xm

denotes market goods, Xh - home goods, Tm – market time, Th- work at home
time and L - leisure. The home production function is Xh = F (Kh,Th ), where
Kh denotes home capital. The constraints confronting the person are the budget
6

A more sophisticated multi-period version also calls for the specification of the capital accumulation

process. Another complication involves the incorporation of multi-person decision making in the
model.

8

constraint

Xm= wTm +r Km , where w is the real wage rate, Km – market

capital and r the real interest rate, and the time constraint Tm+Th +L =1.
Assuming that the capital inputs Ki are exogenously given, the first order
conditions for an interior solution (i.e., Tm>0, Th>0) are
(UL - UTm )/ UXm = w

and

(UL - UTh )/ UXh = F’ .

Combining the two equations, one obtains the familiar factor demand equation
Π F’ = [(UL - UTh )/ (UL - UTm) ] w,
stating that the value of marginal productivity of work at home equals the
“shadow” price of time at home. Π= (UXh / UXm) denotes the “shadow” price of
home goods, F’ is the marginal productivity at home, and the “shadow” price
of time is corrected for the differential in direct utilities of work in the market
compared with work at home

(UL - UTh )/ (UL - UTm) ].

Unfortunately, the model suffers from too many parameters and too few
variables allowing for identification. Three out of the four terms in the factor
demand equation are unobserved (the “shadow” price of home goods, the
marginal productivity of work at home, and the price of time correction factor),
limiting the applicability of this equation for empirical research. Thus, changes
in the observed variable, the wage rate, can be used to trace the parameters of
any of the unobserved terms, but only if the parameters of the other two
unobserved terms are arbitrarily restricted.
The econometric identification problem can be traced to Pollak and Wachter’s
(1975) criticism of the household production model. Pollak - Wachter point out
the limitations of Becker’s model, given that the output of the production
process (the “commodity” in Becker’s terminology) and its price are
unobserved. To separate price effects from income effects one has to assume
that the “shadow prices” of the commodities are insensitive to the level of
production, and this is true only if home technology is subject to constant
returns to scale, and if the production process does not convey utility by itself

9

(i.e., if the welfare derived from a commodity is independent of the way it was
produced)7.
To avoid this problem Gronau (1977) assumed X = Xm+Xh and T = Tm+Th,
i.e., home goods and market goods are perfect substitutes UXm = UXh = UX, (and
hence Π =1) and the same is true for work at home and work in the market
UTm= UTh = UT. This simplification yields the dual condition for an interior

optimum (UL - UT )/UX = F’ =w. The existence of two separate margins allows
the tracing of the slope of the production function and the contours of the
indifference curve between work time and goods. In this scheme the choice of
leisure (or alternatively, work time) and goods is governed by preferences, and
the allocation of work time between home and market is determined by
technology8. Putting it in graphic terms (figure 1), exogenous changes in the
wage rate allow one to trace the demand for home time (i.e., the value of
marginal productivity of Th ).
The “price” Gronau had to pay for attaining identification of the home
production function was giving up on the estimation the psychic income
component (i.e., the utility component) associated with work at home. This
shortcoming seems particularly disturbing in the case of childcare.
Graham and Green (1984) were the first to try and remedy this shortcoming.
More recently Kerkhofs and Kooreman (2003) suggested an ingenious solution.
Their preference function is defined over goods (X) and leisure (L*),
preserving the assumption of perfect substitution between home and market
goods X = Xm+Xh but replacing the assumption of perfect substitution between
home and market work by the assumption that work at home generates some
direct utility L* = L+g(Th).
Rupert et.al.’s model ignores the Pollak - Wachter warning. Their attempt to
extract all three parameters was, therefore, doomed for failure, and their
estimate of the elasticity of substitution between home and market goods, in
7

The authors define this case as a case of “jointness”: ”Jointness is pervasive because time spent in
many production activities is a direct source of utility as well as an input into a commodity.”(p.256)
8
Since the allocation of work time is governed solely by home technology it is insensitive to other nonlabor resources. This conclusion allowed Gronau to test his formulation.

10

their more restrictive scheme, depends heavily on the arbitrarily chosen value
of the elasticity of home output with respect to work at home.
The identification problem is demonstrated in figure 2. Π F’ describes the value
of marginal productivity at home, assuming diminishing marginal productivity.
However, when home and market goods are not perfect substitutes an
expansion in home production entails a decline in its shadow price Π. The
observed curve DTh is hybrid of the value of marginal productivity and the
demand for home goods9. Assuming perfect substitution between home and
market time T = Tm+Th , the shadow price of time w is insensitive to Th and one
can trace the DTh curve, but one cannot separate the changes in F’ from the
changes in Π10. The two extreme cases that allow identification are the case
where Π is constant (adopted by Gronau) and the case where F’ is constant (an
assumption made by Benhabib et. al.).In the first case one can identify the
marginal productivity function F’, and in the second case- the demand for
home goods (i.e., the elasticity of substitution between home and market
goods).
The distinction between changes in the marginal productivity of work at home
and changes in the shadow price of home production bears also on the
measurement of the changes in home output and welfare. When Π is constant,
and the curve DTh reflects the value of marginal productivity of work at home,
home output is measured as the area under the curve , and the change in home
output as a result of the decline in wages is depicted by the area Th0ABTh1. On
the other hand, when it is assumed that the marginal productivity is constant,
the change in real home output is merely Th0EBTh111.
D. Transition Russia – Background and the RLMS Data
It is perhaps ironic that the new macroeconomic literature on home production
has very little to say about work at home. The central stage is occupied by the
9

DTh is the analogue of the industry-wide demand for factors of production.
If one assumes that Th generates direct (diminishing) utility the shadow price of time increases with
Th , complicating the identification problem even more.
11
When the DTh curve is iso-elastic Th = Bw-η, the percentage change in real output is (1-η)dlnw in
the first case, and -ηdlnw in the second.
10

11

changes in market work over the business cycle, the sub-plot deals with
fluctuations in home durables investment, and work at home is delegated to the
role of a behind-the-stage actor, explaining the behavior of the other series. In
second thought this is not surprising. After-all macro deals with economic
aggregates, and there just exists no reliable information on the aggregate labor
inputs in the home sector. The decision to leave the economic activity in this
sector outside the national accounts doomed the labor inputs to remain
unreported. There are no official time series in any of the advanced Western
economies concerning work-at-home, and there are too few cross sections
studies to construct an annual series, from which one can derive the cyclical
variation of work at home. Necessity leads us, therefore to “strange“ places – to
search for clues in the behavior of the Russian economy during the transition
period.
The transition of the East European economies from a centrally planned
economy to a capitalist-style regime was a painful process. Nowhere was it
more painful than in Russia itself. Russian GDP fell by over 40 percent before
it started to pick-up following the financial crisis of 1998, and real wages
dropped at a similar rate (World Bank, 2003). The dramatic changes left their
traces, naturally, on the labor market. In the period 1992−1998 Russian labor
force participation rates declined from 70 to 61 percent, unemployment rates
more than doubled (from 3.6 to 8.1 percent), so that the drop in the
employment rate was even sharper.
The World Bank team that studied the upheaval in the Russian labor market
(2003) argue that over one half of the decline in employment rate can be
explained by a switch from market production to home production, and
specifically subsistence agriculture for own consumption. This shift was not
confined to rural areas, and almost one half of the people engaged in
subsistence agriculture lived in urban areas12. Robinson and Godbey (1997)

12

An early draft of the World Bank report is contained in Earl and Sabrianova (2001). These
researchers were not the only ones who recognized the importance of the “informal sector” in the
Russian economy and its implications for the Russian market. Kolev (1998) estimated the labor supply

12

who pursued the Russian life style since the mid-sixties observe a similar trend
and claim that the increased gardening activity in the early 90s, and a parallel
change in shopping activity, resulted in a slow down of this trend of increased
leisure time enjoyed by the Russian women since 1965

13

. It is of interest to

explore whether the interruption in the trend is temporary, or whether the
transition process resulted not merely in the erosion of material wealth but also
in the decline of free time.
The study of the allocation of time in Russia during the transition period is of
interest also for other reasons. The sharp decline in market output during that
period reflects the low productivity of the market sector in a centrally
controlled regime. Less well documented (but easily observed) was the low
productivity of the home sector. Scarcity of consumer goods and an inefficient
retail sector made search and queues an inseparable part of daily life in the old
regime. Outdated home equipment resulted in daily tasks lasting longer than in
the West. Low rates of car ownership and high labor force participation rates
may have resulted in longer commuting time14. Finally, low productivity in the
market due to inefficient work habits may carry over also to the home. While
the shift from market to home production is perhaps important in the short run,
the increased productivity at home and the increased leisure at the expense of
home-work time has more long-lasting implications for the quality of life in
Russia. The substitution between work and leisure is, therefore, the second
focus of this empirical section.
The study takes advantage of a unique body of data − the Russian Longitudinal
Monitoring Survey (RLMS) which incorporated in four of its rounds (covering
in the informal economy, and Kim (2003) estimates that 27 percent of GDP in 1997−98 originated in
that sector.
13
The Robinson and Godbey (1997) findings are based on the time-diaries of 500 adults. The survey
was conducted in January 1995 in Pskov, a city chosen as a representative city of Russia. Given the
differences in coverage and the method of data collection it is difficult to compare the Pskov results
with those reported in this paper. According to the Robinson and Godbey results leisure time (including
personal care) went down in the period 1986-1995 for almost every employment group (it did not
change for employed women).The results for the sample as a whole are heavily affected by the low
employment rate in the Pskov sample (66 percent for men, and 54 percent for women).
14
Commuting time depends on the geographical distribution of housing and work places. In a centrally
planned economy households have little control on the location of either one of these places, resulting
in greater commuting time. The low rate of suburbanization may have the opposite effect.

13

the years 1994−1998) questions on time-use15. What makes these data unique is
the panel nature of the survey. It is the first time that the allocation of time is
analyzed in this framework. The high transition probabilities from employment
to unemployment and exit from the labor force in Russia in the period covered
by the survey should shed new light on the substitution between time uses,
which the simple cross-section studies cannot reveal.
Another important feature of the data is the household aspects. The
questionnaire was administered to all household members, allowing a closer
investigation of the role of household interactions in the determination of the
individuals’ allocation of time.
The second phase of the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS)
started in 1994 and lasted for 7 rounds till 2002. The first 4 rounds (rounds V to
VIII covering the years 1994−1996 and 1998) included a supplement
(supplement O) on the use of time16. The questions related to the previous
week, and each adult in the household was asked to recall how much time he
spent on work, commuting to work, working on the land (or garden),
purchasing food, preparing food, cleaning the apartment, laundry, taking care
of children (own children or others), caring for parents, and sleep.
Given the claim of a high degree of substitution between work in the market
and work in subsistence agriculture, special attention was paid to the time spent
on work on one’s land. Unfortunately, the survey was conducted during the
winter months17. The harsh Russian weather has clearly a negative effect on the
supply of “garden work”, but this will be also true for large parts of North
America and Northern Europe. Furthermore, as the 1999 Russian Labor Force
15

Questions on time use were asked also in earlier rounds of the survey. Unfortunately these data are
not comparable with later rounds because of changes in sampling design. Equally unfortunate was the
decision to terminate this part of the study in 1998.
16
The survey was not conducted in 1997 the year preceding the great financial crisis. In 1998 the
survey was conducted 2-5 months after the crisis reached its peak.
17
The interviews in round V took place during November and December 1994, round VI from October
to December 1995, round VII − during the same months in 1996, and round VIII from October 1998 to
January 1999. Another word of caution: The RLMS is not a random sample of the Russian population,
because the different regions are not represented proportionally in the sample. The effect of this
shortcoming in the sample design on our results is not clear.

14

Survey indicates, the number of people reporting employment in subsistence
agriculture in November was far from negligible, and was almost one half that
of August (World Bank, 2003, Table I.12). To overcome this shortcoming of
the time use data it was supplemented by the household’s estimate of its value
of household production.
The RLMS panel sampling unit is the dwelling unit and not the household.
Round VII was the first to depart from the original protocol, and an attempt
was made to follow households who changed apartments (RLMS, 1997). Still,
given the low mobility of the Russian population, the attrition due to mobility
is not serious. Attrition affects more the metropolitan areas (Moscow and
St. Petersburg) and the better educated and better endowed parts of the
population. To the extent that these groups are less prone to unemployment,
their under-representation should result in an upward bias in the estimation of
the degree of substitution between home and market production.
Previous studies have shown little systematic effect of economic variables on
the time use of single people. Consequently, most of this study is confined to
married couples in the age group 18-60.
E. First impressions
Table 1 describes the changes in the time use patterns based on the sample
means of the four rounds for the population as a whole18. It includes the
information on the incidence of the activity (i.e., the probability that the person
reported a positive number of hours), and on the average hours spent by those
engaged in the activity. The time budget data follow the labor force surveys in
reporting a significant decline in employment − the employment rate declining
by one-tenth. The decline in the employment rate is the dominant factor
explaining the decline of working hours (which declined by one-eighth). It is,
however, worth noting that, whereas, the mean hours of work of those
employed shows no explicit trend, commuting time declined steadily, saving
the employed half an hour weekly. The decline of commuting time can be
18

The table is based on the adult questionnaire, and relates to everyone 14 years or older.

15

attributed to either a change in the choice of a place of work, closer to home, or
to improved transportation (e.g., a greater availability of private cars).
The probability that a person works his plot or his garden fluctuated sharply
over the four rounds. Gardening was reported only by 1/8 − 1/6 of the adults in
1994 and 1998 and by over a quarter of those interviewed in 1995 and 199619.
The number of hours spent gardening for those engaged in the activity is,
however, on the decline.
The decline in the time spent on the other housework activities (shopping for
food, cooking, house cleaning and laundry) reflects the impact of the “capitalist
revolution” on the Russian home and kitchen. It may be argued that the reduced
time inputs reflect a decline in demand for these services, but in this case one
would have expected a decline both in the incidence of these activities and in
their duration. The fact that participation in these activities has hardly changed
over time, and that the decline is solely in the hours spent by those engaged in
the activity seems to imply an increase in productivity reducing the length of
time it takes to carry out the activity. The RLMS does not cover all housework
activities20, but adding up the five activities reported in the survey the time
savings are considerable − almost 4 hours a week – more than 20 percent of the
time spent in 1994. The timesavings in housework (which are voluntary)
exceed in magnitude those in market time (which are, at least partly,
involuntary).
Parents of children less than 14 years old were asked how much time they spent
caring for their children. The reports show fluctuations over the period, but no
observable decline (in contrast to the time spent caring for other children). The
decline in fertility is reflected, however, in a decline in incidence, resulting in
10 percent less time devoted to this activity. Perhaps the most important change
in the Russian time budget is the resumption of the increase in free time. The
19

The rate of participation in the gardening activity in 1998 is very similar to that reported by the
Goskomstat 1999 labor force surveys for February and November (Earl and Sabrianova, 2001, Table
III. 5).

20

For example, it does not report the time spent on shopping for non-food items. This activity may
have increased given the greater variety of goods and greater price dispersion in Russian stores.

16

decline in hours of work in the market and at home released 6 weekly hours for
leisure activities- an increase of over 10 percent. It is, of course difficult to
compare the RLMS results with those of Robinson and Godbey, but taking
them at face value, it looks as if the leisure time bounced back to its pretransition level, and may have even increased. In the advanced Western
economies some of the increase in leisure comes at the expense of sleep. Biddle
and Hamermesh, (1990) attribute this change to the sensitivity of sleep-time to
material wealth − the greater availability of goods increases time scarcity and
results in people cutting down on sleep, their most time intensive activity. The
decline in the Russian real wage rate was clearly not conducive to this Western
trend, and time spent on sleep hardly changed over the period.
Time use patterns differ by gender. Table 2 distinguishes between married
men and women focusing on married couples21. The decline in employment
rates in this sample is much sharper than the one reported in table 1. The rates
for men decline from 86 percent to 74 percent, and for women from 75 to 66
percent22. The decline in employment rates is the main factor explaining the
decline in the amount of time spent in the market (including commuting time)
of 8 hours a week for men and 2 hours for women. The market time of
employed men declined by 4 hours (the 4-year mean is 43 hours a week), and
the market hours of employed women hardly changed (fluctuating around a
mean of 37.5 )23.
Married women in Russia follow the universal pattern, bearing the main
responsibilities for housework and children (gardening being the only activity
where husbands prevail). As a result, they are also the main beneficiaries of the
increased productivity at home. The time saved in housework (6 hours) almost
21

The sample of couples described in table 2 is confined to the age group 18-60. The age constraint
results in the reduction of the sample (compared to the sample used in table 1) by more than one-fourth.
The removal of the upper bound in the age constraint (i.e., including in the sample all couples, 18 or
older) increases the sample to 1500 observations. The labor force participation rate in the ”older’
sample is about 10 percent lower, and the mean values for work at home and leisure are significantly
higher , but the regression results (reported in tables 3-5) are hardly affected.
22

Goskomstat reports a decline in the national employment rate for that period from 67 to 53 percent
(Earl and Sabrianova, 2001, table III 1).
23
The decline in commuting time observed in table 1 is also observed in the couples samples.

17

equals the “time savings” of their husbands from the decline in employment.
The decline in fertility added to these savings another 2.5 hours spent
previously in childcare24.
In the West married men and women spend about the same time in work
(Gronau and Hamermesh, 2001), men spending more time in market work and
women specializing in work at home and childcare. The high participation rates
of married women in Russia in the old regime and the scarcity of part-time jobs
resulted in Russian married women working over one third more than their
husbands25. The decline in hours worked was almost the same for women than
for men (12 hours), so that the gap did not change.
Gronau and Hamermesh (2001) observe in six Western countries that married
women and men have about 15.5 −17 hours a day for leisure and personal care
(including sleep). The average Russian woman in 1994 was not that fortunate,
having only 13.3 hours26. The addition of 11 weekly hours of non-work time
brought her, however, much closer to the Western norm. In contrast, Russian
married men in 1984 spent over 16 hours daily on non-work activities. The
additional 12 weekly hours of free time “gained” during the transition period,
places them at the top of the Western league. Married women in the West tend
to sleep more than their husbands. The scarcity of free time explains the
opposite pattern in pre-transition Russia. Not surprising, some of the free time
gained by Russian women during the transition period was diverted to sleep.
The results in table 2 are confirmed by a detailed regression analysis based on a
pooled sample of the 4 cross sections (table 3). The explanatory variables are
the standard ones: schooling, age (and age squared), number of young children
(less than 6), number of older children (6−14), and living in urban areas (a
dummy variable). The results seem mostly standard in Western terms:
24

The decline in work at home and childcare was much more pronounced (in absolute and relative
terms) in the case of the not employed compared with the employed.
25
Work includes childcare and other care.
26
The time spent on “leisure” was computed as the difference between 168 and the weekly hours
reported in the time use survey. It includes time spent on personal care (beside sleep) and work at home
activities not covered by the questionnaire (e.g., shopping for non-food items, administrative tasks,
etc.).

18

schooling has a strong positive effect on the number of hours spent in work in
the market (slightly stronger for married women than for married men), and
age has the customary inverted U shape effect27. Schooling has a negative
effect on married women’s work at home, but, surprisingly, a positive effect on
married men’s work at home. As a result schooling is associated with a decline
in sleep and leisure both in the case of men and in the case of women.
When it comes to children, in spite of the well developed childcare facilities,
Russia does not differ much from the West: It is the mothers, irrespective of
their level of schooling, who bear most of the burden of childcare. The effect of
an additional young child on his mother's childcare time is almost 3 times
greater than the effect it his on the father. Young children in the West tend to
increase the time spent by their fathers in the market, and reduce that of their
mothers. Russian fathers do not seem to follow this pattern. Finally, young
children cut into their parents' leisure, and again the "price" paid by the mother
is significantly higher than that paid by her husband.
The regressions in table 3 incorporate also the time spent by the spouse on
the activity. The results imply a strong positive correlation for all time uses.
The positive correlation may be due to positive assortiative mating,
complementarity in home time use or merely a positive correlation in response
errors. In either case we do not observe at the individual household level
patterns of substitution in home time use between the husband and wife’s time.
Finally, the regressions confirm the trend in the allocation of time: a steady
decline of the time spent in work in the market and work at home, and an
increase in leisure of both men and women28.

27

According to the regressions in table 3 labor supply peaks at the age of 32 in the case of men and 39
in the case of women. These are much younger than the ones observed in the West. The young age
seems to be a manifestation of a cohort effect, older people being more prone to unemployment.

28

Table 3 supports also the previous finding that wives’ sleep time increased over the period.

19

F. A Second Look – The Allocation of Time and Employment Status
The regression results for market time closely resemble those of the labor force
participation function. To what extent are the time use patterns of other
activities just a reflection of whether the person is employed or not? To answer
this question, we regressed the four years mean for each person on his socioeconomic characteristics and the number of years he was employed during the
four rounds (table 4). As suspected, employment status is shown to be the main
determinant of working hours. The mean hours of market work (including
commuting time) is 40.3 hours for employed married men and 36.7 hours for
employed married women. Schooling is the only the socio-economic variable
that has a significant effect on the working hours of employed men, and only
age and urban location affect those of employed women29.
Employment status plays a major role determining home time uses, but the
number of hours spent by a person on work at home, childcare and leisure is
affected also by other socio-economic characteristics. Young children are
associated with increased work at home (of their mothers), increased childcare
(of both parents), and a reduction of leisure whether the person is employed or
not. The amount of time spent on each of the home activities is positively
correlated with the amount spent by the spouse. On the other hand, controlling
for employment, market work hours of husbands and wives are not correlated,
indicating that the correlation observed in table 3 should be traced to the
correlation between a person’s employment status and the hours of work of his
spouse.
How sensitive is work at home to employment status? According to table 4,
market employment reduces the mean by 1.7 hours (i.e., by 6.8 weekly hours)
in the case of married men, and by 2.8 hours (i.e., by 11.1 weekly hours) in the
case of women30. Half of the decline in the case of men, and one-quarter in the
29

In the regressions reported in table 4 the line was not forced through the origin (i.e., the intercept was
not set to equal zero). The intercept represents, therefore, the sum of the effects of the socio-economic
variables at their mean points.
30
The regression coefficient of employment status in table 4 measures the effect of annual
employment on the 4-year mean. To derive the effect on weekly hours the coefficient has to be
multiplied by 4.

20

case of women, comes at the expense of work on the household’s plot or
garden. Employment is associated also with a decline in childcare time (2.4
hours for men, and more than 9 hours for women), but the main source of the
working hours is leisure (28.2 hours in the case of men, and 14.9 for women).
The employment effect in Table 4 mixes the effect of a change in the
employment status on the allocation of time with the cross-section differences
between those who are regularly employed and those often not-employed. To
isolate the first effect a fixed effect regression was estimated (table 5). Those
who are prone to change work status work in the market on average fewer
hours than the rest of the population. The change in employment status
involves a change of 38 hours in the case of men and 33 hours in the case of
women31. The results relating the other time uses confirm the earlier findings.
Only slightly over one-fifth of the hours saved when a man becomes not
employed are channeled into work at home and childcare, almost 80 percent
going into sleep and leisure. Women, on the other side, divide the additional
time almost equally between the two activities32.
Testing for symmetry, there is no significant difference between the case where
the person joins the ranks of the employed and the case where he leaves
employment. In an economy struck by unemployment it is sometimes difficult
to tell the unemployed from those out of the labor force. Trying to isolate the
effect of unemployment on the allocation of time, the results resemble closely
those for the not employed.
Table 6 compares the allocation of time of the employed and not-employed
controlling for differences in socio-economic characteristics33. The results

31

These changes are significantly lower than the mean market hours of the employed which are 44 and
38, respectively.
32
The variables “schooling” and “urban” are omitted from the table because they do not vary over
time. Age is omitted because of the inclusion of the year dummies. An additional young child has a
significant effect on his parents’ time inputs in childcare at the expense of leisure. For unexplained
reasons it leads its father to sleep more, and his mother to sleep less.
33
Table 6 is based on the regression coefficients reported in table 4. Let Ỹ denote the mean weekly
hours spent on the activity, and let ỸE and ỸNE denote the corresponding means for the employed and
the not-employed, respectively. Then
ỸE = Ỹ + (4-m)*bE , and ỸNE = Ỹ - m*bE ,

21

confirm the fixed-effect regression findings: whereas in the case of married
women 55 percent of the difference in market hours is taken up by work at
home and childcare, in the case of married men 75 percent is taken up by
leisure and sleep. Hence, an increase in the not employed will be associated
with a substantial increase in the output of the non-market sector only if the
newly not employed come from the ranks of the married women.
Table 6 is revealing also in another sense: though the increase in non-market
work of the not-employed men is quite modest in absolute terms, it can only be
called gigantic in relative terms. Given the low contribution of employed
married men, the time spent by the not-employed in work at home is almost
twice that of the employed, and the amount spent in leisure is almost 50 percent
higher. The comparable figures for not-employed married women are one–
third. If one is to believe that these changes are voluntary reactions to wage
changes, than the wage change has to be quite considerable or the sensitivity of
work at home and leisure to wage changes has to be, at least in the case of men,
quite large34.
Lucas and Rapping (1969) regard the fluctuations in market hours as voluntary.
In their words, “measured unemployment is then viewed as consisting of
persons who regard the wage rates at which they could currently be employed
as temporarily low and who therefore choose to wait or search for improved
conditions rather than to invest in moving or occupational change”. Can the
panel data shed any new light on the “intertemporal substitution of leisure
hypothesis”? The Lucas-Rapping conjecture can be given two interpretations:
According to the first, relying on perfect foresight (or rational expectations),
workers who are prone to unemployment (i.e., periods of "unsatisfactory"
wages) will work more hours when employment opportunities abound (when
the wage is sufficiently high). According to the second interpretation,
Where m denotes the average number of periods (out of 4 ) where the person is employed, and bE
denotes the employment effect (as measured by the corresponding regression coefficient). The value of
m is 3.23 for men and 2.7 for women.
34
Rupert et. al. (1995) adopt as parameters of the home production elasticity η the values 0.1 for men
and 0.65 for women. Their range of estimates for the elasticity of substitution between market and
home goods ranges from 1.57 to 4. A very crude calculation shows that only a wage decline of 30 -50
percent can yield the changes observed in table 6.

22

"unsatisfactory" wages, leading to the choice of unemployment, are random
shocks, to which the person reacts by working harder when he resumes
employment.
To test the first interpretation I compared the average market hours of married
men and women who differ in the length of their employment spans (i.e., 4
rounds, 3 rounds, etc.). A similar comparison was conducted for the average
leisure hours (including sleep). At first hand the results presented in table 7
look revealing35. Married men who worked only for one period worked in that
period 6 percent more than the annual average of men who worked throughout
all the 4 periods. These men tended also to work more at home, and as a result
had 8 percent less time (compared with the continuous workers) for leisure and
sleep36. Lucas and Rapping would have found the patterns of time use of
married women more disturbing. Married women tend to work less the looser
their attachment to the labor market. Thus, women who reported only one
period of employment work during that period 14 percent less than the
continuous workers, having 6 percent more hours to spend on leisure and sleep.
To test whether the results are statistically significant the regressions of table 3
were re-estimated, where the sample is confined to the employed, and 3
dummy variables denote the number of periods the person was employed (table
8)37. The regressions show that while the results reported for women are
statistically significant, those for men are not.
To test the second interpretation, namely that persons tend to compensate in
terms of increased work effort for unforeseen periods of unemployment, I
confined the sample to those reporting having worked in the first and last round
of the survey, and I examined to what extent does the employment record in the
35

The means are computed only for the periods during which the person was employed. The
comparison in table 7 is based on a balanced sample, which explains the decline in the sample size
compared to tables 2-6.
36
Note that though the Lucas-Rapping hypothesis is called "the intertemporal substitution of leisure"
hypothesis", it relates to non-market time and not specifically to leisure. It can be argued that the
differences in the means of the market hours reflect differences in industrial composition, and that
industries that are more exposed to cyclical shocks are characterized by longer work hours, but this
argument does not stand in contradiction to the Lucas-Repping hypothesis
37
Empl n denotes that the person was employed in n out of the 4 years. The sample is the balanced
panel.

23

interim periods affect the change in time-use patterns over these 5 years. As
table 9 testifies, we could not find a trace of an effect – the changes in market
work and leisure hours (the decline and the increase, respectively) are
completely independent of whether the person was employed in 1995-1996 or
not. It can be argued that the our sample is too small, and that the number of
persons not employed in the mid-years was too scanty (10 percent of men and 7
percent of women) to detect these effects, but the sample seems to be large
enough to detect the effect of the change in the number and age composition of
children on their parents' leisure. The verdict one can draw from the Russian
experience on the validity of the intertemporal substitution of leisure
hypothesis is, therefore, negative.

G. Some Preliminary Conclusions
The failure of the Lucas-Rapping “intertemporal substitution of leisure”
hypothesis to explain the large fluctuations over the business cycle in output
and employment associated with only small movements in the real wage led
macroeconomists to search for an explanation in home production38. The
explanation in terms of the intertemporal margin was replaced by an
explanation in terms of the intra-temporal substitution between work in the
market and work at home39. A key parameter in the new explanation is the
supposedly high elasticity of substitution between market and home goods.
Previous microeconomic studies of home production assumed that this
elasticity is infinite. The new generation of macro studies rejects this extreme
assumption in favor of a more general model that allows for both a finite
elasticity of substitution and diminishing returns in home production. In the
absence of micro estimates of the relevant parameters, the new studies employ
arbitrary values in their calibration exercise in an attempt to mimic the
38

An analysis of this failure is contained in Blanchard and Fischer (1989).
Note that the low estimates of the elasticity of substitution between market and non- market time
reflect not merely the low intertemporal substitution between market work and leisure, but also a low
intertemporal substitution between market work and work at home.

39

24

fluctuations in the market labor input over the business cycle. Since time series
on the changes in leisure and work at home are unavailable no attempt is made
to mimic the fluctuations in the allocation of time at home.
The arbitrary nature of the parameters and the scanty information on the
changes in the economic activity at home has been a source of uneasiness to
many macroeconomists40. This paper explores to what extent insights gained
through micro studies can help macroeconomists in their plight.
Expanding on the Pollak and Wachter’s criticism of Becker’s home production
model I argue that there is no way of resolving the first problem- that is, there
is no way of estimating separately the elasticity of substitution between market
and home goods and the elasticity of home production with respect to work at
home. The failure of the new studies to isolate these parameters is, therefore,
not accidental, since the model does not satisfy the fundamental econometric
identification rules. Similarly, it is shown, that when the elasticity of
substitution is estimated in a restricted model where the elasticity of home
production with respect to work at home is set arbitrarily, the estimate is
heavily dependent on the arbitrarily chosen values.
In the absence of data in the Western economies on the cyclical changes in
home production, this paper explores the experience of the Russian economy in
the second half of the 90s. Russia went in the last 15 years through a painful
process of transition from a centrally planned economy to a market oriented
one. The process was accompanied by a sharp decline in output, a decline of
real wages and increased unemployment. A panel of time budgets collected
during the trough of the depression allows us for the first time to follow the
adjustments households make in their home activities in the face of declining
employment opportunities.
In Russia, as in Western economies, the home production industry is dominated
by women. Married women contribute almost 80 percent of the hours devoted
to work at home, and over two-thirds of the hours spent on childcare. There is a
40

The feeling of uneasiness has not been confined to macroeconomists. In response to increasing
demand, several government statistical offices (among them, the U.S. and Israel) started to collect
systematic data on the time spent on home activities.

25

significant difference in the time inputs of those women who are fully
“employed” in this sector and “part-timers”- women who split their work time
between the market and home. “Full-timers” spend on work at home one-third
more time than is spent by the “part-timers”, and they spend on childcare 50
percent more than is spent by members of the other group. Consequently,
though full- time housewives constitute only about one-sixth of our sample
they contribute approximately one-third of the hours spent on work at home
and childcare.
At the beginning of the sample period working men devoted to work at home
only one-third the time spent by working women, and this ratio has been
shrinking over time. The not-employed work at home twice as much as the
employed, but still men’s contribution to the home work effort is limited.
Russian married men’s record is slightly better when it comes to time inputs in
childcare, where they devote almost one–third of the household time.
The panel fixed effect regressions confirm the impressions one gets from the
cross-section data. There exists a significant difference in the way members of
the different genders react to loss of employment (or alternatively, exit from
unemployment). The difference is manifested in the way they reallocate the
time released from market labor: whereas men divert three-quarters of it to
leisure, only one quarter going to work at home and child care, women split the
released time almost evenly between these two time uses. Not surprising, it is
the change in the employment status of women that determines the fluctuation
in home output over the business cycle.
Life under the Soviet regime was characterized by heavy work loads and little
free time. The burden of long market hours (and high labor force participation
rates) was aggravated by the inefficiency of the home sector reflected in long
hours spent on work at home. The prime victims of the inefficiency were
Russian women, a majority of whom had to cope with two full-time work
loads- in the market and at home. Things seemed to ease towards the end of the
Soviet era, but the increase in free time was reported to have dwindled almost
to a stop during the early years of the transition period. The halt was blamed on

26

the increased hours spent in home production (and specifically, gardening) in
response to the deterioration in market earnings. To what extent are these
conclusions supported by our findings?
The answer to this question told by Table 10 is definitely negative. The
substitution from market goods to home goods seemed to be too weak to block
the long term secular trend. The drive for more free time, that may have halted
in the early years of the transition period, has resumed, and even accelerated,
in the second half of the 90s.
Hours of market work of married men declined by a fifth, and those of married
women by almost a tenth. Though Russians tried to compensate for dwindling
income by producing some of their food in their gardens, the increased time
inputs in gardening were overshadowed by the increased efficiency of the
home sector reflected in the sharp decline in the time it takes to carry out the
other home tasks. The increase in efficiency was reinforced by the decline in
fertility. The latter contributed to the shorter home work hours, but is
manifested primarily in the smaller time inputs going into child care.
According to the our sample, Russian couples spent in 1998 one-fifth less time
on work at home and childcare then they spent in 1994. The time savings at
home exceeded, both in absolute and relative terms, the time savings in work in
the market. The decline in working hours in the market and at home led to a
sharp increase in free time. Some of it was spent in more sleep, but most of it
was devoted to other activities. A couple's "leisure time" increased by one-fifth,
and husband and wives shared almost equally in this boon.
It is of interest to separate the increase in free time that is due to the decline in
employment rates, which may be of a temporary nature, from the long term
trend. To isolate the impact of the change in employment rates I calculated the
mean allocation of time of married men and women assuming that the time-use
patterns of the employed and not employed have not changed over the period41.
41

The mean hours reported in table 10 are based on the standardized 4-year means for the employed
and not-employed reported in table 6, where the weights assigned to the employed and not employed
are determined by the labor fore participation rates which decline over time. (The relevant LFPR are
reported at the bottom of the table).

27

The results reported in table 10 indicate that though the cyclical change in
employment rates was crucial in the decline of market hours, it played only a
small role in the increased free time.
The changes in participation resulted in a decline of almost 14 percent in the
supply of labor of men and a decline of 12 percent in the labor supply of
women. This decline explains two-thirds of the total decline in the labor supply
of men and the whole decline in that of women42. Had it not been for the
secular decline in work at home, married men would have increased their
involvement in home production (work at home and child care) by 8 percent,
and their wives by about 4, resulting in a 5 percent increase for an average
couple43. Similarly, the decline in employment contributed to a to a 5 percent
increase in "leisure". This increase accounts, however, only for one quarter of
the actual increase in free time over the period.
The time-use panel allows an examination of the effect of unemployment spells
on the person’s patterns of work and leisure when he is employed. Based on the
Lucas-Rapping hypothesis, two tests are proposed. The first one, relying on
rational expectations, examines whether persons exposed to higher
probabilities of unemployment work harder when they are employed. The
second test regards unemployment as a random shock to which people react by
working harder once they are reemployed. The results of both tests are not
supportive of the Lucas-Rapping hypothesis: men’s work effort seems to be
unaffected by the length of their employment spell, while women who are more
attached to the labor market- work more. The second test is rejected outrightmarket hours are not affected by previous unemployment spells.
What are the lessons for the new macroeconomics of home production that we
take with us from the Russian experience? Perhaps the main lesson concerns
the complexity of the processes taking place in the market and at home during
the business cycle. There are significant differences in the reaction of men and
women, of the employed and the not employed to the changing market
42

These results are consistent with Lilien and Hall’s (1986) conclusion that in the US in the post-war
era employment changes accounted for over three-quarters of the cyclical change in total hours worked.
43
The couple’s gardening activity increased by over 9 percent.

28

prospects in a period of recession. It is hard to see how this complexity can be
captured by a model of a representative consumer reacting to fluctuations in the
mean wage rate. To judge by the Russian experience, the one sector model
used in the calibrations should be replaced by a two-sector model, where intertemporal substitution of leisure drives the “masculine“ sector, and the intratemporal substitution of market and home goods applies to the “feminine”
sector. Given the ever increasing share of the “feminine” sector in the over-all
economic activity of the Western economies, trying to calibrate a “unified”
aggregate model, runs the risk of composition biases. The failure of the
traditional RBC models to track the cyclical fluctuations in market hours has
been traced to the use of a low estimate of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution of leisure, an estimate based on the labor supply of men (Becker
and Ghez 1975; McCurdy 1981; Browning, Deaton and Irish 1985). The new
RBC models of household production run a similar risk, basing their calibration
exercise on the high intra-temporal substitution between home and market
work observed in studies of the labor force participation of married women.
Even more problematic seems the reliance on the mean wage as the sole
motivating force propelling the system. A recession affects different people in
the labor force differently. A recession is a period of increasing diversity- some
people are hardly affected and others have to go through major changes in their
lifestyle. Focusing on the central moment of the distribution one implicitly
gives up telling this story of diversity. Specifically, changes in the mean may
not be able to explain why some people are induced to move from an interior
solution to a corner solution: from being “part timers” in the home industry to
becoming “full timers”. The distinction between the internal margin and the
external margin is in particular important in the context of household activities.
The variation in hours spent in work at home or in leisure by the employed is
relatively small compared with the differences in the time schedules between
the employed and not employed. To study the variation in home production

29

over the business cycle one has to study these differences rather than the
reaction of the allocation of time of the employed to changes in their wages44.
An average Russian couple spends about one-sixth of its time in market work.
To most economists market work is like a tip of an iceberg, most of which is
hidden. Trying to explain cyclical changes in market hours in terms of changes
taking place in the hidden part may look at first as an elegant way to overcome
the shortcomings of previous explanations. The more, however, we learn about
the changes taking place in the home sector during the business cycle we may
find that the new macro theory, instead of simplifying the story – complicates
it. It will require the joint skills of micro and macro economists to tell this
richer version of the story of cyclical variation in market and home activity.

..
References:
44

Not less disturbing is the truncation problem arising from the fact that the wage of those who had
exited employment does not show up in the changes in the mean wage. If workers who get lower wages
are more prone to drop out of employment than the change in the wage will be understated.

30

Aguiar Mark; Hurst Eric. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: Evidence from Five
Decades of Time Use Surveys”, NBER Working Paper 12082 (March
2006).
Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," E.J. 75 (1965): 493-517
Becker, Gary S. ”Family Economics and Macro Behavior.” A.E.R. 78(1)
(March 1988):1-13.
Becker Gary S; Ghez Gilbert. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the Life
Cycle. NBER, Columbia University Press, 1975: 83-132.
Benhabib, Jess; Rogerson, Richard; Wright, Randall. “Homework in
Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
J.P.E. 99(6) (Dec. 1991): 1166-87
Biddle, Jeff ; Hamermesh, Daniel. “Sleep and the Allocation of Time,” J.P.E.,
98 (Oct. 1990): 922-43.
Blanchard, Olivier; Fischer Stanley. Lectures on Macroeconomics, MIT Press
1989.
Browning, Martin; Deaton Angus; Irish M. "A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply
and Commodity Demand over the Life-Cycle," Econometrica 53(1985),: 503543.

Campbell, John Y; Ludvigson, Sydney. “Elasticities of Substitution in Real
Business Cycle Models with Home Production.” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking. 33(4) (Nov. 2001): 847-75
Cooley Thomas F.; Prescott Edward C. “ Economic Growth and Business
Cycles”, ,” in Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
Earle John.S; Sabirianova Klara .“Coping with Crisis: Russian Labor Markets
in Transition”, Mimeo (April 2001)
Einarsson, Tor; Marquis, Milton H. “Home Production with Endogenous
Growth.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 39(3) (Aug. 1997): 551-69

31

Gollin, Douglas; Parente, Stephen L; Rogerson, Richard. “Farm Work, Home
Work and International Productivity Differences.” Review of Economic
Dynamics. 7(4) (Oct. 2004): 827-50
Gomme, Paul; Kydland, Finn E; Rupert, Peter. “Home Production Meets Time
to Build.” J.P.E. 109(5) (Oct 2001): 1115-31
Graham, J.W., Green, C.A. “Estimating the Parameters of the Household
Production Function with Joint Products”. ReStat 66 (1984):277-282.
Greenwood, Jeremy ; Hercowitz Zvi.”The Allocation of Capital and Time over
the Business Cycle.’ J.P.E. 99(6) (Dec. 1991 ) : 1188-1214.
Greenwood, Jeremy; Rogerson, Richard; Wright, Randall. “Household
Production in Real Business Cycle Theory,” in Thomas Cooley, ed.,
Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1995.
Gronau, Reuben. “Leisure, Home Production, and Work-The Theory of the
Allocation of Time Revisited.”J.P.E. 85(6) (Dec. 1977): 1099-1123
Gronau, Reuben; Hamermesh, Daniel S. “The Demand for Variety: A
Household Production Perspective.” NBER Working Paper no. 8509,
2001
Ingram, Beth F; Kocherlakota, Narayana R; Savin, N. E. “Using Theory for
Measurement: An Analysis of the Cyclical Behavior of Home
Production.”Journal of Monetary Economics. 40(3) (Dec. 1997): 435-56
Kerkhofs, Marcel; Kooreman, Peter.” Identification and Estimation of a Class
of Household Production Models.” Journal of Applied Econometrics.
18(3)( May-June 2003): 337-69
.Kim Byung Yeon. “Informal Economy Activities of Soviet Households: Size
and Dynamics”, Jourmnal of Comparative Economics 31(3) (September
2003: 523-551.
Kolev Alexandre. “Labor Supply in the Informal Economy in Russia during
Transition” CEPR Discussion Paper 2024(1998).
Kuznets, Simon.. National Income and its Composition. Vol. II. New York:
NBER 1944.

32

Lilien David M.; Hall Robert E. ”Cyclical Fluctuations in the Labor Market”
in Ashenfelter, Orley, and Layard, Richard, (eds). Handbook of labor
economics. Vol. 2. New York: North-Holland 1986:1002-1035.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr; Rapping Leonard A. “Real Wages Employment and
Inflation”. J.P.E. 77 (September/October 1969):721-754
Marquis, Milton H. “Inflation taxes, financial intermediation, and home
production” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Papers in
Applied Economic Theory: 2001-04 (2001)
McGrattan, Ellen R; Rogerson, Richard; Wright, Randall. “An Equilibrium
Model of the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal
Policy.” I.E.R. 38(2) (May 1997): 267-90
MaCurdy, Тhomas Е., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in Life Cycle
Setting," JPE 89(6) (1981): 1058-1085.
Parente, Stephen L; Rogerson, Richard; Wright, Randall. “Homework in
Development Economics: Household Production and the Wealth of
Nations.” J.P.E. 108(4) (Aug. 2000): 680-87
Perli, Roberto. “Indeterminacy, Home Production, and the Business Cycle: A
Calibrated Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 41(1) (Feb. 1998):
105-25
Pollak, Robert; Wachter, Michael. “The Relevance of the Household
Production Function and Its Implications for the Allocation of Time,”
J.P.E. 83 (Apr. 1975): 255-78.
Robinson, John P; Godbey Geoffrey. Time for Life: The Surprising Ways
Americans Use Their Time, 2nd ed. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press, 1999.
Rupert, Peter; Rogerson, Richard; Wright, Randall.“Estimating Substitution
Elasticities in Household Production Models.”Economic Theory. 6(1)
(June 1995): 179-93
The World Bank. The Russian Labor Market: moving from Crisis to
Recovery,2003.

33

Table 1. The Allocation of Time of Russian People 2004-2008
(mean hours /week)
Round:

V
7520

Sample size

VI
7041

VII
6947

Mean
Hours

Mean
Hours

Mean
Hours

Incidence

Mean
Hours

Mean
Hours

Incidence

Incidence

Total market work
Market work
Commuting

21.94
19.54
2.40

0.48
0.48
0.48

45.97
40.94
5.03

22.64
20.28
2.36

0.48
0.48
0.48

46.80
41.93
4.87

21.26
19.13
2.13

0.46
0.46
0.46

Work at home
Gardening
Food purchase
Cooking
Cleaning
Laundry

20.44
2.12
3.28
8.48
4.24
2.32

15.92
5.87
11.89
6.25
4.74

19.70
3.85
2.75
7.66
3.41
2.03

14.22
4.97
11.20
5.62
4.29

18.93
4.00
2.34
7.53
3.16
1.90

Chid care
Own children
Other children

7.35
6.07
1.28

0.34
0.09

18.04
13.80

6.54
5.49
1.05

0.32
0.08

17.09
13.39

6.65
5.80
0.85

Help parents
(others)

0.98

0.05

19.05

0.69

0.04

18.22

Sleep

52.20

1.00

52.20

52.74

1.00

52.74

Residual (Leisure)

65.08

VIII
7375

Mean
Hours

Mean
Hours

Incidence

Mean
Hours

46.26
41.63
4.64

19.18
17.24
1.93

0.43
0.43
0.43

44.61
40.11
4.50

13.72
4.22
10.87
5.13
3.91

16.34
2.19
2.25
7.35
2.88
1.68

0.16
0.56
0.71
0.63
0.48

13.51
4.03
10.33
4.56
3.49

0.33
0.07

17.48
11.83

6.61
5.65
0.95

0.31
0.08

18.00
12.02

0.86

0.04

19.05

0.75

0.05

16.15

52.87

1.00

52.87

53.41

1.00

53.41

Activity

0.13
0.56
0.71
0.68
0.49

0.27
0.55
0.68
0.61
0.47

65.69

67.43

Source : RLMS Rounds IV-VIII

34

0.29
0.55
0.69
0.62
0.49

71.71

Table 2. The Allocation of Time of Russian Married Men and Women 1994-1998
(Mean hours/ week)
Married Men

Married Women

Activity

1994

1995

1996

1998

1994

1995

1996

1998

Total market work
Market work
Commuting

37.6
33.6
4.0

38.1
34.3
3.8

34.8
31.7
3.1

30.0
27.0
3.0

26.4
23.6
2.8

26.8
24.2
2.6

25.9
23.5
2.4

24.1
21.7
2.4

Work at home
Gardening
Food purchase
Cooking
Cleaning house
Laundry

10.5
3.1
1.7
2.3
3.0
0.3

9.1
5.5
1.1
1.5
0.8
0.2

8.7
5.3
0.9
1.6
0.7
0.2

7.2
3.5
1.0
1.8
0.8
0.2

34.5
2.1
4.7
16.5
6.4
4.8

33.8
4.2
3.9
15.4
6.1
4.2

31.0
4.1
3.4
14.4
5.3
3.8

28.2
2.3
3.3
14.1
5.1
3.4

Child care

5.8

4.9

5.2

4.6

12.5

11.2

11.4

9.9

Help parents (others)

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

1.1

0.8

0.8

1.0

Sleep

51.3

51.6

51.5

52.2

50.5

50.9

51.2

51.8

Residual (Leisure)

62.3

63.9

67.4

73.5

43.0

44.4

47.6

53.0

Labor force
participation (%)

86.4

85.3

79.1

73.6

75.3

73.0

71.0

65.8

no. of observations

994

932

980

1077

994

932

980

1077

Source : RLMS Rounds IV-VIII

35

Table 3a. The Determinants of the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Men 1994-1998
4- year cross-section regressions
Market work

Childcare/
Parent care

Work at home

Sleep

"Leisure"

b

t

b

t

B

t

b

t

b

t

0.331

2.16

0.210

2.95

-0.069

-1.31

-0.220

-4.40

-0.208

-1.34

1.012

2.79

-0.375

-2.27

-0.390

-3.18

0.074

0.64

0.126

0.35

-0.016

-3.68

0.006

2.92

0.004

2.53

-0.001

-0.70

0.002

0.49

-0.203

-0.28

-0.912

-2.70

2.390

9.17

0.074

0.31

-1.567

-2.12

-0.197

-0.38

-0.060

-0.25

0.785

4.44

-0.122

-0.73

-0.351

-0.67

1.578

1.84

-3.472

-8.52

0.603

2.06

-0.234

-0.84

1.245

1.43

0.099

5.41

0.093

8.08

0.190

20.21

0.231

13.87

0.213

13.36

0.634

0.56

-1.289

-2.44

-0.582

-1.50

0.209

0.57

0.937

0.81

-2.117

-1.89

-1.610

-3.07

-0.293

-0.77

0.059

0.16

3.445

3.01

Schooling
Age
Age^2
no. young cld
no. old cld
Urban
Spouse hours
Year 1995
Year 1996
Year 1998
Constant

-6.618

-6.02

-3.034

-5.86

-0.320

-0.85

0.722

2.01

8.107

7.19

16.828

2.25

12.816

3.68

12.340

4.77

40.945

15.51

46.516

6.07

adj R sq

0.053

0.063

0.214

0.053

0.102

Mean weekly hours

34.962

8.853

5.561

51.655

66.969

No. of observations

3932

3932

3932

3932

3932

36

Table 3b. The Determinants of the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Women 1994-1998
4- year cross-section regressions

Schooling
Age
Age^2
No. young cld
No. old cld
Urban
Spouse hours
Year 1995
Year 1996
Year 1998
Constant

Childcare/
Parent care

Sleep

"Leisure"

Market work

Work at home

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

0.842

5.95

-0.330

-3.12

0.072

0.79

-0.132

-2.61

-0.408

-2.48

4.483

16.51

0.100

0.49

-1.600

-9.11

-0.360

-3.72

-2.259

-7.17

-0.057

-17.51

0.002

0.77

0.017

8.01

0.003

2.72

0.031

8.16

-5.598

-8.88

2.244

4.76

6.449

15.42

-1.126

-5.00

-3.229

-4.40

-2.392

-5.39

1.595

4.81

1.549

5.38

-0.352

-2.22

-0.762

-1.47

4.152

5.73

-6.395

-11.67

1.827

3.91

0.720

2.78

-0.395

-0.47

0.068

5.01

0.177

8.19

0.496

20.26

0.200

13.71

0.201

13.26

0.884

0.92

-0.851

-1.18

-0.982

-1.57

0.379

1.10

0.864

0.77

0.071

0.07

-3.519

-4.93

-0.599

-0.97

0.789

2.31

3.057

2.75

-1.733

-1.84

-6.124

-8.70

-0.862

-1.43

1.259

3.76

6.604

6.01

-66.573

-12.23

31.547

7.73

40.060

11.31

50.985

24.15

74.836

11.69

adj R sq

0.157

0.111

0.287

0.067

0.128

Mean weekly hours

25.750

31.792

12.169

51.112

47.177

No. of observations

3943

3943

3943

3943

3943

37

Table 4a. The Effect of Employment Status on the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Men 1994-1998
Regression of 4-year means
Market work

Schooling
Age
Age^2
no. young cld
no. old cld
Urban
Employment status
Spouse hours
Constant

Work at home

Gardening

Childcare/
Parent care

Sleep

"Leisure"

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

0.2742

1.97

0.2192

2.46

0.1321

2.19

-0.1366

-1.84

-0.1781

-2.24

-0.1134

-0.60

-0.4730

-1.35

-0.1160

-0.53

-0.1540

-1.05

-0.2560

-1.38

-0.0070

-0.04

1.6378

3.55

0.0051

1.22

0.0023

0.89

0.0023

1.29

0.0018

0.80

-0.0002

-0.07

-0.0183

-3.32

0.0445

0.07

-0.5232

-1.36

-0.3516

-1.37

1.5551

4.63

-0.4926

-1.45

-0.7605

-0.93

0.4834

1.04

0.0960

0.32

0.3917

1.94

0.5365

2.16

0.0610

0.23

-1.0649

-1.69

0.3701

0.48

-3.3550

-6.62

-3.1736

-8.25

0.3122

0.77

-0.2253

-0.52

2.7260

2.66

10.0786

32.83

-1.7011

-8.67

-0.8463

-6.37

-0.7166

-4.38

-0.4604

-2.63

-7.0451

-16.91

0.0289

1.30

0.0882

4.61

0.5598

17.84

0.2282

15.54

0.2177

6.78

0.2391

10.21

8.6269

1.26

12.0410

2.76

7.9364

2.71

12.9131

3.45

44.1115

10.23

45.0704

4.86

adj R sq

0.5470

0.1692

0.4763

0.3835

0.0532

0.3374

Mean weekly hours

35.3090

9.1023

4.5015

6.4525

50.7295

66.4067

no. of observations

1009

1009

1009

1009

1009

1009

38

Table 4b. The Effect of Employment Status on the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Women 1994-1998
Regression of 4-year means
Market work

Work at home

Gardening

Childcare/
Parent care

Sleep

"Leisure"

b

t

B

t

b

T

b

t

b

t

b

t

-0.0999

-0.78

-0.1288

-0.86

-0.1022

-1.81

0.2235

1.46

-0.0145

-0.17

0.1364

0.53

0.5696

2.10

1.3996

4.41

0.4077

3.41

-1.0221

-3.12

-0.0424

-0.24

-0.3461

-0.64

-0.0066

-1.93

-0.0151

-3.78

-0.0043

-2.83

0.0087

2.11

-0.0008

-0.35

0.0071

1.04

-0.3281

-0.64

2.7230

4.54

0.3613

1.60

4.1097

6.43

-1.1758

-3.52

-7.1263

-6.97

-0.3169

-0.80

0.9997

2.15

-0.0315

-0.18

0.3419

0.72

-0.5325

-2.06

-0.6137

-0.78

1.8187

2.86

-5.7323

-7.45

-3.3404

-10.37

3.3272

4.36

0.8285

2.00

-0.5349

-0.42

9.1804

40.92

-2.8126

-10.70

-0.7011

-7.09

-2.2755

-8.46

-0.3159

-2.16

-3.5220

-7.88

0.96

0.2574

5.57

0.4299

18.71

0.8045

15.08

0.2001

6.74

0.3263

9.92

Constant

0.0177
10.2635

-2.04

11.6857

1.98

-2.4722

-1.11

35.7920

5.83

44.5616

12.18

34.2429

3.37

adj R sq

0.7028

0.2573

0.5229

0.4720

0.0656

0.2509

Mean weekly hours

26.3503

33.4605

3.4360

15.5093

50.3419

42.3380

no. of observations

1012

1012

1012

1012

1012

1012

Schooling
Age
Age^2
no. young cld
no. old cld
Urban
Employment status
Spouse hours

Source: wrknow means

39

Table 5a. The Effect of Employment Status on the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Men 1994-1998
Fixed effect regressions
Market work

Work at home

Childcare /Parent care

b

t

b

t

B

t

b

t

b

t

no. young cld
no. old cld
Year 1995
Year 1996
Year 1998
Employment status
Spouse hours
Constant

1.946
1.550
0.425
0.328
-2.675
37.852
0.096
1.046

1.59
1.56
0.48
0.37
-3.00
31.71
4.68
0.62

-0.309
0.288
-1.302
-1.679
-3.138
-6.072
0.113
11.546

-0.47
0.53
-2.68
-3.45
-6.38
-9.36
8.00
11.65

1.841
0.445
-0.876
-1.000
-1.168
-1.969
0.144
5.233

3.70
1.11
-2.43
-2.78
-3.24
-4.09
11.83
7.94

1.061
0.480
0.232
0.230
0.785
-1.254
0.206
41.155

2.30
1.28
0.69
0.68
2.33
-2.78
9.81
33.50

-4.399
-2.566
1.387
1.759
5.346
-28.298
0.190
81.671

-3.12
-2.24
1.35
1.71
5.13
-20.58
10.18
39.74

R-sq: within
between
overall

0.303

0.067

0.072

0.043

0.212

0.497

0.111

0.322

0.053

0.312

0.411

0.094

0.214

0.047

0.265

Mean weekly hours

34.962

8.853

5.561

51.655

66.969

no. of observations

3932

3932

3932

3932

3932

40

Sleep

"Leisure"

Table 5b. The Effect of Employment Status on the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Women 1994-1998
Fixed effect regressions
Market work

Work at home

Childcare /Parent care

b

t

b

t

B

t

b

t

b

t

no. young cld
no. old cld
Year 1995
Year 1996
Year 1998
Employment status
Spouse hours
Constant

-0.113
0.458
1.331
0.560
0.394
32.763
0.055
0.914

-0.12
0.59
1.93
0.82
0.57
36.16
4.36
0.74

-0.669
0.577
-0.904
-3.261
-6.362
-8.567
0.203
38.261

-0.76
0.80
-1.40
-5.09
-9.96
-10.13
8.12
34.67

4.153
1.883
-1.622
-1.525
-2.520
-5.811
0.345
12.797

5.52
3.06
-2.95
-2.80
-4.66
-8.07
12.08
13.81

-0.724
-0.114
0.173
0.477
0.867
-1.743
0.164
43.720

-1.75
-0.34
0.57
1.59
2.90
-4.37
9.62
43.08

-2.851
-2.766
1.241
3.726
7.035
-16.297
0.171
46.644

-2.06
-2.43
1.22
3.69
6.93
-12.24
9.86
22.57

R-sq: within
between
overall

0.3376

0.0969

0.0988

0.0495

0.1312

0.6597

0.1695

0.3882

0.0727

0.1995

0.5441

0.1342

0.2747

0.0609

0.1783

Mean weekly hours

25.75037

31.79177

12.16866

51.11235

47.17684

no. of observations

3943

3943

3943

3943

3943

41

Sleep

"Leisure"

Table 6. The Allocation of Time of the Employed and Not- Employed 1994-1998
4-year means
Married men

Married women

Total

Employed

Not
Empl.

Market work

35.3

43.1

2.8

40.3

6.5%

26.4

38.2

1.5

36.7

4.0%

Work at home

9.1

7.8

14.6

-6.8

187.4%

33.5

29.8

41.1

-11.3

137.7%

Gardening

4.5

3.8

7.2

-3.4

188.0%

3.4

2.5

5.3

-2.8

211.0%

Childcare /Parent care

6.5

5.9

8.8

-2.9

148.6%

15.5

12.6

21.7

-9.1

172.5%

Sleep

50.7

50.4

52.2

-1.8

103.7%

50.3

49.9

51.2

-1.3

102.5%

"Leisure"

66.4

61.0

89.1

-28.2

146.2%

42.3

37.8

51.9

-14.1

137.3%

Difference

Ratio

Total

42

Employed

Not
Empl.

Difference

Ratio

Table 7. Time Use Patterns during Employment Periods by Employment Span
(mean weekly hours)
Employment
span
(rounds)

Number of
observations

Married Men
Market
work

Sleep+
leisure

Number of
observations

Married Women
Market
work

Sleep+
leisure

4
3
2
1

232
171
101
46

48.2
49.3
50.3
51.0

108.9
106.4
107.0
99.7

207
150
80
56

43.1
41.4
39.8
37.0

89.8
91.3
91.1
94.8

43

Table 8. The Effect of the Employment Spell on the Allocation of Time of Russian Married Men and Women 1994-1998
4- year cross-section regressions
Married Men

Married Women

Market work
Schooling
Age
Age^2
no. young cld
no. old cld
Urban
Spouse hours
Year 1995
Year 1996
Year 1998
Empl 4
Empl 2
Empl 1
Constant
adj R sq
No. of
observations

Leisure+sleep

Market work

Leisure+sleep

b

T

b

t

b

t

b

t

0.145
0.077
-0.002
0.160
0.293
-0.606
0.005
0.450
1.070
-2.214
-0.813
-0.167
-1.442
47.410

1.06
0.21
-0.37
0.20
0.59
-0.76
0.28
0.46
1.07
-2.14
-1.00
-0.14
-0.64
6.28

-0.191
1.130
-0.012
-2.805
-1.281
4.165
0.120
2.083
0.739
5.673
0.738
0.101
-2.501
69.543

-1.18
2.67
-2.49
-2.98
-2.17
4.39
6.75
1.80
0.62
4.57
0.76
0.07
-0.93
7.44

0.023
1.216
-0.015
-2.136
-1.077
1.820
0.004
-0.559
-1.024
-3.328
1.386
-1.572
-3.428
18.529

0.16
3.51
-3.55
-2.55
-2.42
2.57
0.28
-0.63
-1.15
-3.62
1.91
-1.38
-1.94
2.61

0.026
-1.324
0.016
-5.114
-1.821
2.885
0.096
2.544
4.054
8.307
-1.769
-1.133
3.514
102.823

0.12
-2.58
2.54
-4.09
-2.74
2.73
4.88
1.93
3.06
6.02
-1.64
-0.67
1.34
9.54

0.004

0.084

0.037

0.084

1661

1661

1476

1476

44

Table 9. The Effect of Interruptions in the Employment Career on the Change in Market Hours and Leisure 1994-1998
Married Men
Market work
Not employed in 1995
Not employed in 1996
Not employed in 1995-96
Change in no. young cld
Change in no. old cld
Constant
adj R sq
Change in mean weekly
Hours
No. of observations

Married Women
Leisure

Market work

Leisure

b

t

b

t

b

t

b

t

10.197
2.173
-9.404
1.527
0.371
-2.005

1.09
0.4
-0.71
0.58
0.2
-1.54

-1.717
-6.774
19.308
-6.298
0.751
6.700

-0.15
-1.03
1.21
-1.98
0.34
4.27

6.216
5.392
-5.420
1.443
3.436
-1.829

0.59
0.83
-0.36
0.56
2.05
-1.45

-14.352
-4.908
10.835
-6.276
-5.566
6.033

-0.96
-0.53
0.50
-1.71
-2.33
3.35

0

0.012

0.004

0.012

-1.950

7.505

-2.150

7.537

321

321

273

273

45

Table 10. The Effect of Changes in the Employment Rate on the Allocation of Time of Married Couples -Russia 1994-1998
1994-1998
Mean Hours-Total % change
Men
Women
Couple

1994
Mean Hours
Men
Women Couple

1998
Mean Hours
Men
Women Couple

1994-1998
% change due to employment
Men
Women
Couple

Market work

-20.3%

-8.8%

-15.6%

37.6

29.2

66.8

32.5

25.7

58.2

-13.7%

-12.0%

-13.0%

Work at home

-30.7%

-18.2%

-21.1%

8.7

32.6

41.3

9.6

33.7

43.2

10.0%

3.3%

4.7%

Gardening

11.3%

6.8%

9.5%

4.3

3.2

7.5

4.7

3.5

8.2

10.1%

8.3%

9.3%

Childcare /Parent care

-20.3%

-20.0%

-20.1%

6.3

14.8

21.1

6.7

15.7

22.3

5.8%

5.9%

5.9%

Sleep

1.7%

2.6%

2.2%

50.6

50.2

100.9

50.9

50.4

101.2

0.5%

0.2%

0.4%

"Leisure"

18.0%

23.3%

20.2%

64.8

41.2

106.0

68.4

42.6

111.0

5.6%

3.3%

4.7%

86.4%

75.3%

80.9%

73.6%

65.8%

69.7%

Labor Force
Participation

Comments: Columns 1-3 are based on table 2. The computations in columns 4-9 are based on the standardized 4-year means for the employed and
not-employed reported in table 6, where the weight assigned to the employed is the labor fore participation rates reported at the bottom of the
table.

46

w

w0

A

B

w1

VMPTH

TH
Figure 1

47

w

A

w0

VMPTH (π 0 )

B

E
w1

VMPTH (π 1 )
DTH

TH0

TH1

Figure 2

48

TH

