                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                U.S. INTERNATIONAL TRADE POLICIES
                IN A WORLD OF INDUSTRIAL CHANGE


                       1. David Richardson



                     Working Paper No. 1228




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1983




I gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments of Robert E. Baldwin,
Alan Deardorff, William Diebold, Jr., and Rachel McCulloch, and the
support of National Science Foundation Grant PRA—81161459 to the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1228
                                                     November 1983




                         U.S.   INTERNATIONAL TRADE POLICIES
                                     IN A WORLD OF
                                   INDUSTRIAL CHANGE

                                       ABSTRACT

    This paper   assesses the place of active trade policy in   U.S. industrial
change.   The growing role of imperfectly competitive multinational corporations

provides new arguments for more active U.S. trade policy, as does an increased

social consensus that governments should insure what markets do not.     Arguments
against more active U.S. trade policy stem from its manageability in a democrat-

 ic system of checks and balances, from its possible perception as a form of

policy aggression, and from the likelihood that there are feasible alternatives

to trade policy with smaller implementation costs, administrative costs, incen-

tive costs, and resource—diversion costs. Considered promising among such

alternatives are government adjustment programs, foreign—exchange—market

intervention, and macroeconomic renovation.

    Sections 2 and 3 of the paper describe how international economic and policy

environments encourage industrial change and pressure U.S. trade policy.

Section 4 describes the pros and cons of more active U.S. trade policy where

imperfectly competitive industrial structure and missing insurance markets are

taken as facts of life. Section 5 assesses alternatives to more active U.S.

trade policy, including, in addition to those mentioned above, strict reliance

on market forces.

                                                   J. David Richardson
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of Wisconsin,
                                                     Madison
                                                   Madison, Wisconsin 53706

                                                   (608) 263—3867/3876
                                       CONTENTS




                                                  Page


1. INTRODUCTION                                     1


2. THE CHANGING ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT               3

3. THE   CHANGING POLICY ENVIRONMENT              19

   A. Policy Power                                19

   B. Policy Order                                21

   C. Policy "Place"                              23

4. PROS AND CONS OF NEW PERSPECTIVES ON A MORE
       ACTIVE U.S. TRADE POLICY                   26

   A. "Strategic" Trade Policy...                 27

   B. Trade Policy as Insurance                   44

5. ALTERNATIVES TO A MORE ACTIVE U.S.
       TRADE POLICY                               49

   A. Market Reliance ("Our Policy is to have     50
          No Policy")

   B. Government Adjustment Programs              54

   C. Exchange—Rate Stabilization                 56

   REFERENCES                                     62
                                       1



                                1. INTRODUCTION


    U.S. trade policy today is pressed and pulled by many forces. Some are

 foreign; most are domestic. Some are purely economic; others are social and

political. Some forces press naturally on trade policy; many do so almost in

desperation, because of resistance to change in policies more congruent to the

force.

    U.S. industrial change underlies many of these pressures. And trade

policy is not always the most sensible or effective instrument for influencing

industrial change. But it does have such a role in U.S. history, and in

modern economic development. And to the extent that global industrial change

is propelled by trade policy abroad, U.S. response to its domestic spillover

might naturally include active U.S. trade policy.

    In assessing the place of active trade policy in U.S. industrial change,

institutions are important. The growing role of imperfectly competitive

multinational corporations provides new arguments for more active U.S. trade

policy, as does an increased social consensus that governments should insure

what markets do not. Arguments against more active U.S. trade policy,

however, stem from its manageability in a democratic system of checks and

balances, from its possible perception as a form of policy aggression, and

from the likelihood that there are feasible alternatives to trade policy with

smaller implementation costs, administrative costs, incentive costs, and

resource—diversion costs. Considered promising among such alternatives are

government adjustment programs, foreign—exchange—market intervention,

and macroeconomic renovation.

    Sections 2 and 3 of the paper describe how international economic and policy

environments encourage industrial change and pressure U.S. trade policy.
                                       2




Section 4 describes the pros and cons of more active 13.5. trade policy where

imperfectly competitive industrial structure and missing insurance markets are

taken as facts of life. Section 5 assesses alternatives to more active U.S.

trade policy, including, in addition to those mentioned above, strict reliance

on market forces.
                                           3




                       2. THE CHANGING ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT


        International trade ha8 become an increasingly important source of

 industrial change in the United States, especially since the early 1970s.

Overall trade has grown faster than overall domestic activity. And trade con-

ducted by imperfectly competitive multinational corporations has grown even

 faster than overall trade. So has trade in agricultural goods and, of course,

oil. For the U.S. net exports of capital equipment have mushroomed, and net

exports of technology—intensive products have not declined. Trade in financial

assets and its concomitant flow of debt service have grown fastest of all. As a

result, exchange rates and interest rates have become important short—run

influences on U.S. industrial prosperity and structure.

    The U.S. industrial Incidence1 of these economic trends is discussed

in this section. Industrial change seems to be the most important force

shaping prospective U.S. trade policy, as well as being the subject of this

conference.

    International trade in goods has grown dramatically over the past

fifteen years for most industrial countries. In the U.S. since 1971 both

the export share of gross national product and the Import share of gross

national expenditure have doubled from 4—6 percent to 9—12 percent, depending




    1
     Nothing is said here about the U.S. regional and occupational incidence
of international economic trends. These issues, while almost as important
as industrial incidence in shaping trade policy, require additional research.
Bluestone (1983) makes a reasonable start at addressing them.
                                         4


on measure. Roughly half of this increased share is due to a rise in the

price of tradeables relative to other goods, but the other half is due to

volume.1 In other industrial countries, export and import shares of economic

activity have also risen over this period, almost doubling for some, and

increasing roughly one and a half times for most (Lipsey (1982b, pp. 2—5),

United States (1982, pp. 3—8, 161)). Even as the global economy slumped in

the past several years, the share of international trade in overall activity

has continued to increase. Only trade in mineral products (mostly petroleum)

has slumped along with the global economy; world trade in manufactures con-

tinued to grow until 1982, when it declined only one percent in volume; and

world agricultural trade has grown continuously and rapidly (GATT (1983, pp.

1—2)).

    Developing countries have contributed disproportionately to growth in

global trade. In the past decade, industrial countries, especially the U.S.

and Japan, have increased their trade dependence on developing countries as

                                             This reversed a trend of the previous
import suppliers and export customers.

decade. Developing countries increased their share of imports bought by

 industrial countries to 31 percent in 1981 from 22 percent in 1973; their

 share had been 25 percent in 1963. Developing countries increased their share

 of exports purchased from industrial countries to 28 percent in 1981 from 19

 percent in 1973; their share had been 24 percent in 1963 (GATT (1982, Table

 A3, excluding Eastern trading area)). A recent study suggests that if



     1Export shares of tangible good production and import shares of tangible
 good consumption have grown even more dramatically.
                                          5

 developing—country growth rates were to decline 4 percent, industrialized—

 country (OECD)   growth rates would decline 1 percent.1
    Multinational corporations have also contributed disproportionately to

 growth in global trade. Affiliates of U.S. multinationals have been

 increasing their share of world exports. U.S. majority—owned manufacturing

affiliates increased their share of total host—country exports from roughly 8

percent in 1966 to roughly 10 percent in 1977 (Lipsey and Kravis (1982, pp.

25—26)). Their share of exports in total affiliate sales (i.e., exports plus

host—country sales) rose from 16 percent in 1957, to 19 percent in 1966, to 31

percent in 1977. The rise was especially pronounced for affiliates in east

and southeast Asian countries. Exports of U.S. affiliates to third—country

markets grew most rapidly; exports of U.S. affiliates back to the U.S. grew

more sluggishly. The share of exports to the U.S. in total U.S. affiliate

exports declined from 38 percent in 1957, to 30 percent in 1966, to 29 percent

in 1977 (Lipsey and Kravis (1982, pp. 3—5)).

    Certain sectors have contributed disproportionately to the U.S. stake in

global trade. Others have suffered the spillover consequences. This sectoral

imbalance is one of the many forces that underlie recent industrial change in

the U.S. The remainder of this section addresses these matters briefly.

    Growth in agricultural exports has been highly significant for the U.S.

(and also significant for the European Community). U.S. agricultural exports

increased 600 percent in value from $7 billion in 1970 to $41.3 billion in



    1Bradford (1983, table XI), citing a study by Morgan Guaranty
Trust Company, summarized in their World Financial Markets, June 1983,
table 4, p. 7.
                                       6


1980 (United States (1982, P. 17), then declined to $39.1 billion in

1982 while world agricultural exports continued to grow (Wall Street

Journal, May 19, 1983, p. 1). U.S. agricultural imports grew more modestly

from $6.2 billion in 1970 to $17.1 billion in 1982 (U.S. Department of

Commerce (1972, table 81; 1983, table 3)). Net agricultural exports thus

increased from roughly $1 billion in 1970 to $22 billion in 1982.

    Growth in repatriated investment income from assets owned abroad has

also been highly significant for the U.S. Such investment income is

properly understood as payment for a kind of export, an export of the

services of U.S. capital that is employed abroad. It increased almost

750 percent from $11.7 billion in 1970 to $85.9 billion in 1982 (and

also in 1981). Growth in U.S. investment payments to foreigners, i.e.,

import of the services of foreign capital, increased even nre rapidly

from $5.5 billion in 1970 to $57.2 billion in 1982 (United States (1983a,

Table B—l01; 1983b, p. 36). Net exports of capital services for the U.S. have

thus increased from $6.2 billion in 1972 to $28.7 billion in 1982, a change of

almost exactly the same value as the change in net agricultural exports.

    Some commentators have argued that the U.S. has grown increasingly

attractive as a "safe haven" for footloose global financial capital.     They

see the U.S. as an increasingly competitive supplier of investment assets ——
                                                                 U.S. trade
secure, high—yielding claims on future purchasing power. Data on
 in such claims up through 1982 does not, however, seem to bear out these con-

 jectures. Average annual capital inflows (exports of claims on the future)

 have doubled or tripled since 1974, depending on measure.   Yet average annual

 capital outflows (imports of claims on the future) grew comparably. Net

 export of such claims, the capital—account balance, shows no systematic trend
                                      7

 from 1974 through 1982.1

    Cr088 international trade in financial assets has accelerated strikingly,

however, with implications to be discussed below. Data on annual capital

movements understate the acceleration because of recurrent ebbs and ref lows

during a year. The acceleration can be more readily glimpsed from surveys

conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In April 1983, the gross

value of daily transactions in the U.S. foreign exchange markets was estimated

to be $33.5 billion; three years earlier in March 1980, it had been estimated

to be $23.5 billion; and in April 1977, it had been estimated to be only $5

billion (Wall Street Journal, September 8, 1983, p. 3, Revey (1981, p. 32),

United States Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (1980, p. 3)). Since U.S. trade

in goods and services at most doubled during the same period, most of

remainder of the near five—fold increase in transactions is likely due to U.S.

international capital movements.2

    Growth in net agricultural exports, investment income, and possibly capital

inflows has arguably tended to "crowd out" exports of manufactures and other

products, and "crowd in" imports of all kinds (United States (1983a, p. 54)).

The most immediately understood explanation is the tendency for exogenous3


    1The large ($41 billion) statistical discrepancy in 1982 suggests the
possibility, however, of substantial unrecorded capital inf lows.

    2Some may also be due to increased U.S. bank activity in the global
foreign exchange markets, of course (Revey (1981)).

    3There is an important empirical question being glossed over in this
account that is, to my knowledge, unanswered. The question is loosely which
trade trends were the "crowders" and which were the "crowdees"? More tightly,
the question concerns exogeneity. Did agricultural, debt—servicing, and
oil—price forces from outside the usual frame of economic reference crowd out
U.S. industrial exports and crowd in U.S. industrial imports? Or did de—
industrializing forces from outside the usual frame of economic reference
crowd in fuels imports and investment income and crowd out agricultural goods
into world markets? As the text reveals, my own tendency is to answer the
first question, "yes, strongly," and the second, "maybe, but not dominantly."
Less casual empirical work could test these causal linkages, and assign
weights to alternative exogenous forces.
                                        8

growth in one type of net exports to raise the dollar's foreign exchange

value, thereby reducing the international competitiveness of all other types

of net exports. The ultimate explanation, however, for these "crowding ten-

dencies, is the relative price adjustment that in due time brings about the

same anti—competitive effect. From this perspective, growth in U.S. agri-

cultural trade, maturation of the U.S. as an international creditor, and

possibly the attractiveness of the U.S. for financial investments, are poten-

tial sources of U.S. "de—industrialization."

    DurIng the niid—1970's these de—industrializng tendencies were checked by

equally dramatic growth in net U.S. imports of fuels and materials, chiefly

petroleum. Imports of petroleum and related products grew from $2.9 billion

in 1970 to $8.4 billion in 1973, leaped to $26.6 billion in 1974 and grew

erratically to $79.4 in 1980 (United States (1983a, Table B—102)). But U.S.

oil import growth turned dramatically negative in 1981, in reflection of still

higher price, recession, conservation, and domestic production. Gone was the

chief counter—balance to the potential de—industrializing trends described

above.

    Buoyant growth in agricultural competitiveness, investment income, and

possibly inward financial capital movement all contribute to the spectre of

sweeping "de—industrialization." They are the opposite face to declining U.S.

competitiveness in manufactures, where Japan seems committed to excel in high—

technology goods, and gangs of developing countries seem committed to excel in

low—technology goods. Nevertheless, evidence for across—the—board U.S. de—

industrialization   through 1980 is not very convincing. And   evidence   since

1980 is contestable.

    From 1973 to 1980 the U.S. trade balance in manufactured products was

generally positive and often growing, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore,
                                         9

  from 1973 to 1980 labor productivity and the
                                                 capital—labor ratio grew faster
 in U.S. manufacturing than in any other broad sector, and U.S. manufacturing

 employment grew faster over the same period than
                                                    manufacturing employment in
 any other industrial country (Lawrence (1982c, pp. 13, 16). See also

 Branson (1983b, pp. 10—19)).

     Since 1980 aggregate data on U.S. trade and manufacturing might be read to

 imply sweeping industrial exodus from the U.S. to other countries. But a

 persuasive alternative explanation is that U.S. industry as a whole (and

 not just housing and consumer durables) has borne the greatest burden from

 monetary and fiscal innovations during this period. If so, then (to anticipate

 the section on policy options) moderating the monetary and/or fiscal stance of

 the U.S. government may be the most direct and effective re—industrialization

 policy available. Industrial and trade policies aimed at re-industrialization

may by comparison be second—best, attended by an unfortunate number of

unwanted precedents and by—products.1

    The case for moderating fiscal policy Is strong, and summarized well in

Feldstein (1983) and Branson (1983c). Growing full—capacity budget deficits

drove up U.S. real interest rates in 1981—1982.
                                                   Growing full—capacity budget
deficits drove up U.S. real interest rates in 1981—1982.
                                                            Increasingly pessi-
mistic forecasts of future budget deficits drove up anticipated levels of

future real interest rates. During this period, international capital move-

ments toward the U.S. and parallel policy abroad closed the real—interest dif-

ferential. The capital inflows forced the dollar to a higher level, and



    'William Diebold has pointed out the parallel to the frequent demon-
strations of U.S. inability to compete internationally in the late 1960s, most
of which were proved false by the 1971—73 adjustments of exchange rates.
               10




            Table 1

Overall U.S. Trade Balance in
     Manufactured Products'

     1973             —0.3

     1974              8.3

     1975             19.9

     1976             12.5

     1977              3.6

     1978             —5.8

     1979              4.4

     1980             18.8




 1Billions of dollars.

 Source: United States (1982, p.   280).
                                           11


  reduced the international competitiveness of U.S. goods. As the real—interest

  differential was closed, the appreciation ended.   But the dollar remained at a
  higher and less competitive level. And it will stay until the reallocation of

  financial capital stocks toward the U.S. is reversed. Reversal will require

 some exogenous innovation to lower U.S. real interest rates (or raise foreign

 real interest rates). One such innovation would be legislation that would

 establish a credible reduction of future budget deficits. Anticipated future

 real interest rates would then fall. Current real interest rates would tend

 to fall in response, through induced changes in the timing of borrowing and

 lending. And the current value of the dollar would fall as expected and

 current real interest rates fell.

     The case for moderating monetary policy is weaker. The most important

 recent monetary innovation was arguably the shift toward contraction in late

 1979 and 1980. The burden on U.S.
                                     industry was very pronounced shortly
 thereafter, as the dollar quickly overshot (Branson
                                                       (1977), Dornbusch (1976)),
 appreciating more than its ultimate equilibrium amount, and making U.S. goods

immediately less competitive in international markets. Then the burden may

have increased in intensity, cumulating for as long as real U.S. interest

rates lay above global levels (Richardson (1983, p. 23 passim)). Yet by 1983,

the economy may finally be witnessing an adjustment of expectations to per-

manently lower rates of monetary growth and inflation. If so, then the real

effects of the monetary shift of 1979—1980 will have almost died away ——

including   its effects on real interest rates and the international competitive

position of U.S. goods (Richardson (1983, pp. 13—17)). To alter U.S.

monetary policy in any surprising way in 1983 might only confuse and retard

the adjustment of domestic and international economies to lower U.S. inflation.
                                        12


    In short, industrial flight from the U.S. to other countries may only

appear to be an inexorable external force in the economic environment of the

1980s. Macroeconomic policy rather than inevitable industrial relocation may be
                                                          rather than trade
the principal culprit.1 Macroeconomic policy renovation

policy may be the principal solution.

    This policy—centered account of U.S. de—industrializatiofl in the 1980s is

consistent with the trend and timing of the decline in U.S. international com-

petitiveness in Table 2. The decline in competitiveness is most pronounced in
                                                caused real interest rates to rise
1981, as both monetary and fiscal innovations

and the dollar to appreciate. No significant additional monetary innovations

occur in 1982, but further fiscal innovations do ——   in the   form of increasingly

                                                         further decline in U.S.
bleak budgets and full—capacity budget forecasts. The

competitiveness is large, but less pronounced than in 1981. As the bleakness of
                                                     bleaker) toward the end of
the budget outlook stabilizes (that is, becomes no

1982 the dollar also begins to stabilize, albeit at an uncomfortably high

exchange value.

    Aggregate trends notwithstanding, among u.s. manufacturing industries there
                                                                     for some, and
 is evidence of secularly declining international competitiveness
                                                     for others. The U.S.
 secularly improving international competitiveness

 could be argued to be de—industrializit1g in the first group and prospering

 in the second. A familiar measure of these trends is a sector's trade

 balance. Table 3 includes trade balances for both groups, for two




                                                     dear Brutus, lies not in our
        paraphrase of Cassius may apply, "the fault,
 stars, but in our self—selected macroeconomic policy."
                                        13




                                   Table 2


               Percentage Change In International Competitiveness
                  of U.S. Manufactures Over the Previous Year1

                          1975                  -3.5
                          1976                  —1.4
                          1977                   0.2
                          1978                   3.6
                          1979                  —0.1
                          1980                 —1.8
                          1981                 —9.8
                          1982                 —7.4
                          19832                —2.6




              1Percentage changes in the reciprocal of the "real effective
exchange rate" of the dollar, which is an index of trade weighted exchange rates
adjusted for inflation differentials in wholesale prices of nonfood manufactures
for a group of major developed countries.

              2April 1983 over April 1982.

              Source: United States (1982, p. 174), Morgan Guaranty Trust
Company, World Financial Markets, May 1983, p. 10.
                                       14




                                   Table 3
                                                           1
                 Selected U.S. Manufacturing Trade Balances


                                                    1973       1981

             Textiles                               —0.5        0.5

                                                    —2.0       —6.8
             Clothing

             Iron and Steel                         —2.0       —9.3


             Chemicals                               3.5       13.6

                                                    11.9       43.5
             Machinery and Equipment
             (except vehicles and
               appliances)

             Road—Motor Vehicles                    —6.8       —19.9
               and Household
               Appliances

         1Billions of dollars.

         Source: Deardorff and Stern (1973, pp. 7—8), adapted from GATT (1982,
                                                              trends in even
Table A19). Branson (1980, pp. 212—231) summarizes these same
greater industry detail. See also United States (1982, pp. 167-470).
                                        15


 years in which aggregate U.S. international competitiveness was roughly

 the same.'

     In general, U.S. imports are becoming more complementary to domestic

 production. The trend over three decades is toward increasingly positive U.S.

 trade balances in capital goods, chemicals, and agricultural products, and

 increasingly negative U.S. trade balances in fuels, automotive products, and

 consumer goods. This appears to reflect restoration of pre—Worid—War—lI

 trends (Branson (1980, 1981, 1983b), Lawrence (1982b, c), Deardorff and Stern

 (1983)).

    Increasing complementarity of this sort probably makes domestic adjustment

problems more severe (Branson (1980), Krugman (1982a)). Skills, technology,

and equipment differ more radically between import—competing industries and

the rest of the U.S. economy than in the past, when U.S. trade was more

heavily intra—industry trade. With increasing cotuplementarity, ebbs and

flows of U.S. international competitiveness may cause structural/transitional

unemployment and excess capacity to be correspondingly larger and longer

than in the past.

    The amplitude of U.S. industrial and agricultural fluctuations may become

larger due to growing dependence on global commodity markets and increased

export specialization on capital goods. Business swings in agricultural

prosperity are increasingly influenced by exchange rates and by foreign as

well as domestic weather patterns. Business swings in capital—goods

sectors are subject to accelerator influences that magnify ripples in



      ith March 1973 serving as a base of 100, the average real multilateral
trade—weighted value of the dollar was estimated in United States (1983a,
table B—100) to be 98.8 for 1973 and 100.8 for 1981.
                                        16



global economic activity into waves in U.S. manufacturing production.    This

also may make domestic adjustment problems more severe and enduring, as

congestion and slower clearing of labor and other factor markets is the result

of larger cyclical swings.

    Some commentators have alleged that U.S. imports are also becoming more

"intermediate" in nature due to growth in global or "out—" sourcing and co—

production   arrangements (Bluestone (1983, pp. 18—19)). The evidence is

largely anecdotal. Data on imports by end use are not helpful in assessing

the allegation. The share of industrial supplies and materials in total U.S.

imports (each measured exclusive of petroleum products)1 fell from 34.6 per-

cent in 1970 to 31.9 percent in 1973, leaped to 36.7Z in 1974, and has

declined gradually since then to 29.0 percent in 1982. This does not suggest

growing "intermediate—ness" of trade. On the other hand, the end—use classi-

fication assigns many parts and sub—assemblies to categories such as "capital

goods" and "automotive" that are not, therefore, strictly measuring final—

goods imports.

    If U.S. trade is becoming more concentrated on intermediate and capital

goods, then trade policy may affect industrial factor markets more importantly

than it affects final demand. Its consequences for industrial structure may

be more a matter of how it influences input costs and availability of capital

and materials than how it influences product demand, and dependent more on

elasticities of substitution among factors than among products.



               imports are also removed from the total. Source: U.S.
 Department of Commerce, Survey of Current Business, various March issues.
                                       17



    Net U.S. exports do not seem to be becoming less technology—intensive,

 despite success by Germany and Japan at narrowing the "technology gap" of the

 1950s and 1960s. Technology gaps have closed for soma products, but not

overall, and have opened wider in soma instances. Table 4 illustrates how

data on trade that is "intensive in research and development (R&D)" show no

across—the—board loss of international competitiveness for U.S. producers.

    It is perhaps not surprising that persistent (albeit waning) U.S.

technological leadership in world markets escapes popular attention (Branson

(1983a, p. 1)). Sectors with rapidly expanding technology—based exports

tend to be small and lack well—established public identity and geographical

location. They are not nearly as identifiable statistically or as easily

recognized by the public as are sectors such as "steel" or "autos." Such

sectors on the edge of technology—based import competition tend to be large,

long—established, and well—defined in geographic center and political backing.

    The U.S. continues to dominate other nations in R&D expenditure. As late

as 1979, the U.S. was spending nearly as much on R&D as all other OECD countries

combined (Piekarz, Thomas, and Jennings (1982, pp. 14—15)). While losing

ground to Japan and Germany (but not to others) in the late 1960's and early

1970's, the U.S. has stabilized its relative position since 1975.1 Most of

the recent acceleration of U.S. R&D has been business spending, not govern-

ment. And proportionally less of it has been agricultural than for other

nations (Piekarz, Thomas, and Jennings (1982, p. 25)).



    1However, a broader but more dated study of U.S. technological leadership
(U.S. Library of Congress (1980, p. 34), cited by Lawrence (1982b, pp. 37—
38)) includes measures additional to R&D for which Germany and Japan continued
to close the technology gap into the late 1970's.
                                          18



                                     Table 4



                                                      1
                                    U.S. Trade Balances in.

                              R&D—In t en8 ive    Non—R&D—Intensive
                              Manufactured          Manufactured
             Years              Products              Products

          1960_19642               6.8                 —0.5
          1965_19692               9.0                 —4.5
          1970_19742              14.7                —13.2
            1975                  29.3                 —9.5
            1976                  29.0                —16.5
            1977                  27.1                —23.5
            1978                  29.6                —35.4
            1979                  39.3                —34.8
            1980                  52.4                —33.5

       1Billions of dollars

       2Annual average.

        Source: United States (1982, p. 156) from the National Science
Foundation. See also Balassa (1983).
                                             19




                          3. THE   CHANGING POLICY ENVIRONMENT


     The environment for trade policy has also changed significantly in

 recent years. Some changes are most pronounced in the U.S., such as the

 growing power of its trade policy for domestic purposes, and its waning power

 for foreign—policy purposes. Other changes are global, such as growing policy
 disorder ——   the   declining adherence of governments everywhere to established

 policy conventions and to long—standing commitments. Most fundamentally,

 the whole conception of trade policy as an interference in markets is being

 re—examined. Recent institutional trends suggest alternative conceptions of

 trade policy as a participation in markets or as a replacement for them.

    These aspects of the trade policy environment are discussed below under

the headings policy power, policy order, and policy "place"


                                   A. Policy Power


    Trade policy has always served two masters, and is in fact a way of

discriminating between them. For the U.S. in recent years, one master has

grown in relative influence. Domestic economic prosperity has become

increasingly sensitive to trade policy, which has been turned more and more

toward meeting its demands. International and national security goals of U.S.

trade policy have correspondingly declined in relative importance (Baldwin

(1982, p. 1 passim); see also Blackhurst (1981)).

    This is a predictable result of growing U.S. dependence on international

markets, discussed above, and of the decline in U.S. hegemony, discussed below.

Growing U.S. trade dependence increases not only U.S. vulnerability to inter-

national competition, but also the effectiveness of its trade policy for
                                      20


domestic purposes. Elasticities of sectoral output, employment, and profit

with respect to trade policy rise as import and export shares rise. When

trade shares were small, even export and import embargoes had only modest

impacts on domestic industries. As trade shares have grown, so has the

attractiveness of trade policy to attain domestic goals, and to defend against

"unfair" trade practices1 of foreign firms that are no longer just token com-

petitors for U.S. giants.2

    Furthermore, as the rest of the world has grown relative to the U.S.

since World War II, its trade dependence on the U.S. has declined.

Elasticities of global output, employment, and profit with respect to U.S.

trade policy have become smaller. U.S. ability to influence world economic

prosperity has therefore declined, and so has the importance of this goal in

shaping U.S. trade policy. The important, but non—voting, foreign consti-

tuents of U.S. trade policy have taken careful note of its reduced influence

on them at the same time as voting U.S. constituents awakened to its growing

influence on them. Reflective of these trends is the long decline in the

influence of the internationally-minded State Department over U.S. trade

policy and the more recent ascension of the Agriculture and Commerce

Departments.



    1Baldwin (1983, pp. 18—19) documents the increasing U.S. prosecution
of "unfair" trade cases. An aspect of these that underscores the increasingly
domestic intent of U.S. trade policy is the role that plaintiff firms them-
selves are given in government negotiations over unfair trade practices, as
a result of 1979 amendments to the Trade Act of 1974. See, for example, the
account of the October 1982 U.S.—European steel agreement in the Wall Street
Journal, November 23, 1982, p. 26.

    2Carroll (1982) is a helpful summary of the decline in the size of
U.S. firms to foreign firms over the period.
                                        21

     Trade policy, of course, discriminates by definition in favor of either a

 domestic or foreign constituency and against the other. From this point of

 view, one of the most troublesome aspects of recent trade policy is the

 increased weight given to its use as an aggressive or defensive tool in an

 implicit economic war between countries. This tendency is exacerbated by

 social trends such as declining personal responsibility and increasing resort

 to "blaming." When consti tuents fail to take appropriate responsibility for

 their own economic prosperity, and blame external forces instead, foreigners

 are tempting scapegoats. Democratically elected representatives must in some

measure reflect these attitudes or else be guilty of misrepresenting their

constituents. The result is an increase in the use of trade policy to punish

 "blameworthy" foreigners and to protect "innocent domestic victims" from

foreign machinations, or even from the impersonal circumstances of global

markets.

                               B. Policy Order


    Order seems to be declining and aggression rising in the formation

of national trade policy. A familiar American image may help to flesh out

this observation. "Frontier justice" has seemed increasingly to order trade and

policy. Under frontier justice, if a government can get away with it," it

should "do it." Strong governments survive prosperously; weak governments,

tenuously. The economic problem with frontier justice is unpredictability.1

More organized systems of justice regularize economic exchange, establishing

boundaries for what qualify as voluntary transactions, rules governing the

exploitation of market advantage, and sanctions to guarantee the enforcement


    1Alan Deardorff has pointed out that another problem is resource
waste from private attempts to provide protection, an inherently
public good.
                                      22


of contracts. Frontier justice, by contrast, can destabilize economic

exchange, becoming an irritant to the market rather than its lubricant.

    Another way to describe frontier justice among governments is to call it

policy aggre8siOfl. Tendencies toward 8uch are always present, of course.

Yet some of the constraints that check policy aggression have become looser.

U.S. hegemony1 has waned since 1945, however one defines it. And undesirable

though it was in some ways, it clearly checked the scope for policy

aggression, much as the frontier sheriff or U.S. marshall checked the scope

for frontier justice. U.S. influence was, roughly speaking, once sufficient

to make other nations "fall into line" in trade policy, exchange—rate policy,

and the international institutions that oversee them, but the U.S. seems

currently less able and less willing to play that role. The awkward question

this raises is: what happens on the frontier when the citizenry grows

stronger and when the sheriff not only grows weaker, but begins to act

just like everyone else? The problem facing both trade policy and exchange—
                                                                             ——
rate policy is how to avoid frontier justice in inter—government relations

how to re—order policy interchange.

    It may be unduly alarmist to claim that declining order is a fact.

For example, the U.S. Trade Representative's Office (United States (1982,

pp. 55—61)) expresses considerable satisfaction with the orderly working

of the seven codes on non—tariff barriers that were negotiated in the

"Tokyo Round," and with the code committees that meet periodically to

oversee them. Yet the very same report contains conspiratorial comments



    1See Gilpin (1977), Keohane (1980), Kindleberger (1981), and Krasner
(1976) for extended discussions of hegemony and international economics.
See Blackhurst (1981) for implications that are similar to those described
here.
                                        23


such as, "... most ominously, there has been an increase in secret and

voluntary restrictions over the past decade ...     unpublicized,   secret safeguard

understandings" (p. 35). Lawrence (1982a, pp. 36—40) also documents the

decline in transparency of recent trade policy, consistent with the attempt by

countries to advance their own welfare at the expense of others without being

detected.

    Increasingly aggressive trade policies are to be feared more for their

potential to disorder resource allocation than to mis—order it. To put the

problem even more starkly, the law of the jungle may increasingly dictate

policy interchange among governments. Yet this is as haphazard a way of

ordering policy transactions as it is of ordering market transactions. Even

laisser—faire economists have in mind some particular legal structure of

common—law conventions when they favor "free" markets and liberal trade

policy. The threat is that longstanding legal structures and conventions

governing government behavior will be abandoned. Uncertainty at best and

chaos at worst could be the consequence for international trade and invest-

ment. The danger of the worst case can be appreciated by considering what

happens to everyday commerce during civil disorder, when legal systems crumble

and vigilantism waxes strong.



                                C. Policy "Place"


    Policy may have an increasingly natural "place" in international trade

because of changing institutional features. What we call trade policy may

become less a distortion of markets and more a participation in them or a

replacement for them. Part of this trend is due to governments' relation to

multinational corporations, whose share of global transactions is rising. A
                                      24

second part is due to governments' role as an insurer or guarantor on behalf

of its constituents.

    Governments have been gradually acquiring increased ownership stakes in

corporations. Public corporations have grown, private corporations have been

nationalized, and governments have acquired equity shares in both new and old

ventures (Vernon (1983a, 1983b, pp. 31—34), Vernon and Aharoni (1981),

Kostecki (1982)). Trade policy is inevitably tugged in the direction of

preserving employment (a kind of public "labor—hoarding"), growth, and the

capital value of publically owned equity, especIally at the expense of employ-

ment, growth, and equity in the firms of foreign competitors.   Trade policy

may take on certain aspects of boardroom policy as trade itself includes more

state trading. And state trading is inevitably more "politicized" than market

trading. Certain quasi—inercantilist perspectives acquire respectability in

this environment, as described in Section 4.

    Second, it seems clear that the citizenry of industrial countries looks

more and more to government as the guarantor and insurer of economic

prosperity and security. At the same time, it seems likely that increasing

integration of international markets exposes domestic agents to larger and

more frequent unanticipated shocks, despite diversification opportunities.1

Since insurance markets may not provide adequately against such shocks, and



    LThe argument is expanded in Grossman and Richardson (pp. 20—23). It
is that information is generally more mobile (cheaper to acquire and convey)
within a nation than across national boundaries. Firms and other economic
institutions will usually find it optimal to acquire less information about
foreign markets and government policy than about domestic equivalents.
(Presumably they proceed in such a way that an extra dollar spent on
information—gathering would reap results of the same marginal value for infor-
mation abroad as at home.) The result is that economic agents will generally
be better able to anticipate and forecast domestic events than foreign events.
The variance of unexpected business shocks should be larger the more dependent
a sector is on exports or the more competitive it is with imports.
                                          25


since capital markets may   not   be sufficiently perfect to allow appropriate

diversification, trade policy may    emerge as a feasible and reasonably inexpen-
sive second—best alternative, as also described in Section 4.
                                          26


                   4. PROS AND CONS OF NEW PERSPECTIVES ON
                        A MORE ACTIVE U.S. TRADE POLICY


   Even if the U.S. were to return on average to full capacity and acceptable

exchange rates, industrial pressures for active U.S. trade policy might

emanate from three sources. One, described in Section 2, is the ongoing

rationalization of global industrial structure, coupled with the still

incomplete elimination of the post—World—WarII gap between American and
                                                          expertise, and firm size
foreign industrial technology, equipment, managerial

(Branson (1980, 1981), Carroll (1982)). A second, described in Section 3, is
                                                      abroad aids foreign firms in
the perception that aggressive government policy

their attempt to catch up with and surpass their American competitors. A

third, from Sections 2 and 3, is the conviction that the international eco-

nomy is growing more volatile and uncertain, partly because of floating

exchange rates, partly because of policy disorder, and partly because of ambi—

guity about debt crises and oil prices.        American industry often perceives

both the economic environment and the policy environment to be conspiring

against it.

    As firms have grown multinationally over the years, and as the European

Community, co—production, joint ventures, and ambitious development plans have
                                                 markets have taken on an
 encouraged their global identity, national
                                                  similar firms in each. And as
 increasingly oligopolistic, structure, with

 both policy and exchange rates become less predictable, world markets appear

 to take on an increasingly stochastic, and less static structure. Traditional
                                                        retain the static com-
 trade policy analysis, by contrast, has tended to

                              conclusions that are sharp and familiar. Recent
 petitive norm,   producing
 trade—policy analysis, however, has begun to incorporate imperfect competition
                                         27

 among segregated national markets as a maintained distortion,1 and stochastic

 shocks as a fact of life. Its conclusions are only conditionally sharp, and

not yet either complete or familiar. This is not surprising since multiple

distortions to the competitive norm casts analysis into the complexity of

second—best economics. But imperfect competition, segmented markets, and

incomplete insurance against stochastic change, unlike other potential distor-

tions, are realistic and important.

       This section summarizes some recent trade—policy analysis in imperfectly

competitive, segmanted, and stochastic worlds. It attempts to draw out its

practical implications for the U.S. The risks in doing so, as Paul Krugman

once remarked, are similar in many ways to those associated with recombinant

DNA.


                         A. "Strategic" Trade Policy...2



    When the behavior of foreign individuals, firms, and even governments3 is

sufficiently competitive, then there are only weak defenses for trade policy

intervention. In the absence of market distortions, market—determined trade

wastes fewest resources; in the presence of market distortions, policies other

than trade policy waste fewest resources. But when policy abroad, collusion



    1The reality being reflected is not increasing global or even national
concentration of production. On the contrary global industrial concentration
has probably been declining since World War II (Vernon (1977, pp. 73—82)).
The reality being reflected is, however, increasing shares of production by
multinational firms, as outlined in Section 2.

       more detailed expansion of this sub—section is in Branson, Grossman, and
Richardson (1983). See Dixit (1983) for an even more complete survey, with
ample caveats.

    3Governinents compete with each other, for example, to attract foreign
investment.
                                      28


                                                strategically as a
abroad, or both lead foreign countries to act
                                                           is unlikely to be the
group—conscious whole, then passive U.S. policy response

optimal rejoinder. It is as unlikely as finding in a two—person game that one

player's optimal strategy is independent of the other's (Branson and

Richardson (1982, p. 21), United States (1983a, p. 61)).


     ...towardGoVernmetS. Consider strategic trade policy by foreign

governments even in the presence of reasonably competitive markets. Then

there would seem to be a problem with passive U.S. trade policy ——   policy   that


is invariant to time or circumstance, of which the best known (but least

practiced) variety is "free trade".   The problem is that policy passivity

is equivalent to allowing some other government to set trade policy for ours.
                                            determining our own policy and
And given the choice between us actively
                                          incompetent governments would seem well
 someone else doing it, only foolish or

 advised to choose passive trade policy.

     The point can be made in a more arresting way.    Some economists defend

 passivity and foreswear active trade policy because active policy almost always
                              improve some domestic situation by making the same
 "beggars our neighbor" —— we

 situation worse in our trading partners. But in this light, passive trade
                                            governments to "beggar us" with impu-
 policy is equivalent to allowing foreign

 nity. It is almost as if our policy were to allow their policy to decide for

 us. That is not on the face of it a better course of action. And it is
                                           others to exploit its constituents by
 clearly worse when a government allows

 slavish allegiance to some notion that "markets can do it better."
                                                   commentary continues to favor
     These considerations otwjthstanding, some
                                          p.236) characterizes the view of
 passive trade policy. Baldwin (1979,
                                               allocation to be the key objective
  economists who consider efficient resource
                                       29


 of economic activity as follows:


    "The fact that a foreign government's subsidy policies place
    severe competitive pressure on certain U.S. industries ... is
    not in principle different from the fact that the existence of
    lower wages abroad puts severe competitive pressure on particular
    U.S. industries. If foreign governments want to use their own
    taxpayers' money to provide us with goods at lower prices than
    we can provide ourselves, then we should welcome the addition to
    our living standards."


The implication of this view is that foreign governments should be free to

choose their own optimal pattern of 1ndustral subsidies and that our policy

response should be always passive. That stance abjures the strategic insight

that our policy may be able to improve for us their calculation of optimal

policy (whereas our policy is not likely to be able to influence foreign

wages). That is, we may be able to choose some active policy, or menu of

active policies (contingent on foreign response), that would shift "optimal"

foreign policy to an outcome more desirable to us than the outcome under

policy passivity (Macdonald (1983, pp. 13—15).

    Policy passivists sometimes recognize this but find the complexity and un-

predictability of strategic policy to be overwhelming defects. These practical

concerns are given more attention below. In principle, active dissuasionary

policy may be not at all complex or unpredictable. It may even involve no

resource cost, despite its "active" character. Domestic anti—dumping duties

provide a potential example. If they were credibly anticipated by foreign

suppliers and rescinded once dumping ceased, then no dumping would take place

and no duty would be levied (Eichertgreen (1983, pp. 9—10)). Trade would

appear to be free and undistorted by either policy or price discrimination.

Yet the appearance would be the result of active, not free, trade policy.

U.S. anti—dumping policy is meant to approach these features in its design
                                      30


since it is ostensibly transparent, non—discretionary, and in force for only

as long as the dumping continues. In general, it seems likely that active

dissuasionary trade policies would have to be predictable, non—discretionary,

and temporary (contingent on foreign behavior).


    ...Toward Firms. If we add now imperfect competition among firms, then matters

become even more complex. The economics of active trade policy in imperfectly

competitive markets is even less well developed than the economics of active

government—to—government response. The chief reason for greater complexIty is

that the characterization "imperfectly competitive" takes on many different

meanings in many different contexts. Important elements of imperfect com-

petition in early research on "strategic" trade policy include ongoing or

transitory super—normal profits, static or dynamic scale economies, segregated

product markets, and absence of markets providing adequate insurance or infor-

mation about the universe of investment opportunities.

    Brander and Spencer, for example, in a series of papers (1982a, 1982b,

Spencer and Brander (1982)) generate a possibility for strategic trade policy

that is aimed at capturing (or preserving) super—normal profits. One source

of super—normal profits is obviously permanent market power. Another is

temporary market power that accompanies technological leadership. Still

another is the temporary super—normal profits that accrue to firms and indivi-

duals who adjust most rapidly to structural and industrial change.1



    1This last kind of super—normal profits is no less relevant for being
even more obviously an extra—equilibrium phenomenon. When the issue is
equilibrium industrial structures, as for this paper, one might argue that
economies are more often between equilibrium industrial structures than at
them. Furthermore, quick capture of super-normal profits is analytically
equivalent to quick escape from sub—normal profits.
                                           31


     Brander and Spencer start with an imperfectly competitive global industry,

 and take as a fact of life market segmentation that
                                                         generates nation—by—nation

 pools of super—normal profits. Other things being the same, we would prefer

 that our producers had a larger share of each national pool than theirs. That

 preference seems sensible whether each pool is ongoing or transitory (say

 because new entrants could compete it away). And it seems sensible whether we

 are consciously aggressive (Out to maximize our share of the "gains" ——     or
 spoils ——   from   oligopoly, much as we maximize our share of the gains from trade

by setting an optimal tariff) or conservatively and honorably defensive (out to

prevent our oligopolistic trading partners from maximizing their share of the

gains from oligopoly at our expense). The point is very      simple.   If oligopo—

listic profit is inevitable, then trade patterns that give us larger access to

it are economically superior to other trade patterns, given everything else.

    Policy would seem at first blush to have no place here, and especially not

trade policy. "Our" oligopolistic firms would seem to have exactly the same

goals as outlined above and to be perfectly capable of taking care of them-

selves if they were allowed the market freedom to do what comes naturally to

oligopolists. Allowing them to is in fact one argument for looser or even

non—existent extraterritorial application of U.S. antitrust law.1 But

Brander's and Spencer's contribution is to show that even the basic intuition

about oligopolistic adequacy is misleading. Policy has a potential role, and

most appropriately trade policy.

    Policy enters in its ability to shift the equilibrium generated by

oligopolistic interchange. In an equilibrium without policy, the information



    1October 1982 passage of legislation authorizing export trading companies
in the U.S. was a mild step in this direction.
                                       32


every oligopolist has about others deprives each of any credible new threat.

The information is that each oligopolist has chosen optimally in light of the

underlying environment. This information removes any Incentive for further

alteration in oligopolistic instruments. Price, quantity, quality, investment,

R & D, etc. are already at their optimal values when there is genuine

equilibrium. Credible policy, however, can change the underlying environment

and shift the equilibrium.

    Government subsidies for domestic R & D, for example, might reduce costs

and generate new products for which "our" firms will have at least temporary

market power. Government export subsidies, for another example, might shift

out the export demand curves that face domestic firms, and shift down the

demand curves facing our firms' foreign competitors. Both policies could

improve the competitive position of our firms if they were judged to be

"credible" (sustainable) by oligopolistic combattants. Foreign competitors

then might take them into account as "pre—commitmentS" ——   inhospitable   aspects

of the competitive environment on the same order as our access to a productive

labor force or to plentiful raw materials. Being "first" with such policy

pre—comniitments may be important because the payoff to reactive foreign poli-

cies of the same sort is then reduced (Macdonald (1983, pp. 13—15)), and our

firms may inherit a permanently larger share of each market's pool of super-

normal profits) Firms themselves can undertake such strategic "first

 strikes" when they are out of equilibrium, as demonstrated in the literature



     The technical explanation for "first—strike" strategic policy in Brander and
 Spencer is that it can shift the economy to the Stackelberg equilibrium that
 would have emerged had our firms been "leaders" and foreign firms "followers."
 Firma by themselves are unable to establish and maintain such equilibria unless
 there are informational assymetries or other distortions, since otherwise these
 equilibria imply irrational behavior for the followers.
                                        33


on pre—emptive capital formation and corporate innovation (Prescott and

Visscher (1976), Spence (1977, 1979), Dixit (1980), Eaton and Lipsey (1980)).

But in equilibrium, threats of futher thrusts by some firms are dismissed by

other firms as mere bluffs. Everyone is known to have adopted optimal strate-

gies already, from which divergence would be costly.

    Governments, however, can be assumed to have potential to threaten and

credibly pre—commit even after the firms attain oligopolistic equilibrium,

shifting the equilibrium to obtain a nationally desirable distribution of pro-

fits. Therein lies the key asymmatry between governments and firms in

Brander's and Spencer's conception, and the answer to what governments can do

for firms that firms cannot do for themselves. There are of course con-

ditioning factors. Dubious or inscrutable policies have no influence ——

influence   stems from both credibility and public transparency. But recurrent

policy may lose strategic effectiveness. It may become so regularized that it

too can be de8cribed by a stable behavioral relation (a policy reaction

function). Then firms may be able to predict policy accurately, treat govern-

ment as another "player" in the competitive game,1 and dismiss and discre-

tionary policy divergence from regular patterns as incredible.

    Brander's and Spencer's conclusions appear to be neo—mercantilistic, since

they rest on "improving the competitive position of our firms." Furthermore,

this seems a far cry from the traditional, respectable, and even—handed trade—

policy objective of maximizing the standard of living of the whole nation. In

fact, though, under the imperfectly competitive conditions described,

attaining the neo—mercantilist objective is an important part of attaining



    1lncreasingly, as governments own some or all of a firm's equity, they
are closer to being just another player.
                                     34


the traditional national—welfare objective. Global super—normal profits are a

given. Nations compete over their international distribution. The larger

the share that our policy can claim for us, the larger is our national pur-

chasing power and economic welf are.1 Given the imperfectly competitive global

market structure, no nation need lose absolutely from us claiming a larger

share of its rents. Other nations lose only the opportunity to enjoy a larger

windfall share for themselves. Nor is any nation necesarily exploited by
                                         2
policy as opposed to market structure.       Nor are we necessarily exploitative

to want as large a share for ourselves as possible. That is simply the logi-

cal implication of caring about national welfare. And its defensive version

is even more unobjectionable. We would not sensibly choose as a nation to

encourage foreign oligopolists to collect super—normal profits from us.

    Trade policy (e.g., an export subsidy) is arguably appropriate to attain

these objectives, given the oligopolistic structure; domestic policy (e.g. an

R & D subsidy) may be less appropriate, involving unwanted second—best by-

products. The reason is Brander's and Spender's recognition that transport

costs and cultural differences separate national markets. An optimal strate-

gic trade policy is then made up of a set of initiatives, a different ini-

tiative for each segregated market, all aimed at capturing the maximal share

of every national pool of super—normal profits. Trade policy that is not MFN

(Most—Favored—Nation) is an effective instrument for such market—by—market



    LThe gains accrue as corporate profits, of course, suggesting some
shift in internal income distribution. But such shifts are not traditionally
given any weight in calculations of the welfare effects of trade policy.

    2The imperfectly competitive market structure does expolit some nations at
the expense of others. Those with comparative advantage in oligopolistically
produced goods gain absolutely from market power. Those with comparative
disadvantage in them lose absolutely from the market distortion.
                                          35


 profit preservation. Other policies, such as production subsidies, R & D sub-

 sidies, and MFN taxes and tariffs will often be second best by comparison.

        Krugtnan (1982c), in a paper summarizing work by himself and others,

 generates a closely related possibility for strategic trade policy based on

 scale economies and market imperfections. Krugman examines international oh—

 gopolistic competition in a single industry. The industry has two dis-

 tinctive characteristics. Firms sell their products in several national

markets that are insulated from each other by transport costs and other

natural barriers. And firms enjoy economies of scale of several potential

kinds in production. Either cost curves decline as output increases, or cost

curves are flat but nevertheless shift down when larger outputs ratify

larger productive R & D spending, or when larger historical output imparts

improved productivity through learning—by—doing.

    Krugman's chief conclusion is that protection of domestic markets and

promotion of export markets can reduce per unit costs, thereby saving resour-

ces. Cost and resource savings improve the international competitive position

of our producers in all markets, not only those protected or promoted. The

potential national—welfare gains from improved competitiveness are the same as

in Brander and Spencer —— a larger share of global oligopolistic profit.1

But the mechanism for achieving these gains is different. In Krugman's work

trade policy is directly a demand—side policy, but ultimately a supply—side

policy. The size of markets facing our producers directly influences the

productivity of their resources and effort. Trade policy is likely to be


    1
     Krugniart properly refuses to draw any definitive welfare conclusions,
however. His analysis relates to a single industry only, and he observes
how complex is the analysis of simultaneous distortions to the competitive
norm ——    in
           this case oligopoly and trade policy intervention.
                                        36


more appropriate than domestic policies in this regard. It is by definition a

discriminatory policy for altering the relative shares of every market served

by both domestic and foreign firms   (including   third—country markets).

   Krugman and others demonstrate only a potential for policy in all these

circumstances, not the case for it. When information is reasonably complete,

and when insurance and financial capital markets work reasonably well, markets

will leave no scope for policy. The financial market will correctly identify

the firm with the most productive prospects in each market and underwrite its

ventures to the exclusion of its competitors; the insurance market will

underwrite any risk. And   the   most competitive firm   will   become a "natural

monpolist" in the designated market (Shaked and Sutton (1982, pp. 25 passim)),

Markets will have made sure that all scale economies are captured, leaving

none for trade policy to seize.

    However, when private information is imperfect, or when risks are very

large, or when certain externalities are present, then policy potential may be

restored. This observation is trivially true, of course, whether scale econo-

mies are present or not. Scale economies can increase the practical relevance

of these causes of market failure, however, by creating multiple market

equilibria (Helpman (1982, pp. 26 passim)). Some of the many equilibria are

preferable to others from the perspective of national welfare. But the economy

may be stuck at an inferior equilibrium if lenders and insurers are unable or

unwilling to accept the risk involved in underwriting a dramatic change in

 resource allocation, even when the expected reward is quite high.1 Good infor—



     1This observation has a long and full history in the analysis of trade
 policy. Caves (1960, pp. 161—174) gives a thorough summary. See also Meade
 (1955, Ch. XXI).
                                        37


 mation about the immediate neighborhood of a (stable) equilibrium helps keep the

 economy there; poorer information about more distant neighborhoods and

 equilibria is heavily discounted by risk aversion and institutional limits to

 the size of down—side loss that any firm can accept. Of course once again these

 observations establish no case for policy, only a potential. And it is a poten-

 tial that rests on the dubious reeds of superior government information and risk

management. When markets do badly, governments may do "badly—er."

      Many other practical and conceptual objections temper the arresting

conclusions outlined above. But it is worth noting in turning to them that the

force of the objections does not differ markedly from the force of those

that are often raised against free trade. Differentiating sensible trade

policies from nonsense is thus a complex task, better achieved by careful ana-

lysis with realistic roots in historical precedent than by sloganeering

application of ideology.

      For example, one conceptual objection to the strategic trade policies

described above is that "our" firms and projects must be distinguishable from

"theirs." This point is important because many firms are trans—nationally

owned, and many projects are joint ventures by firms with different nationali-

ties. Trade policies that redistribute profits toward some favored project or

toward some favored firm will fail to aid "us" significantly unless our resi-

dents have disporportionate stakes and shares in the favored projects and

firm. But global integration of capital markets seems to be moving the world

closer to an extreme in which profit—earners world—wide hold comparable port-

folios of investments. In this extreme, national trade policies would be

completely ineffective for capturing or preserving super—normal profits for
us.
                                      38


    A similar conceptual objection could be raised to the familiar view that

we would be better able to exploit our technological advantage if outward

technology transfer were somehow restricted. The view can be supported

analytically in an imperfectly competitive world where technology bears

a national label (Krugman (1982b), Feenstra and Judd (1981)). But in today's

world technological advantage should not too readily be seen as a national

factor of production similar to labor and capital. It is more typically a

corporate factor of production and hence "belongs" to firms rather than to

countries. National policies aimed at circumscribing the application of tech-

nology or at appropriating a larger share of its gains may not succeed (Lipsey

(1982a)). Nor do nations where technology is applied necessarily gain more

than the enhanced productivity of local resources, since monopoly profits

often become a part of repatriated corporate income.

    More practically, one can object that successful government trade policy

along strategic lines would require the same flexibility, centralization, and

managerial discretion as are found in firms. It is not clear that the U.S.

government can feasibly adopt these characteristics without sacrificing some

democratic tradition (Lawrence and Krause (1982, pp. 7—10)). In the U.S.,

government's functions are constitutionally delineated, legislatively

detailed, and judicially defended. Constitutional, legislative, and judicial

checks and balances are built into the U.S. political system precisely in

order to make U.S. government less flexible, centralized, and managerial.

Americans fear more than most that such governments can become capricious and

tyrannical. Furthermore, flexible management of policy tactics without sen-

sible long—run policy strategy may create the worst kind of whimsical dis—

ordering of investment and resource allocation (GATT (1982, p. 23)).
                                      39


    The most significant concern regarding activist trade policy along these

lines, however, is that it is rooted in a kind of aggressive, frontier—like

competition for the spoils of oligopoly or of desirable industrial structure.

Some might answer that "that's life," and we should learn to live with it in

our policy. But such policy runs all the risks of the economic di8order

described in Section 3 in the remarks on frontier justice.

    The crucial question is thus whether there are any sensible alternatives

to living with frontier justice. It is easier to describe first what seem

to be unlikely or undesirable alternatives. One is a return to hegemonic

policy leadership in the fashion of the frontier sheriff. This seems out of

the question for any government, barring a massive military realignment that

might emerge from world war. Also out of the question is an extensive (that

is, global) set of new "rules" governing trade relations. Such initiatives

are at worst unappealing, and at best premature ——   in   the same way that the

U.S. Constitution was premature before a decade's experience with the more

loosely binding, less inclusive Articles of Confederation. Finally, oft—

repeated exhortations to "more policy coordination" are only a pretender to a

solution. They beg the fundamental question of why such largesse would be in

the narrow national interest of aggressive governments. Policy coordination

is a safe haven only in the eyes of commentators without any stake in policy

aggress ion.

    Blackhurst (1981, p. 369 passim) describes one possible alternative to

living with frontier justice. He references the national benefits of a return

toward "conventions" in governmental policy initiatives. Blackhurst seems to

have in mind conventions that would at least order, but not bind, trade

policy. Governments themselves should be the constituents. Mutually agreed
                                     40

conventions protect governments from each other and also from domestic politi-

cal constituents in narrow pursuit of trade policies that serve their special

interest at the expense of other constituents.

    There are two important practical challenges in any such return toward con-

ventions. One is to avoid over—ambitious promulgation of "rules" which, when

broken, breed the unpredictability and incredulousness that disorders

resource allocation. The second is to keep the resource and time costs of

negotiation in check.

    In these lights it seems timely to consider reinforcing recent retreats

from multilateralism. Multilateralism may currently be too ambitious and too

costly to maintain. Bilateralism, trilateralism, quadrilaterialism, and so

on, may be cheaper, more promising, and the most predictable route toward a

new multilateralism. Initially, after all, the GATT, IMF, and World Bank were

upheld by small, non—exhaustive groups of nations. In the light of another

metaphor, small neighborhood gangs may take on the obligations of turf—sharing

agreements only after a conclusive demonstration of neighborhood peace and

predictability that stems from agreement within the "exclusive club" of larger

gangs.

    What this may suggest practically is aggressive bilateral peacemaking —— the

formation of mutually advantageous coalitions with like—minded governments)

For example, the U.S. and Japan seem likely partners for a bilateral but

possibly non—MFN trade agreement that would order trade along lines that are

held closely in common. A successful U.S.—Japan trade agreement might then

encourage other trade—policy coinbattants to sue for peace. Or for example,


    1See Aho and Bayard (1983) and Vernon (1983b, pp. 40—41 passim) for more
detailed consideration. The European Community has been essentially following
this route as it expands, and in its preferential arrangements with non—member
countries. See Camps and Diebold (1983) for arguments in favor of renewed
aggressive multilateral peacemaking.
                                      41


the U.S. seems currently in a position to bargain for European trade—policy

concessions in return for a recommitment on its part to exchange—market inter-

vention. U.S. intervention, as outlined below, might purge the economic system

of large unanticipated exchange—rate variations that may be mistaken for

resource—allocational signals. The case for stable, predictable monetary policy

to avoid resource—allocational mistakes and disorder ought to apply with equal

force to stable predictable exchange—rate management.

    The general goal of any return toward convention in government policy

interchange is to re-order resource allocation, or perhaps more accurately to

allay the Imminence of disorder. Stability, credibility, and predictability

are crucial pre—requisites for both new trade policy and new exchange—rate

policy (Krueger (1981, P. 91), Grossman and Richardson (1982, pp. 20—27),

Artus (1982, pp. 10—11)). These characteristics are more than simply

motherhood principles. They entail, for example, more consistent and less

discretionary enforcement of trade law that already exists, potential bindings

of agreements made in committees negotiating non—tariff codes of conduct, and

detailed and honest forecasts not only of trade trends, but of both U.S. and

foreign trade policy over a medium—term horizon.

    Stable, credible, and transparent trade policy is able to influence trends

in resource allocation. Stable, credible, and transparent exchange rate

policy is able to influence deviations around those trends. Ideal trends

with minimal divergences are the obvious targets of policy. Trend mistakes

are costly not only for the usual reasons, because resources are continuously

less productive than they would be in the "right" place, but also because

irreversible human and physical investment is often wasted, and because

retraining and retooling costs are ultimately unavoidable. Divergence mistakes
                                      42


are costly not only because of human aversion to risk, but also because

temporary competitive imbalances can generate empty shelves and storage lots

in one location, excessive inventories in another, and resource—diverting

arbitrage that transfers goods from the latter location to the former. The

three respective costs associated with divergence mistakes are waste from

rationing, waste from excessive stockpiles,1 and waste from unnecessary trans-

portation and redistribution.

    In a peculiar way, the goals of stability, credibility, and predicability

amount to making trade and exchange—rate policy more endogenous and less

exogenous. Endogenous policy in this context simply means systematic policy.

Policy may still be quite flexible and responsive to circumstances. But it

will be governed by conventions and behavior that are stable, self—enforcing,

and readily apparent to economic decisionmakers. Exogenous policy in this

context, typical though it is in standard economic analysis, amounts to

arbitrary, unsystematic, and unpredictable policy.

    Attempts to negotiate new conventions governing international trade may

fail, even among limited groups of like—minded governments. In that event,

the U.S. is left with the alternatives of passivity and active, nationally—
                                                                        2
centered trade policy. Passivity may well be the better of two evils.




    1Stockpiles are costly both to maintain, and in a growing economy, to
build up at steady—state growth rates. Inventories can be excessive in the
sense that they waste resources on maintenance, and in the sense that they
force regular incremental additions to stockpiles that could otherwise be
consumed.

    2One well—known international economist has been known to say that Just
as with lying, active trade policy may sometimes be beneficial, but that open
trade, like honesty, is almost always the best policy. He alleges to have
been quoting Edgeworth, Paper II, p. 17.
                                      43



 But trade wars are not an inevitable consequence of active trade policy.

 there is presumably a reasonable range of policy action that resists predation
                                3
 rather than fomenting feuds.




    3William Diebold observes that at least in principle the U.S. might
find passivity the best response in some sectors and circumstances, and
activism best in others. Re then points out the new problem such
asymmetry would cause, however: allegations of inequity, and difficulties
of sterilizing one set of actions against the economic, political, and
judicial impacts of the other.
                                         44



                         B. Trade Policy as Insurance1



     It is well accepted that trade policy affects production patterns. It is

somewhat less well understood that it can affect both the volatility of

deviations around otherwise stable sectoral trends and the adjustment path

from one trend to another. Massive surges and retreats in recent trade volu-

mes and competitiveness have, however, forced increased attention to the

issues of adjustment and economic variability. Section 3 has already intro-

duced the idea that increasing integration of international markets exposes

domestic agents to larger and more frequent unanticipated shocks.

     Increasing trade according to comparative advantage induces specializa-

tion. Yet if that same   trade   induces economic volatility, then it may

heighten the need for adaptability. Adaptability is not necessarily furthered

by   specialization. For example, when production patterns .are replicated over
time,   incentives for factors to train as adaptable generalists are reduced

(Grossman and Shapiro (1982)). Internal factor mobility may decline and sec-

tor specificity may increase. Trends toward specialization may be further

self—perpetuating to the extent that each task undertaken by a nation or a

factor features learning—by—doing ——   productivity   that improves with cumula-

tive experience. This can diminish adaptability, which is a valuable attri-

bute when other means of dealing with unforeseen divergences (e.g., insurance)




       more detailed expansion of this sub—section is in Grossman and
Richardson (1982, pp. 19—26). See Baldwin (1981) for an expansion of the
notion that trade policy may be the outcome of an implicit social contract
to provide insurance.
                                        45


 are unavailable or under—supplied by market mechanisms.1

     Adaptability problems are exacerbated once policy response itself is

 endogenized. The degree of sector specificity determines the strength of

 the linkage between the reward to a factor and the fate of the industry in

 which it is located (Grossman (1981)). When dislocations do occur, such spe-

 cificity may lengthen periods of involuntary unemployment and deepen income

 losses. The incentive for specific factors to lobby for preservation of the

 status quo is clear. And successful po1ttcal preservation of the status quo

 then only leads to further investment and worker commitment, which increases

sector specificity, in a vicious circle.

    In this environment the challenge to policy is formidable. Adjustment to

unforeseen shocks will be facilitated if policy minimizes the economic

hardship to well—defined segments of the population, Sensible policy may

include temporary protection as well as subsidization of retraining and relo-

cation (Diamond (1982)). But commitment to eventual adjustment seems a

necessity, since agents will forecast future government policy when con-

templating a specialized investment. Government commitment to "preservation"

makes no private adjustment the rational and equilibrium response.2 Credible

commitment to adjustment makes it possible for anticipations of government

reaction to alter ex ante allocation decisions. Thus "sunk costs" are not

really sunk costs, as Eaton and Grossman (1981) emphasize.

    Of course trade policy may not always be the ideal insulator of an economy

from unforeseen divergences from international trends, nor the most desirable



    'This would in fact appear to be the economic rationale for national—
defense objections to full—fledged free trade.

    2Alan Deardorff has pointed out further that government commitment
to "eventual" adjustment makes waiting the rational private response.
                                        46


catalyst of adjustment from trend to trend. Por example, a less wasteful

alternative for achieving the saute goal might be a domestic loan and insurance

scheme for firms and workers, providing benefits (contingent on participation

and payment of premia) dependent on the state of competition from abroad.

Under such a program, buyers would continue to enjoy the benefits of low—

priced imports and incentives for factor reallocation would be preserved. In

order to avoid problems of moral hazard, payments could be triggered by market

conditions that lie outside the control of the decision—makers involved. In

industries where such indicators were not readily observable, trade policy

might still have a second—best role. Other alternatives to trade policy as

insurance are discussed in Section 5.

    When trade policy does function as insurance, it will impede adjustment

least if it is explicitly temporary. It should also provide no unconditional

windfall gains.1 In fact, revenue—generating protection (tariffs, surcharges,

auctioned quotas) has the potential to provide funds for underwriting desired

adjustment (e.g., retraining, retooling, and relocation, such as rewarding

workers who leave designated declining industries to accept employment in
                     2
other industries).

    The whole discussion of trade policy as insurance of course rests on the

observation that insurance markets are incomplete and capital markets are



    1There is reason to believe that productivity slippage due to resource
diversion toward lobbying and rent—seeking is far greater than the slippage
due to more familiar resource misallocation. In simulation extensions of
Magee and Brock (1981), Magee reports resource diversion resulting from trade
policy as high as 25 percent of total fdctor endowments, with only minuscule
resource misallocation.

    2See Hufbauer and Rosen (1983) for an application of this idea to U.S.
policy. Dore (1982) defends exit—adjustment incentives itt a British
setting.
                                        47

imperfect. Then international trade that causes larger unanticipated deviations

of costs, revenues, and profits may also cause larger incidence of financial

insolvency for firms that are still viable in terms of underlying trends. If

insolvency is a boon, implying only a transfer of ownership and a shaking out

of the least viable operations in the still viable firm, then there is no case

for interventionist trade policy. If insolvency is a bane, implying waste of

resources through indivisibility or immobility, then trade policy may be

defensible if it reduces the frequency or severity of unanticipated inter-

national disturbances.

    Even in the absence of discontinuous change or cataclysm such as

insolvency, trade policy may still be defended as a second—best means of

establishing insurance markets or alleviating imperfections in the

capital market. Eaton and Grossman (1981)1 demonstrate how a policy commitiuent,

to tax imports when world prices would otherwise shift donstic resources from

iniportables to exportables, and to subsidize exports in the converse case,

will meet the implicit desire of individuals to insure themselves against

losses. Furthermore, Eaton and Grossman demonstrate the superiority of a per-

manent, inflexible tariff over free trade in regimes of unanticipated shocks

to international prices.

    In these regimes, the importance of anticipating trade policy correctly is

easily seen, as discussed above. Information about trade—policy intentions

and forecasts of trade—policy actions have the same kind of economic value to

firms and individuals as information about market conditions. Anticipated

trade policy can influence economic decisions as dramatically as the realiza-

tion of the trade policy itself. Investment in equipment, worker training,



    1See also Cassing, Hiliman, and Long (1982).
                                      48


and plant expansion are all examples of decisions that can be influenced by

anticipations of trade policy. Richardson (1982b) and Eaton and Grossman

(1981) illustrate the potential for a kind of "leading adjustment" to trade

policy that has the virtue of being controlled by expected prices, costs, and

profits, all of which are flexible and able to contribute to market clearing,

and none of which seem likely to be distorted in any systematic or undesirable

way. Thus "adjustment costs" associated with transparent, forecastable trade

policy may   be   minimal.
                                        49


                      5. ALTERNATIVES TO A MORE ACTIVE
                              U.S. TRADE POLICY


    Trade policy analysis obviously becomes more realistic by incorporating

such ubiquitous distortions as imperfect competition and missing insurance

markets. But that step toward realism does not by itself necessarily make

stronger the case for active trade policy. There may still be superior poli-

cies for coping with industrial change in a competitively and temporally

distorted world.

    Alternatives to trade policy may be superior in several dimensions. They

may avoid inevitable but wasteful side—effects of trade policy. They may

require fewer resources to legislate their advent or to oversee their admi-

nistration (that, among other things, is what political feasibility implies).

They may hit desired targets with more accuracy. They may avoid setting

unfortunate precedents and perverting productive incentives. When alternative

policies have all these traits, then trade policies are simply silly and bad.

They are like Rube Goldberg contraptions compared to finely tuned machines.

When alternative policies have only some of these traits, however, then trade

policies may begin to make sense. When they have none, then trade policies

are themselves superior (first best).

    In this section of the paper, we examine some policies for industrial

change that are closely related to trade policy. The crucial question for

research and governance in coming years is whether or not they are superior to

trade policy.

   The first alternative is to rely on market forces despite their

distortions, that is, to have no active policy of any kind. Doing something

is not always better than doing nothing, even when the problems of industrial
                                          50


change are severe. When markets fail, governments may fail worse.

    Yet a case is made that market—based adjustment in the U.S. is working

less and less well, due to the large size of recent international shocks, and

due to fundamental changes in social attitudes and institutions. Labor

adjustment policies are discussed as a desirable alternative (or supplement)

to active trade policy. Adjustment policies for firms are argued to be

generally undesirable in contrast to labor adjustment policies.

    Exchange—rate stabilization is discussed as an appealing alternative to

active trade policy ——   appealing   for firms especially, and indirectly for their

workers. Firms view exchange rates, unlike other aspects of their international

competitiveness, as beyond their ability to control and possibly even to fathom.

The unanticipated component of their volatility leads to increased interven-

tionist pressure. Exchange—rate stabilization might satisfy firms as much as

trade policy. Brief reference is made to methods of stabilization, including

intervention in the foreign exchange market, which is argued to work as long as

the government's target is credible.

    Macroeconomic policy renovation, discussed in Section 2, is mentioned

briefly again as a compelling antidote to hyperactive trade policy.


           A. Market Reliance ("Our Policy is to have No Policy")



    Reliance on markets to provide adequate adjustment incentives during

industrial change is a fashionable alternative to trade policy in the U.S.

today, at least in ideology if not in practice:


         Adjustment assistance ... (does not of Itself] effectuate
         adjustment. It is U.S. policy to place primary reliance
         on market forces to facilitate adjustment in affected
         industries.
                                       51



         A better solution to the problems associated with shifts
         in competitiveness is to promote positive adjustment
         of economies by permitting market forces to operate.

                                       —— Ambassador
                                            William E. Brock,
                                                                        1.
                                            U.S. Trade Representative



    But just how effective is the °market for adjustment? Does it succeed

reasonably well or fail? Do government adjustment programs succeed better or

fail worse? Aho and Bayard (1980, pp. 367—371) provIde a useful introductIon

to these questions in the context of U.S. trade adjustment assistance for

workers. Their litany of problems with market adjustment is familiar, and

worth repeating: imperfect information, uncertainty, incomplete factor mobi-

lity, wage—price rigidities, and insufficient access to the capital market to

finance the capital investments (human as well as physical) that are the con-

comitants of adjustment. One reason that the litany is worth repeating is

that some of the entries on it are reflections of social attitudes and insti-

tutions that are not very responsive to economic policy. These attitudes and

institutions may exact a sobering economic cost if they impede the ability of

the market to administer adjustment adequately.

    Only one cautionary note needs to be added to the litany of problems.

Even with the problems, U.S. markets for adjustment have probably worked

fairly well until now in practice. Furthermore, market forces will always be

sufficient to generate acceptable adjustment if there is an adequately large



    1Opening statement to the Joint Oversight Hearing of the Senate Committee
on Finance and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs,
July 8, 1981, quoted at greater length by Gray, Pugel, and Walter (1982,
end of Chapter 3).
                                       52


margin of workers and firms, even a minority, with adequate information, con-

fidence, ambition, acceptance of risk (observe how these personal attitudes

are the counterparts to the apparently impersonal forces labelled uncertainty,

incomplete factor mobility, and wage—price rigidities), and access to the

capital market. Only the margin matters. Characteristics, histories, and

personalities of the average worker and firm do not.1

    With that note of caution in mind there are two potential dangers itt

leaving adjustment to industrial change to be achieved in the market. The

first is that the international fluctuations that will be experienced in the

1980s may be so much larger than those of recent history that they will

"overwhelm" the margin of workers and firms who adjust to market signals.

It may then be desirable for policy to mediate the adjustment to the extent

that the market cannot.

    The second potential danger is that U.S. attitudes and institutions may

change in such a way that the margin is narrowed, and even

moderate fluctuations cannot be accommodated by market adjustment.

Attitudinal and institutional sclerosis seems to be the "European

disease." (Blackhurst et al. (1977, pp. 44—52) provocatively entitle one

section "Protection and the Refusal to Adjust.") There are signs that Canada

has caught it, and that the U.S. has been exposed. In today's Congress,

there is fundamental questioning of market reliance in. U.S. international eco-

nomic transactions, with surprising support for a "negotiated" world trade

structure that would administratively constrain and channel global market



    1Dore (1982) provides some engaging profiles of the easy adjustment
undergone by firms and workers on the "margin" of adjustment to inter-
national competitive forces.
                                         53



 forces (Richardson (l982c, point (60))). And Congres8 may be faithfully repre-

 seating a shift in social attitudes and institutions that includes:      (1) a
 decline in intellectual curiosity and increasing satisfaction with 8hallow and

 indulgent education, such that uncertainty and speculation displace information

 and reasoned judgment; (ii) increasing expansion of "rights" at the expense of

 contingent privileges, positions, and property —contingent on performance ——
 such that perceived entitlement to a particular
                                                 job at a particular salary level

 in a particular cominity precludes all but a semblance of mobility- and rigidi—

fies wages, work conditions, and promotion paths; (iii) higher real interest

rates, crowding out, and credit limitations relating to wealth inequality, all

of which constrict the availability of capital—market resources for physical

investment and for human investments in retraining and
                                                         relocating.
    Each of these attitudinal and institutional shifts intensifies the

distortions that impede the market adjustment mechanism ——   imperfect   infor-

mation, uncertainty, incomplete factor mobility, wage—price rigidity, and

insufficient capital—market access. If little can be done about these shifts

in the short run, then it may be desirable to have short—run policies that

re—expand the margin of workers and firms that adjust, policies that
                                                                         implement
effective incentives to do so. It is anomalous that the social shifts so fre-

quently decried in conservative diagnoses also undermine the conservative

prescription for relief. Recourse to the market alone for adjustment may be

ineffective without complementary government adjustment programs.
                                       54



                     B. Government Adjustment Programs



    Trade—related manpower policies and capital—transformation policies are

worth consideration as alternatives to more active trade policies.1

    With respect to workers, adjustment—centered programs to replace

moribund Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) seem to have potential. TAA in the

U.S. is generally acknowledged to have been more a compensation program than

an adjustment program (Corson et al. (1979), Aho and Bayard (1981, 1982),

Richardson (1982a, 1982d)). Yet it was not devoid of adjustment stimuli. One

of the less appreciated impacts of the U.S. program on labor market adjustment

was its signalling dimension (Richardson (1982d, pp. 3—9)).   If it did nothing

else, TAA certification signalled to employers and workers that a plant or

firm was under important competitive pressure from imports. And it did this

without significantly impeding similar adjustment signals from the market

itself —— wage, employment, price, and sales trends remained roughly as they

were. Furthermore, there is an empirical suggestion that more generous TAA

compensation increa8ed the efficiency of job search, so that the first job

taken after separation seemed to be a "better match" for the worker

(Richardson (1982a, p. 350)).

    A sensible U.S. trade adjustment policy for workers in the 1980s might

nevertheless put more weight on adjustment and less on compensation than

historical TAA programs. To be considered as potential components of such a



     1General manpower and capital—formation policies are treated in conference
 papers by Wachter and by Bosworth.
                                          55


program are: extension of existing U.S. employment subsidy programs, such as

targeted job credits, to workers certified as having been permanently (not

temporarily) displaced by trade; self—financing and voluntary loan/insurance

programs for the same   kind   of worker to underwrite retraining and maybe

relocating; and conditional extensions of unemployment benefits beyond normal

for trade—displaced workers ——    conditional,   for example, on employed workers

and firms bearing some sizeable portion of the extra financial burden through

negotiated cost—sharing." In addition, a new trade adjustment program

should avoid clear shortcomings in the administration, eligibility, and

design of past TAA programs. Aho and Bayard (1980, pp. 21—28) make helpful

suggestions along these lines.

    With respect to firms in distinction from their workers, the potential

for trade—related adjustment programs seems weaker. Capital markets are

national and international; labor markets are local. Risk—taking owners of

capital are presumably better informed than workers about prospects for

international industrial change, and also about more lucrative employment of

their resources by moving to other industries. They have thus more oppor-

tunities to diversify than workers. Firms are supported (or confronted) by

financial intermediaries with imiltinational scope or contacts who are presu-

mably even better informed than the firm about international and inter—

industry   prospects. Except perhaps for gargantuan,    highly risky endeavors

with long start—up periods and economically disenfranchised future benef i—

ciaries, one can argue that financial markets assess more or less correctly

the relative productivities of alternative firms and projects. Therefore

government programs to encourage modernization and product diverisification by

trade—pressured firms probably indenture workers and managers to an institu—
                                         56


tional shell that was revealed by the market already to be comparatively

unsuccessful. (If it had been a successful firm, modernization and diver—

sification would presumably have been profitable for it without government

encouragement.) There seem to be few economic reasons for preserving institu-

tions, especially unsuccessful ones, in contrast to preserving the skills and

well—being of individuals. So it would seem more productive to allow firms to

die rather than to modernize or diversify, after which diversification does

take place, but individual—by—individual diversification by employees of the

dead firm ——   into   new skills, new responsibilities, and relatively more suc-

cessful institutional shells (firms). The upshot of this argument is of

course to cast doubt on the wisdom of all government programs aimed at the

survival of firms rather than their exit.1



                           C. Exchange—Rate Stabilization



    U.S. efforts to stabilize exchange rates can be defended as an important

alternative to active trade policy. Bergsten (1982, p. 4) suggests that

"throughout the postwar period, dollar overvaluation has been the single most

important 'leading indicator' of an outbreak of protectionist trade pressures

in the United States." He and Williamson (1982) expand on how both misalign-

ment (even undervaluation) and oscillation breed protectionist pressure.      If


the point is granted, of course, the key question is how to stabilize



         untraditional exit—adjustment program for firms has been proposed
 by Hufbauer and Rosen (1983). A trade—pressured firm's owners would be
 essentially bribed to leave their industry (although not their geographical
 region) by government purchase of capital equipment at some negotiated value.
 The source of funds for such purposes would be increased tariff revenues
 from conversion of U.S. non—tariff import barriers to tariffs.
                                               57

 exchange rates. That is addressed briefly at the end of this sub—section.

       Over long enough periods of time, pressures for trade policy are un-

 affected by exchange rates. That is because ratios of wages, profits,

 and prices ——     in one   sector relative to another and in one nation relative to

 another        respond only temporarily to exchange rates. These non—monetary

 ratios are ultimately the real measure of distributional equity and the real

 source of protectionist pressure. The monetary level of wages, profits, and

 prices   doesn't really matter much. No worker, manager, shareholder, or credi-
 tor   sees   gross inequity or need for government protection when his or her wages
 and   income rise as fast as prices, and when foreign wages, prices, and incomes

 rise at the same rate.

       But over shorter periods of time, exchange—rate fluctuations can cause real

adjustment and injury ——       in   much the same way as monetary policy does. And when

exchange rate fluctuations are recurrent, sharp, and unpredictable, they can

lead to recurrent, sharp, and undesirable shifts in income distribution and

in resources (see, for example, Artus (1982, p. 6) or Deardorff and Stern

(1982)). Unanticipated exchange—rate volatility has all the unfortunate

features of unpredictable monetary policy. Both can create hardship and send

misleading and wasteful price signals to economic decisionniakers. Thus

exchange rates are not irrelevant for trade policy even though they may be

neutral in their long—run effects. Changes in the level or even the trend of

an exchange rate may be ultimately innocuous; changes in its variance or pre—

dictability are not.

    For example, an increase in unanticipated exchange—rate
                                                                  volatility may
cause financial failure for firms that are still viable in terms of under-

lying trends, This can occur when intertemporal capital—market imperfections

set practical limits to the losses consistent with any firm's continued survival.
                                      58

Each firm views itself as having very little influence over exchange rates.
                                             think of their movement as "acts
(Corden (1980, p. 176) suggests that firms
                                                            influences on them.
of God".) Yet firms are painfully aware of exchange—rate

Depreciation and appreciation due to asset market flux cause ebbs and flows in

competitiveness, cash flow, and long—term prospects.

    Thus unanticipated exchange—rate volatility may heighten corporate, sectoral

and even collective political pressure for protection, especially quantitative
                                               shrink the variance of international
trade barriers. Quantitative trade barriers

competitiveness, as well as changing its mean.    Tariffs (more accurately ad

valorem tariffs) affect only the mean (Richardson (1983, p. 21), Aizenman (1983).

    Successful policy to stabilize exchange rates would obviously eliminate

the need for trade policy to compensate for volatility in international

competitiveness. Furthermore, exchange-rate stabilization would eliminate

 the inevitable resource waste and incentive costs that would occur from having

                                                       to solve a problem that
adopted relatively rigid, long-lived trade policies

was inherently temporary.1   Moreover, the policy apparatus necessary for the

 U.S. at least to modulate exchange rates already
                                                    exists. Resources necessary

                                            tariffs) would have to be diverted
 to administer new trade policies (except

 from other productive activities. Finally, most methods of exchange-rate

 stabilization, unlike trade policies, create few incentives for resource—

 diverting rent—seeking.2


     1See the second paragraph of this sub—section.

     2Neither this point or the previous one is necessarily true of exchange—
 rate stabilization that is carried out by exchange and capital controls.
 These instruments are more typical, of course, of developing countries, and
 not likely to be adopted in the U.S. Some proposals for reducing exchange—
 rate volatility, however, such as a uniform tax on all foreign—exchange-market
                                                       recommendations are a
 transactions and other "sand_inthe—finaflC1alWheel9
                                                  administrative cost or rent
 kind of capital control, but without significant
 creation.
                                            59

     On all these counts, stabilization of exchange rates appears to be a

 desirable alternative to new   varieties   of protection. But how exactly could

 U.S. policy stabilize exchange rates? The most general answer is that it

 would help for the Federal Reserve System to decide and then simply to

 announce that a relatively stable dollar was one of their goals in es-

 tablishing U.S. monetary policy. It might       help   further, if governments could
 agree, to have several central banks announce jointly that exchange—rate

 iolatility would influence their monetary initiatives, then to issue joint

 reports periodically on how it had.1 Finally official U.S. intervention in

 foreign exchange markets is worth reconsidering. Unsterilized intervention is

 really no more than monetary policy —— open
                                             market purchases and sales of
officialreserve assets — so that it adds nothing except credible action to

 the suggestion that stable exchange rates be one of the goals of U.S. monetary

policy. Sterilized intervention, by contrast, is an independent instrument

for influencing exchange rates, recent official research notwithstanding. It

inevitably changes the shares of donstic and foreign assets in the portfolios

of the general public, and will change relative asset prices, including

exchange rates, for the same reason that any shock to relative asset supplies
      2
does.




    'This is a much weaker proposal than Ronald MacKinnon's (most readily
accessed in two New York Times columns,
                                        January 23 and 30, 1983) but in the
same spirit.

        is curiously inconsistent (although understandably self—serving)
for the U.S. government to imply (e.g. United States (1983a, pp. 68—69))
that the U.S. asset swaps called monetary policy somehow matter whereas
the asset swaps called unsterilized U.S. foreign—exchange-marke intervention
would not.
                                        60



      Unsterilized intervention is not without its problems, however. Two

are often said to confront any regular and significant unsterilized inter—

vention. One is that official reserves are inadequate to cope with massive

cross—boundary portfolio reallocations. The second is that no matter how

large official reserves were, rational expectations of the government's inter-

vention, based on knowledge of its policy reaction behavior, would cause the

intervention to be ineffective. It is rarely observed that both of these

problems are derivative, not primary. They are themselves caused by a fun-

damentally deeper problem: the incredulousness with which the market greets

government exchange—rate targets and commitments. Suppose instead that

governments were really believed in their exchange—rate commitments, and that

they really took policy action consistent with those beliefs in order to

ratify them. Then the payments mechanism would work much as it did under the

gold standard, although not necessarily with fixed exchange rates. Massive

portfolio reallocation might indeed take place. And the government's policy

reactions would be indeed transparent to rational forecasters. But any

massive capital movements based on rational expectations would themselves sta-

bilize the exchange rate around the government's credible target. Little

actual intervention would be necessary. By contrast, if the target is incre-

dible, no amount of government intervention will succeed. The real problem is

thus the stability and credibility of government financial policy, as

discussed in Section 4 above. Stability and credibility seem to be as much

a pre—requisite for policy effectiveness as they are for personal effec—

t   iveness.
                                       61



                       D. Macroeconomic Renovation

    In this regard, mention might be made one more time of the general

renovation of macroeconomic policy discussed in Section 2. Its main

attraction to the U.S. today may not be macroeconomic at all, but rather

the deterrence of wasteful, Incongruous, and indenturing sectoral policies

that would be adopted in understandable desperation if macroeconomic perf or—

mance does not improve. among other improvements, lower real interest rates

brought about by improved future budget forecasts, would assist adjustment to

industrial change in a very natural way. Lower real interest rates would

facilitate the market's ability by itself to provide adequate adjustment,

through capital formation and transformation, and through labor retraining and

relocation.
                                         62


                                    REFERENCES


Aho, C. Michael and Thomas 0. Bayard (1980), "American Trade Adjustment
    Assistance After Five Years," The World Economy, 3 (November 1980),
    359—376.

_________ (1982), "Costs and Benefits of Trade Adjustment Assistance," forth-
    coming in Baldwin and Krueger (1984).

             (1983), "U.S. Trade Policy: Where Do We Go Prom Here?"

Aizenrnan,   Joshua
                 (1983), "On the Optimal Combination of Commercial and
    Exchange Rate Policies," Southern Economic Journal, 50 (July),
    pp. 185—194.

Artus, Jacques R. (1982), "Toward a More Orderly Exchange Rate System," paper
    given at a Wingspread Conference on Evolving International Monetary
    Arrangements, Racine, Wisconsin, July 29—31, 1982.

Balassa, Bela (1983), "The United States in the World Economy," in Christian
    Stouffaes, ed., The Political Economy of the United States, Amsterdam:
    North Holland.

Baldwin, Robert E. (1979), "Protectionist Pressures in the United States,"
    in Ryan C. Amacher, Gottfried Haberler, and Thomas 0. Willett, eds.,
    Challenges to a Liberal Economic Order, Washington: American Enterprise
    Institute.

_______________ (1981), The      Political    Econo of U.S. Import Policy,
     processed,   July.
                          "The Changing Nature of U.S. Trade Policy Since World
_________________ (1982),
     War II," processed, December, forthcoming in Baldwin and Krueger (1984).

_________________ (1983), "Trade Policies Under the Reagan Administration,"
     forthcoming in a National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report on
     Recent Issues and Initiatives in U.S. Trade Policy.

Baldwin, Robert E. and Anne 0. Krueger, eds. (1984), The Structure and
    Evolution of Recent U.S. Trade Policj, Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bergsten, C. Fred (1982), "The Dollar, The Yen and U.S. Trade," statement
    before the Subcommittee on Trade, House Ways and Means Committee,
    processed, November 30.

Bergsten, C. Fred and John Williamson (1982), "Exchange Rates and Trade
    Policy," forthcoming in Cline (1983).

Bhagwati, Jagdish N., ed. (1982), Import Competition and Response, Chicago:
    Univer8ity of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         63

 Blackhurst, Richard (1981), "The Twilight of Domestic Economic Policies,"
     The World Economy, 4 (December), pp. 357—373.

 Blackhurst, Richard; Nicolas Marian; Jan Tumlir (1977), Trade Liberalization,
     Protectionism, and Independence, GATT Studies in International Trade
     No. 5, Geneva: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, November.

 Bluestone, Barry (1983), "Economic Turbulence: Capital Mobility vs.
     Absorptive Capacity in the U.S. Economy," processed, May.

 Bradford, Cohn I., Jr. (1983), "The Newly Industrializing Countries:
     Growth and Prospects," processed, June.

 Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer (1982a), "Tariff Protection and
     Imperfect Competition," forthcoming in Kierzkowski (1983).

 _________ (1982b), "Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry,"
     presented at a November 5 National Bureau of Economic Research Program
     Meeting on Trade Policy, Technology, and Industrial Organization,
     Cambridge, Ma8sachusetts.

Branson, William H. (1977), "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange
    Rate Determination," Sozialwissenschafthiche Annalen, Band 1, pp. 69—89,
    reprinted as Reprint No. 20 by International Finance Section, Princeton
    University (June 1980).

_________ (1980), "Trends in United States International Trade and
    Investment," in Martin Feldstein, ed., The American Economy in Transition,
    Chicago. University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

_________ (1981), "OPEC Lending, LDC Growth, and U.S. Trade," National
    Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 791, November.

_________ (1983a), "Data Analysis of U.S. Capital Goods Exports," draft
    working paper, processed, May 2.

_________ (1983b),   "Industrial Adjustment in the U.S. Since World War II,"
    processed, May   26.

          (1983c), "Macro Policy for Recovery and Growth," processed, June 28.

Branson, William H.; Gene M. Grossman; and J. David Richardson (1983),
    "Strategic U.S. Trade Policy: An Outline of Early Analysis and Issues,"
    National Bureau of Economic Research, tentative Research
                                                             Progress Report,
    in process.

Branson, William H. and J. David Richardson (1982), "Openness, Industrial
    Structure, and United States Trade," proces8ed, December.

Camps, Miriam and William Diebold, Jr. (1983), TheNewMultilateraligm: Can
    the World Trading System Be Saved?, New York: Council on Foreign
    Relations.
                                           64

Carroll, Geoffrey S. (1982), "Multinational Reshuffle," Europe 231 (May/June),
    pp. 12—15.

Cassing, J. H.; A. L. Hiliman; and N. V. Long (1982), "Income Variability
    and the Social Consensus for Tariffs," processed, June.

Caves, Richard E. (1960), Trade and Economic Structure, Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Cline, William R., ed. (1983), Trade Policy in the Eighties,

Corden, W. M. (1980), "Relationships Between Macroeconomic and Industrial
    Policies," The World Economy, 3 (September), pp. 167—184.

Corson, Walter; Walter Nicholson; J. David Richardson; and Andrea Vayda
    (1979), Final Report: Survey of Trade Adjustment Assistance Recipients,
    a report to the Office of Foreign Economic Affairs, Bureau of
    International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor, from Mathematica
    Policy Research, Incorporated, December.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern (1982), "The Effects of Exchange Rate
    Changes on Domestic Prices, Trade, and Employment in the U.S., European
    Comnnity, and Japan," forthcoming in International Economic Association,
    Structural Adjustment in Trade Dependent Advanced Economies.

                                            (1983), "Current Issues in U.S. Trade
             Aervi,'enEit a March 17 meeting of the Aspen
    Institute's project Governance in a World Economy, Washington.

Diamond, Peter A. (1982), "Protection, Trade Adjustment Assistance, and
    Income Distribution," in Bhagwati (1982).

Dixit, Avinash (1980), "The Role of Investment in Entry—Deterrence," Economic
    Journal, 90 (March), pp. 95—106.

  ____________ (1983), "International Trade Policy for Oligopolistic
    Industries," Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School, Discussion Paper
    No. 48, May.

Dore, Ronald P. (1982), "Adjustment in Process: A Lancashire Town," in
    Bhagwati (1982).

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), "Expectations and Exchange—Rate Dynamics,"
    Journal of   Political   Economy, 84   (December),   pp. 1161—1176.

Eaton, C. and R. Lipsey (1980), "Exit Barriers as Entry Barriers: the
    Durability of Capital as a Barrier to Entry," Bell Journal of Economics,
    10 (Autumn), pp.

Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman (1981), "Tariffs as Insurance: Optimal
    Commercial Policy When Domestic Markets Are Incomplete," National Bureau
    of Economic Research Working Paper No. 797, November.
                                       65


Eichengreen, Barry J. (1983), "The Simple Analytics of Dumping," Harvard
    Institute for Economic Research Discussion Paper 943, March (revised).

Feenstra, Robert and Ken Judd (1982), "Tariffs, Technology Transfer,
    and Welfare," Journal of Political Economy, 90 (December), pp. 1142—1165.

Feldstein, Martin (1983), "The Dollar and Exchange Market Intervention,"
    remarks before the French Institute of International Relations,
    processed, April 27.

 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) (1982), International Trade
    1981/82, Geneva: GATT.

_________ (1983), "International Trade in 1982 and Current Prospects,"
    GATT Press Release (GATT/1333), March 4.

Gilpin, Robert (1977), "Economic Interdependence and National Security in
    Historical Perspective," in Klaus Knorr and Frank N. Trager, eds.,
    Economic Issues and National Security, Lawrence, Kansas: Regents
    Press of Kansas.

Gray, H. Peter; Thomas A. Pugel; and Ingo Walter (1982), Employment, Trade,
    and North—South Cooperation, United States Study, processed February 15.

Grossman, Gene M. (1981), "Partially Mobile Capital: A General Approach to
    Two—Sector Trade Theory," processed, May.

Grossman, Gene M. and J. David Richardson (1982), "Issues and Options for
    U.S. Trade Policy in the 1980s: Some Research Perspectives," National
    Bureau of Economic Research, Research Progress Report.

Grossman, Gene M. and Carl Shapiro (1982), "A Theory of Factor Mobility,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 90 (October), pp. 1054—1069.

Helpman, Elhanan (1982), "Increasing Returns, Imperfect Markets, and
    Trade Theory," Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion
    Paper No. 921 (October), forthcoming in Ronald W. Jones and Peter
    B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam:
    North Holland.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde and Howard Rosen (1983), "Managing Comparative
    Disadvantage," processed.

Keohane, Robert 0. (1980), "The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes
    in International Economic Regimes, 1967—1977," in Ole Holsti, Randolph
    Siverson, and Alexander George, eds., Change in the International
    System, Boulder, Colorado: Westview.

Kierzkowski, H., ed. (198?), Monopolistic Competition in International Trade,
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
                                       66


                                            and Leadership in the Inter-
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1981), "Dominance
                                                   and Free Rides,"
    national Economy: Exploitation, Public Goods,
    International Studies     t17, 25 (2),  PP. 242—254.
                                             in International Markets, London:
Kostecki, M. N., ed. (1982), state Trading
    Macmillan.
                                   Power and the Structure of International
Krasner, Stephen D. (1976), "State
    Trade," World Politics, 28 (April), pp. 317—347.
                                       Between Inflation and Trade Regimes
Krueger, Anne 0. (1981), "Interactions
                                           in William R. Cline and Sidney
    Objectives in Stabilization Programs,"
               eds.,flomicaj0 jnDeifl!i!8,
                                                                the political
Krugman, Paul R. (1982a), "Trade in Differentiated Products and
    Economy of Trade Liberalization," in Bhagwati (1982).
                                                             and the
                     "Technology Gaps, Technology Transfers,
__________ (1982b),
    Changing Character of U.S. Trade," presented at a March 4—5 National
    Bureau of Economic Research Conference on US. International Trade
    Policy, Washington.

                    "Import Protection as Export Promotion," processed, May,
 _________ (l982c),
     forthcoming in Kierzkowski (198?).
                                        Trade, and the Global Trading System,"
 Lawrence, Robert Z. (1982a), "Growth,
     Es say Number One, Appendix A, Free Trade Goals
                                                     in an Unfair World,
                                            Grant PRA—8l16455 from the
     Report on National Science Foundation
     Brookings Institution, processed, April.

                     "Trade Performance Patterns," Essay Number Two, Appendix
 __________ (1982b),               ir World, Report on National Science
     A, Free Trade Goals in an
     Foundation Grant PRA—8116455 from the Brookings Institution, proces8ed,
     April.
                    "DeindustrialiZation and U.S. International
 _________ (1982c),                                              Industrial
     Competitiveness: Domestic and International Forces in u.s.
                                              October 19 Conference on the
     Performance, 1970—1980," presented at an
     political Economy of Inflation and Unemployment, Williams College.

 Lawrence, Robert Z. and Lawrence B. Krause (1982), "Problems of Positive
     Adjustment: Do We Really Need a National Industrial Policy?",
     presented at the December American Economic Association meetings, New
     York.
                                                                   of Economic
 Lipsey, Robert E. (1982a), remarks at a March 4—5 National Bureau
     Research Conference on U.S. International Trade Policy, Washington.

                     "Recent Trends in U.S. Trade and Investment," National
  _________ (1982b),
      Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1009, October.
                                         67
  Lipsey,Robert E. and Irving B. Kravis (1982), "U.S. Owned Affiliates and
     Host—Country Exports," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper No. 1037, December.

 Macdonald; David R. (1983), "A Washington Perspective on Strategic Behavior
     and Trade Policy,' processed, March 17.

 Magee, Stephen P. and William A. Brock (1981), "A Model of
                                                            Politics, Tariffs,
     and Rent—Seeking in General Equilibrium,"
                                               processed, August.
 Meade, James E. (1955), Trade and Welfare, London: Oxford University Press.

 Piekarz, Roif, Eleanor Thomas, and Donna Jennings (1982), "International
     Comparisons of Research and Development and Government
                                                            Policies,"
     processed, presented at a September 30/October 1 American Enterprise
     Institute Conference on International Comparisons of
     and Causes of the Slowdown.                          Productivity

 Prescott, K. and M. Visscher (1976), "Sequential Location Among Firms With
     Foresight," Bell Journal of Economics, 8 (    ), pp. 379—393.
 Revey, Patricia A. (1981), "Evolution and Growth of the United States
     Foreign Exchange Market," Federal Reserve Bank of New York
                                                                Quarterly
     Review, 6 (Autumn), pp. 32—44.

Richardson, J. David (1982a), "Trade Adjustment    Assistance   Under the Trade
    Act of 1974," in Bhagwati (1982).

_________ (1982b), "Opaque and Transparent Trade Policy: Some Expectational
    Considerations," processed, February.

_________ (1982c), "Further Issues, Insights, and Options for U.S. Trade
    Policy," processed, March.

_________ (1982d), "Worker Adjustment to International Trade:      Programs and
    Prospects," forthcoming in Cline (1983).

_________ (1983), "The New Nexus Among Trade, Industrial, and
                                                              Exchange—Rate
    Policies," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    March.                                                  Paper No. 1099,


Shaked, Avner and John Sutton (1982), "Natural Oligopolies and
                                                               International
    Trade," processed, June.

Spence, A. M. (1977), "Entry, Investment, and Oligopolistic Pricing," Bell
    Journal of Economics, 8 (Autumn), pp. 534—44.

_________ (1979), "Investment Strategy and Growth in a New Market," Bell
    Journal of Economics, 10 (Spring), pp. 1—19.

Spencer, Barbara J. and James A. Brander (1982), "International R & D
    Rivalry and Industrial Strategy," forthcoming in the Review of Economic
    Studies, October 1983.
                                         68


United States (1982), Twenty—Sixth Annual Report of the President of the
    United States on the Trade Agreements Program, 1981-1982, Washington:
    Office of the United States Trade Representative, November.

                   Economic Report of the President, together with the
_________ (1983a),
    Annual Report of the   Council of   Economic Advisers, Washington:
    February.
                   Economic Indicators, Washington: Council of Economic
_________ (1983b),                                                1st
    Advisers for the Joint Economic Committee, 98th U.S. Congress,
    Session,    May.

United States Department of Commerce (1972), Survey of Current Buslns,
    52:3, Washington: March
          (1983), Survey of Current Business, 63:3, Washington:       March.

United States Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (1980), International Letter No.
    425, July 4.

United States Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service (1980),
    "Technology and Trade: Some Indicators of the State of U.S. Industrial
    Innovation," processed, April 21.

Vernon, Raymond (1977), Storm Over the Multinationals,    Cambridge,
    Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

________ (1983a), Two Hungry Giants, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
    University Press.

                    "Old Rules and New Players: GATT in the World Trading
   _______ (1983b),
     System," processed, May 11.

Vernon, Raymond and Yair Aharoni (1981), State—Owned     Enterprise   in the
    Western Economies, London: Croom Helm.
