                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TINKERING TOWARD ACCOLADES: SCHOOL GAMING
                   UNDER A PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY SYSTEM

                                            Julie Berry Cullen
                                             Randall Reback

                                          Working Paper 12286
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12286


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Julie Berry Cullen and Randall Reback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Tinkering Toward Accolades: School Gaming Under a Performance Accountability System
Julie Berry Cullen and Randall Reback
NBER Working Paper No. 12286
June 2006
JEL No. D82, H39, I28

                                             ABSTRACT

We explore the extent to which schools manipulate the composition of students in the test-taking
pool in order to maximize ratings under Texas' accountability system in the 1990s. We first derive
predictions from a static model of administrators' incentives given the structure of the ratings criteria,
and then test these predictions by comparing differential changes in exemption rates across student
subgroups within campuses and across campuses and regimes. Our analyses uncover evidence of
a moderate degree of strategic behavior, so that there is some tension between designing systems that
account for heterogeneity in student populations and that are manipulation-free.

Julie Berry Cullen
Department of Economics
Unviersity of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jbcullen@ucsd.edu

Randall Reback
Department of Economics
Barnard College
Columbia University
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6598
rr2165@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

    Advocates of elementary and secondary education reform believe that the current system

does not provide adequate checks and incentives to ensure that teachers and school

administrators maximize student learning. Increased accountability is seen as a necessary

condition for improving the quality of public schools. The two leading current reform

movements to improve accountability involve expanding the educational choices of students and

establishing performance standards. In this paper, we examine a problematic design issue

associated with the latter type of reform by analyzing behavioral responses to incentives to

exempt students from taking exams under Texas’ system during the 1990s. While the goal of

establishing standards is to improve school efficiency and student outcomes, standards are

inevitably imperfect instruments.

    Performance-based incentive systems are not new to the public sector and there is a well-

developed literature addressing the potential pitfalls.1 First, public agencies typically pursue

multiple goals, of which only some produce measurable outcomes. Since rewards are

necessarily tied to measurement, agents may divert resources toward these and away from other

valuable outcomes. This issue may be particularly problematic in the education setting where

teachers multi-task and where desirable outcomes, such as social adjustment, are often not easily

measured.

    Second, when outcomes do have empirical counterparts, the performance measures may only

be weakly correlated with progress toward program goals. For example, by teaching specifically

to the content of high-stakes exams, measured achievement may improve in the absence of




    1
      Ladd (2001) provides an overview of the theoretical issues associated with designing effective performance
standards in the school accountability context.


                                                         1
general improvements in knowledge and ability in those subject areas.2 Further, most states base

school ratings on pass rates, so that schools may achieve higher ratings by targeting instruction to

near-failing students, while not necessarily improving the performance of other students

(Reback, 2005).

    Finally, the performance measures themselves are often flawed, so that agents can improve

reported performance without making progress on actual performance. We refer to behaviors

that fall under this final potential pitfall as “gaming,” and the form of gaming that we focus on is

the exclusion of low-achieving students from the test-taking pool.3 When bureaucracies use

heterogeneous inputs, as in the education sector, there is inevitably a trade-off between designing

an accountability system that is “fair,” in terms of accounting for this heterogeneity, and

“manipulation-proof,” in terms of ensuring that measured performance represents real

accomplishment. For example, some students with pre-existing academic limitations should be

legitimately excluded from high-stakes exams, or at least given alternative treatment. On the

other hand, when an accountability system allows student exemptions from exams, schools are

then able to improve measured performance by manipulating the composition of students taking

the exams. Officials at a strategic school might classify additional students in exempt categories,

such as special education or limited English proficient, misreport students’ statuses, or

“encourage” absences primarily to improve aggregate outcomes.

    Although the potential for this dysfunctional response is well recognized, there has been

relatively limited systematic analysis of the link or its practical relevance.4 Haney (2000) and


    2
       There is mixed evidence whether improvements on the test instruments used for accountability are matched by
parallel gains on other exams (e.g., Hanushek and Raymond, 2005; Jacob, 2005; Klein et al., 2000).
     3
       Jacob and Levitt (2003) find evidence that the accountability system in place in Chicago has led to a more
direct form of gaming—cheating, likely by both students and teachers.
     4
       The most extensive previous literature on an analogous form of caseload manipulation under performance-
based incentive systems has examined “cream-skimming” of participants by local job training agencies (e.g.,
Heckman et al., 2002; Heckman et al., 1996; Anderson et al., 1993).


                                                        2
Deere and Strayer (2001a) provide descriptive evidence by documenting increases in special

education classification rates particularly for minority and low-achieving students, respectively,

following the introduction of the Texas policy. In the presence of strong secular upward trends

in special education placements,5 Deere and Strayer (2001b) present more convincing evidence

by showing a reversal in the growth in the rate at which special education students sit for

achievement exams following a recent policy change that counts scores of special education test-

takers. More recent studies use within-state and within-school control groups. For example,

Figlio and Getzler (2002) find that schools at risk of failing reclassify previously low-performing

students as disabled at higher rates following the introduction of the testing regime in Florida,6

and Figlio (2005) finds that schools also alter the test-taking pool by strategically assigning long

suspensions to low-performing students subject to disciplinary action near the test-taking

period—and in both cases the behavior is stronger for students in tested grades.7,8

    Our paper differs from prior studies in that it exploits the specific structure and evolution of

the performance targets of the Texas system to formulate more precise school-level incentives.

We begin by developing a model of the marginal benefits to administrators from exempting

students in order to increase the probability that their schools attain higher ratings. We then

conduct empirical tests of two theoretical predictions that arise from the model. First, given that

     5
       Hanushek and Raymond (2005) caution against drawing strong inferences from pre-post analyses in this
setting, and do not find any relationship between special education classification rates and the introduction of strong
state accountability policies in a state-level panel analysis that accounts for flexible time trends.
     6
       Even when controlling for time trends, Figlio and Getzler (2002) find that the introduction of high-stakes
testing led to about a 50 percent increase in the rate that students from low-income families were exempted from
test-taking due to special education classifications.
     7
       Jacob (2005) also finds evidence of strategic special education placements using a similar triple-differences
strategy that compares trends in special education classification rates for low- versus high-performing students in
low- versus high-performing schools in Chicago before and after the high-stakes testing policy.
     8
       In addition to students enrolled in tested grades being exempted, low-achieving students can be excluded by
being retained in untested grades or encouraged to drop out. Jacob (2005) reports higher retention rates in untested
grades following the implementation of the accountability system in Chicago. Haney (2000) reports a similar
finding for minorities in Texas, although Carnoy et al. (2001) show that this trend was pre-existing. The literature
linking testing standards to dropout rates has focused on the negative impact of grade retention and failure on
completion (e.g., Reardon, 1996; Kreitzer et al., 1989), rather than on the interaction with school incentives.


                                                           3
the pass rate standards apply not only to all students but separately to students within

race/ethnicity and economic disadvantage subgroups, we analyze changes in exemptions rates

among subgroups within the same schools. We predict that exemption rates should increase

most for groups whose pass rates are expected to be below the required threshold, because these

groups are most likely to constrain the school from attaining the next-highest rating. Our

findings confirm this prediction; exemption rates are inflated by up to 7 and 14 percent for

Hispanic and Black students, respectively, in years when these students are under-performing

relative to peers in the same campus. Although the requirements for separate subgroups are

meant to ensure that schools target improvement efforts toward all students, this policy also

appears to encourage targeted exemptions.

   In our second test, we use student-level test score data to explicitly compute the marginal

benefit to a school from exempting additional students between consecutive years. Using these

explicit incentives, we analyze whether changes in the level of exemptions at the same school

during consecutive years are related to changes in incentives. Strong short-run incentives to

exempt additional students are found to raise the likelihood that a school has a one-year increase

in the fraction of students classified as exempt by 11 percent. This finding for overall

exemptions appears to be driven by more aggressive special education placements and higher

absenteeism.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we provide detailed

information about the Texas accountability system. Section 3 then presents a conceptual

framework for measuring variation in schools’ incentives to exempt students that arises from the

structure of the accountability system. Sections 4 and 5 describe our empirical strategies and

results, respectively. Section 6 offers a brief set of implications and conclusions.




                                                 4
2. Texas Accountability System

2.1 Background

    The Texas accountability system originally applied only at the student level in the form of

exit exams required for graduation. School-level accountability began in 1993, with schools

classified into four rating categories based on student pass rates.9 The rating categories are: low-

performing, acceptable, recognized, and exemplary.10 The same base indicators for determining

ratings were used through 2000, after which the number of tests and grades tested were expanded

and an entirely new set of assessments were introduced in 2003.11 During our sample period, a

school’s rating depends on the fraction of students who pass Spring Texas Assessment of

Academic Skills (TAAS) achievement exams in reading, mathematics, and writing. The reading

and math exams are given in grades 3-8 and 10, while the writing exams are given only in grades

4, 8, and 10.12 For the tested grades combined, all students and four separate student subgroups

(White, Hispanic, Black, and economically disadvantaged) must demonstrate pass rates that

exceed year-specific standards for each category.13 In addition, prior year dropout rates must be

below and prior year attendance rates must be above threshold levels.

    Table 1 displays the year-specific standards for each category for the years 1993 to 1998.

There was a planned phase-in of the pass rate standards for the acceptable and recognized
    9
       Throughout, we refer to school years by the year associated with the final term, or the fiscal year. That is, we
refer to school year 1993-94 as year 1994.
     10
        Districts are also assigned one of four ratings, based on identical indicators defined at the district level.
Throughout we focus on campus-level incentives, since incentives at both levels are likely to be closely aligned and
the kinds of behaviors that could affect exemptions occur at the school level.
     11
        Detailed accountability manuals are available for each year at http://www.tea.state.tx.us/perfreport/account/.
     12
        There is little interaction between student and school incentives under the accountability system—student
performance on the high-stakes tests does not directly affect retention decisions, and graduation requirements can be
met by passing end-of-course exams or eventually passing the exit-level TAAS exam.
     13
        In the first year of this system, 1993, the subgroups were not held separately accountable. In all years,
subgroup pass rates only count when the number of students contributing scores exceeds specified minimum levels.
Economically disadvantaged students are those who are eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch or for other public
assistance.


                                                           5
categories to 50 percent by 2000 and 80 percent by 1998, respectively. Those two categories

also depend on improvement in pass rates from the previous year during the phase-in period.14

Although the thresholds have evolved, the standards for passing have remained the same.

    A school’s rating can have real consequences. The ratings are easily understood and are

made public. The rating a school attains may affect how attractive it is perceived to be, which

could affect its student population, property values, and local support for funding.15 In addition,

ratings can affect the regulatory burden placed on schools. Those placed in the lowest category

undergo an evaluation process and may be reconstituted or otherwise sanctioned, including an

allowance for students to transfer to better-performing schools inside or outside the district.

Schools with the highest rating become exempt from some regulations and requirements.

Finally, in most years there have been financial awards for schools that are either high

performing or show substantial improvement.

    The opportunity for schools to attain a higher rating by gaming this system is related to the

way the accountability subset is defined. In order to safeguard schools against the risks of

serving disadvantaged populations, there are a number of categories of students that are not

included in calculating the school’s aggregate pass rates. During our sample period, fiscal years

1993-98, there are four possible reasons why a student would not be tested at all: i) the student is

in special education with a severe enough handicap to limit the usefulness of testing, ii) the

student is limited English proficient (LEP) and the Spanish test was not offered that year, iii) the

student was absent that day, or iv) some other reason (e.g., illness, cheating). There are three

possible reasons why a tested student would not have his/her performance contribute to the
    14
        The ability to substitute a minimum amount of growth in pass rates for a minimum pass rate level could, in
theory, introduce important dynamics to schools’ incentives. However, this more lenient alternative is only
available for the acceptable category and, as Figure 3 shows, only a handful of campuses are ever unable to meet the
standards for that ratings category.
     15
        Figlio and Lucas (2004) find empirical evidence that the arbitrary distinctions made by Florida’s school
report card system are capitalized into housing values, particularly in the short run.


                                                         6
school pass rate: i) the student is tested but is in a special education program, ii) the student took

a Spanish test, or iii) the student was mobile, i.e. not in the district as of October of the school

year. Classifying additional students as special needs or LEP or “helping” them to fall into any

of these other categories could improve measured performance if these students would likely fail

their tests.

    Policymakers and practitioners understand the role that differential exemptions can play in

upsetting the validity of the ratings categories. The Texas accountability system has evolved to

address these types of concerns. Since 1999, special education and Spanish TAAS test-takers

have been included in the accountability subset, and more recently an assessment specifically

designed for disabled students has been incorporated to further increase participation. Our

analysis is based on data from the years leading up to these reforms when gaming is likely to

have been more prevalent.16

2.2 Descriptive trends

    Figure 1a presents mean school pass rates by subject and year. For all subjects, there was a

dramatic, steady increase in pass rates between 1994 and 1998.17 Furthermore, this rise in

performance occurred for all of the various accountability subgroups. For example, Figure 1b

reveals that the average White, Hispanic, Black, and economically disadvantaged pass rates on

the math exam increased from 71, 52, 41, and 50 percent to 90, 81, 73, and 79 percent,

respectively. Though the pass rate thresholds for various accountability ratings increased over

this period (see Table 1), these pass rate improvements were significant enough to cause an

upward trend in school ratings. Figure 2 displays the distribution of school ratings by year.

Since the TAAS exams are supposed to be comparable over time, on the surface, it appears that

    16
        Although it would be revealing to track gaming before and after the tightening of restrictions on exemptions,
the student-level data that underlie our analysis are not available to us for these more recent years.
     17
        The 1993 pass rates are not directly comparable since students were tested in fewer grades in that year.


                                                          7
there has been tremendous academic improvement.

    Figure 3 presents mixed evidence as to whether alterations in the test-taking pool can explain

any part of this “miracle.” After rising between 1993 and 1995, mean overall exemption rates

have since fallen. The fraction of students exempted due to special education placement

increased each year, particularly for disabled students who were able to take the test. The

fraction LEP exempt also increased rapidly in the early years, before leveling off. The slowing

in the rate of growth in each of these categories could be related to the pending inclusion of

special education and Spanish test-takers in the accountability system, which started in 1999 and

was first announced in 1996. The overall decrease is driven by pronounced declines in the

fraction exempted due to mobility status. The drop in mobility exemptions in 1997 was due to a

policy change that tightened the process for identifying a student as new to a district.18 Thus, the

overall decrease in exemptions does not dispel the idea that the accountability system, prior to

becoming more inclusive, may have led to higher rates of placement in excepted categories than

would have otherwise prevailed.



3. Conceptual Framework

3.1 Basic model

    In this section, we develop a simple model of the marginal benefits and costs of exempting

students under a pass rate threshold system. We do not model the politics and competing

objectives of agents within schools, and treat a school'
                                                       s exemption decisions as being made by a

single agent, or administrator. Another important simplification is that we treat exemption


    18
      A student’s information reported on the Spring test document was no longer required to perfectly match Fall
enrollment data for the student to be identified as having been in the district. For instance, prior to 1997, a student
would have been classified as mobile if his name was entered as Juan Garcia in the Fall and as John Garcia on the
Spring exams.


                                                           8
decisions as depending on current-year incentives, and thus ignore potential dynamic behavioral

responses. The framework generates testable predictions that motivate the empirical analyses

that we conduct. We focus our theoretical discussion exclusively on the benefits and costs that

are directly related to the accountability system, but in our empirical analyses we do control for

the important role of fiscal incentives to place students in special programs that arise from the

structure of the school finance system (Cullen, 2003).

     Though there are three separate subject exams and separate hurdle requirements for student

subgroups, start by assuming there is only one exam and that only the overall pass rate matters.

Suppose that the administrator at school j takes the current level of exemptions ( E 0j ) as given

and is deciding how many students to exempt from among the set of students who are in the

accountability pool ( N j − E 0j ). Define P̂ij to be the administrator'
                                                                       s expectation concerning the

probability that student i will pass the exam. Let Pij equal one if the student passes the exam

and zero if the student fails, so that Pij = Pˆij + ε ij with E[ε ij ] = 0 . Assume that the disturbance

terms associated with the administrator’s predictions are independent, or at least perceived to be

independent by the administrator.19 Then, the administrator’s expectation of the overall pass rate

is based on the sum of independent binomial outcomes and is approximately normally

                                                                                                               N j − E 0j
                                                                                                      1
distributed, with mean equal to the mean student pass probability, Rˆ j =                                                   Pˆij , and
                                                                                                  N j − E 0j     i =1




     19
       This assumption, Cov(ε rj , ε sj ) = 0 ∀ r , s ∈ {1, N j − E 0j }; r ≠ s , affects the specific shape of the marginal benefit
curve and facilitates the simulation of incentives in our empirical work. It is possible that the surprises to students’
pass rates are not independent, such as if students in an entire classroom are not prepared to correctly answer certain
questions. Generalizing the framework to account for correlated disturbances would lead to the same basic
predictions unless the individual error terms are correlated with each other in such a way that the distribution of the
expected overall pass rate becomes severely skewed or multi-peaked.


                                                                 9
                            N j − E 0j

                                         Pˆij (1 − Pˆij )
standard deviation σ =        i =1                          . The standard deviation of the expected pass rate is
                    j            N j − E 0j


greater when the underlying predicted probabilities for students are more uncertain (i.e. closer to

0.5) and when there are fewer test-takers.

    The distribution of the expected pass rate determines the potential benefits to reclassifying

students or otherwise exempting students from the test-taking pool. Let T equal the closest pass

rate threshold to R̂ j (either from above or below) and define Z j to be the marginal benefit

associated with attaining the higher rating. If the administrator has risk neutral preferences, the

marginal benefit of an additional exemption equals Z j times the probability that this exemption

causes the aggregate pass rate to be above T . The marginal benefit from increasing exemptions

by ∆E j = E 1j − E 0j can be written as:


        MB(∆E j ) = Z j × Φ
                                            (
                                      Rˆ j N j − E 1j − T     )           −Φ
                                                                                    (            )
                                                                               Rˆ j N j − E 0j − T
                                                                                                        ,       (1)
                                          σ j (N j − E            1
                                                                  j   )            σ j ( N j − E 0j )

where    is the cumulative standard normal density function. We refer to the term in square

brackets as the raw (i.e., non-normalized) marginal benefit.

    Both the change in the expected overall pass rate and in its standard deviation will influence

the raw marginal benefit from increased exemptions. Assuming that administrators shrink the

accountability pool by exempting students with the lowest pass probabilities, the expected pass

                                  (                     )             (        )
rate will improve so that Rˆ j N j − E 1j ≥ Rˆ j N j − E 0j . Selective new exemptions will also

typically decrease the standard deviation, which on its own has an ambiguous effect on the

probability that the overall pass rate exceeds the required threshold, depending on whether the

mean expected pass rate is above or below the threshold. Regardless, changes in the expected



                                                                          10
pass rate will generally dominate, so that additional exemptions are beneficial.

   In order to provide intuition for when incentives for additional exemptions are likely to be

greatest, it is helpful to graph the marginal benefit curve under different scenarios. Consider an

example where an administrator expects 68 percent of the accountability pool to pass this year’s

exam. Suppose the nearest pass rate threshold is 70 percent, so that the school is deemed

“recognized” if the pass rate is at least that high. If the administrator exempts an additional

(approximately) 2 percent of students in tested grades, and these students all had near zero

probabilities of passing, then the likelihood of reaching the next highest rating increases to 50

percent. Figure 4a shows the shift in the distribution of the expected pass rate, with the

associated increase in the probability of meeting the criterion represented by shaded area A.

Note that, abstracting from evolutions in the standard deviation that accompany additional

exemptions, the experiment could equivalently be carried out by hypothetically sequentially

shifting the threshold down. From this perspective, as the administrator increases exemptions

starting from the status quo, the raw marginal benefit curve would track the original pass rate

distribution curve in reverse starting from where it crosses the relevant pass rate threshold, and

the two shaded areas in the figure are identical.

   Figure 4b illustrates marginal benefit curves for a school under two pass rate regimes. In

Figure 4b, the x-axis shows the percentage point increase in the exemption rate (as a fraction of

total enrollment), starting at the status quo. These illustrations are derived from the notion

established above that the raw marginal benefit curve is closely related to the initial probability

density function for the expected overall pass rate, adjusted for changes in the standard deviation

as additional students are exempted and scaled by Z j . As shown, the marginal benefit to

exempting additional students when the initial pass rate is above the threshold (e.g., a threshold



                                                    11
of 0.66) will generally be steadily decreasing. In contrast, the marginal benefit schedule when

the initial pass rate is below the threshold, as in the case shown in Figure 4a, will at first increase

and then decrease.

   In order to determine how many students a given school would optimally choose to exempt,

the marginal benefits have to be traded off against marginal costs. We presume that marginal

costs are an increasing function of the level of exemptions, although the testable predictions that

we develop in the next section do not depend on this. Exempting additional students likely

involves short-run costs associated with reclassification, as well as long-run costs associated with

providing a different type of service to the student. Schools are discouraged from classifying

students as special education or LEP on test-day without actually assigning special services by

the threat of audit if the number exempted exceeds service caseloads. The state also threatens to

audit schools with excessively high absenteeism relative to annual attendance rates or high rates

of “other” exemptions.

   Figure 4b also depicts a representative marginal cost curve. In order to interpret the marginal

cost curve appropriately, realize that the x-axis equivalently indexes the overall number of

exemptions, with the origin set to the current exemption rate. In the example that is depicted, the

marginal benefit to additional exemptions exceeds the marginal cost regardless of whether the

threshold is high or low. The administrator will in one case want to improve the chances of

attaining the higher rating, and in the other reduce the risk of receiving the lower rating. If the

thresholds are equidistant from the mean expected pass rate across the two regimes, the

administrator will generally behave more aggressively in the high-threshold regime. Obviously,

administrators will also often have incentives to decrease exemptions, which in this framework

would occur when policy or other changes cause marginal costs to exceed marginal benefits at




                                                  12
the existing level of exemptions.

3.2 Testable predictions

   Our first empirical test uses within-school variation in whether subgroup pass rates are

expected to be above or below the closest relevant threshold. Consider the case where there are

two mutually exclusive subgroups in a campus. If one group’s expected rate is above the

threshold (group A) while the other’s is below (group B), exempting students in the former group

is associated with muted benefits. The reduction in the risk that group A falls below the

threshold translates into only a fractional reduction in the risk that the school is rated in the lower

category.

   For example, suppose a school’s rating is only influenced by the pass rates of these two

mutually exclusive subgroups. Using the notation developed above, the marginal benefit of

exempting more students in g, given that there is another group h, is:

                                   Rˆ gj ( N gj − E 1gj ) − T                Rˆ gj ( N gj − E gj0 ) − T
        MB gj (∆E gj ) = Z j × Φ                                   −Φ
                                      σ gj ( N gj − E 1gj )                    σ gj ( N gj − E gj0 )
                                                                                                                       (2)
                                   Rˆ hj ( N hj − E hj0 ) − T
                           ×Φ
                                     σ hj ( N hj − E hj0 )

The last term represents the probability that the school satisfies the pass rate requirement for the

other group. The marginal benefit to increasing exemptions for group B by a given amount will

                                               φ (k Bj )        φ (k Aj )                       Rˆ gj − T
be greater than for group A as long as:                    >                , where k gj =                  and φ is the
                                               Φ (k Bj )        Φ (k Aj )                         σ gj

standard normal probability density function. If the variances are the same, this condition always

holds whenever k Bj < k Aj , since log-concavity of the normal density and distribution implies the

hazard function ( φ (1 − Φ ) ) is everywhere increasing. We empirically test the prediction that,




                                                             13
controlling for factors related to the variance of the test score distribution and to the cost of

exempting students on the margin, there should be larger increases in exemption rates for student

groups with expected pass rates below the relevant threshold ( k Bj < 0 ) than for student groups

with expected pass rates exceeding this threshold ( k Aj > 0 ).

   Our second empirical test uses student-level data to explicitly calculate shifts in schools’

marginal benefit curves between years. Figures 4c and 4d illustrate the relationship between

changes in marginal benefits and changes in exemption levels. Figure 4c shows three different

potential marginal benefit curves for a school where the mean expected pass rate is in all cases

above the relevant threshold, and each curve is associated with a threshold of differing

stringency. These marginal benefit curves do not cross, so that one can readily determine

whether incentives have increased or decreased. In Figure 4d, where similar curves are shown

for a campus with the mean expected pass rate below the threshold values, which regime induces

the greatest increase in exemptions depends on the school’s cost function. If there are steep

marginal costs associated with higher exemption levels, then schools may increase exemptions

by less when their expected pass rate is relatively far from the required threshold.

   We structure the empirical analysis in order to test predictions that are robust to these

underlying ambiguities. First, we characterize the marginal benefit curve local to the observed

exemption level in the prior year, and then determine whether the curve shifts up or down over a

range of incremental exemptions. Assuming that marginal cost curves are fairly stable across

consecutive years, schools with local upward shifts in the marginal benefit curve should be more

likely to increase exemption rates than schools with local downward shifts. Further, the greater

is the upward shift, the greater is the likelihood of an increase in exemptions from the prior year.

Although we also estimate the relationship between changes in the level of exemptions and these



                                                  14
changes in incentives, the predictions for the continuous outcome measure are not similarly

independent of the shape of the marginal cost curve.



4. Data and empirical strategies

4.1 Data

   We combine several administrative data sets, each collected and provided by the Texas

Education Agency. These data sets include school- and student-level panel data. The school-

level data for the years 1993 through 1998 come from the Academic Excellence Indicator

System (AEIS), and are publicly available for download from the Texas Education Agency

(http://www.tea.state.tx.us/perfreport/aeis/). The AEIS data are used to determine school ratings

and include overall and student subgroup pass rates, attendance and dropout rates, and exemption

rates broken down by type of exemption and student subgroup. These data also include a wide

variety of campus demographic and financial variables. We purchased the restricted-use student-

level data from the Public Education Information Management System (PEIMS) for the same

years. These data include test scores, exemption status, and basic demographics for all students

in tested grades. Individual students can be tracked across years and campuses through student-

and campus-specific identifiers.

   The total number of schools in Texas during our sample period ranges from 6,184 in 1993 to

7,053 in 1998. We analyze the 88 percent of schools (representing 97 percent of students) that

are rated based on the standard accountability system and their own test scores. Schools that are

excluded from our analysis fall into three categories: i) campuses that are not rated because they

do not serve students in grades 1-12 (e.g., pre-kindergarten centers and special education

schools), ii) alternative education campuses that are evaluated under a different system, and iii)




                                                 15
schools that are assigned the test score performance of the school with which they have a feeder

relationship since they do not serve students in tested grades (e.g., K-2nd grade and 9th grade

centers). Although information from the early years is used in the calculation of incentives for

other years, our regression samples exclude 1993, since not all of the relevant grades were tested

in that year, and exclude 1994, to allow us to model changes in exemption rates from the prior

year.20

4.2 Comparison of subgroups within schools

   Our first empirical analysis focuses on schools in which there is heterogeneity in the

achievement of student subgroups relative to the relevant pass rate standard. As previously

shown, we would generally expect a strategic school administrator to increase exemptions by

more (or decrease exemptions by less) for groups that are predicted to perform below the

threshold. We test this proposition by investigating whether these groups exhibit greater one-

year changes in exemption rates than other groups within the same school and year.

   Since actual student performance is endogenous with respect to exemptions, we determine

overall and subgroup-specific expected pass rates by using the prior year performance of

students and adjusting for upward trends in achievement. In particular, we find the statewide

percentile associated with the lowest-scoring student in a given grade who passed during year t,

and then calculate the fraction of students in that grade in each school (and each subgroup at the

school) that scored at that percentile or better in year t–1. School administrators and teachers

likely expect an achievement distribution similar to that of the previous year’s cohort, adjusted

for upward trends in achievement.

   Given these expected pass rates, we then determine the target rating for each school by

identifying the lowest rating for which at least one relevant pass rate is expected to be below the
   20
        In 1993, only students in grades 4, 8, and 10 were tested.


                                                           16
standard required threshold. We classify a group as “under” if the subgroup contributes to the

school’s rating and its expected pass rate (on either reading or math) is below this threshold and

fails to satisfy any alternative less-binding criteria (such as required improvement).21 Subgroups

that are not classified as “under” either have expected pass rates that satisfy the requirements for

the relevant ratings category or are not held separately accountable because there are too few

students represented in the group.22

    A campus may have up to three mutually exclusive race/ethnicity subgroups: White,

Hispanic, and Black. For those campus-years with multiple subgroups and across-subgroup

variation in “under” status, we estimate the following baseline regression model:

         ∆e gjt = α jt + δ g + θ1 × Undergjt + θ 2 × d gjt −1 + θ 3 × d gjt −1 × Underdjt
                                                                                            ,                 (3)
                  + Tgjt −1   + X gjt + ε jgt

where g, j, and t denote the subgroup, school, and year, respectively. The dependent variable is

the change in the exemption rate from the prior year. Undergjt is a dummy variable equal to one

if the group’s pass rate is expected to hold the campus back from attaining the next highest

rating. To incorporate any differential incentives to exempt economically disadvantaged

students and differing degrees of overlap between this subgroup and the race/ethnicity

subgroups, we include the fraction of the subgroup that is economically disadvantaged in the

prior year ( d gjt −1 ), and an interaction between this fraction and an indicator for whether the

economically disadvantaged subgroup is predicted to be “under” ( Underdjt ). Importantly, the

specification includes campus-year fixed effects ( α jt ), so that the model identifies the effect of

    21
        We ignore writing since only rarely do subgroups fail to satisfy that requirement if the reading requirement is
met. Math is almost always the binding subject, and in only 10 percent of cases does the subgroup meet the math
requirement but fall short of the reading requirement.
     22
        Pass rates for student subgroups with either fewer than 30 students tested or fewer than 200 students tested
and less than 10 percent of all tested students do not factor into campus ratings under the Texas system. A subgroup
is predicted to fail minimum size requirements based on its status in t–1.


                                                           17
“under” status relative to other student groups in the same campus and year.

    The remaining variables included in the control set attempt to eliminate the potential for

confounding factors that may be correlated with a group’s expected status. First, groups that are

“under” will tend to have relatively low academic ability, so that there may be secular

differences in exemption patterns for this reason. Also, campuses may face differential marginal

costs of exemptions through special program placements for students from different

race/ethnicity subgroups for unrelated reasons. To address these concerns, we control for the

fraction of students in the subgroup in the prior year with math and reading test scores in various

failing ranges ( Tgjt −1 ) and subgroup fixed effects ( δ g ).23 The distribution of prior scores also

helps to control for differences in the standard deviations of the expected pass rates across

groups, as do the control variables related to the relative and absolute size of group g included in

the vector X gjt .24

    Although our baseline model controls for any shared school-wide changes in exemptions

between years, since we include controls for campus-year, we also report specifications that

allow there to be random growth that differs by subgroups within schools. In these cases, the

effect of being below the threshold is identified by subgroups that are “under” in some years and

not in others.

4.3 Relationship between changes in campus-level exemption rates and incentives

    Our second empirical test explores whether schools are more likely to increase exemptions

when the potential impact on the likelihood of attaining the relevant rating from additional


    23
       For both math and reading, we include the fraction of students in the group scoring in the following failing
ranges (i.e., scores below 70) during the prior year: below 50, 50-59, 60-64, and 65-69.
    24
       The vector X gjt includes prior year level and changes in the subgroup’s share of enrollment in tested grades
and the number of students in tested grades (measured by a five-part spline with cut-points defined by quantiles of
the size distribution). Also included is the change in the share of students economically disadvantaged.


                                                          18
exemptions increases between back-to-back years. Our approach is to first estimate the raw

marginal benefit curve associated with additional exemptions in t–1. Then, artificially holding

the set of students in the accountability subset fixed, we simulate the raw marginal benefit curve

in t by adjusting predicted pass probabilities for statewide upward trends and allowing the

accountability rules to update. This allows us to isolate exogenous variation in changes in

incentives for the same school that arises from changes in the required pass rate thresholds and

the general upward trend in student performance over time.

    We begin by describing how we estimate the raw marginal benefit curve associated with

additional exemptions in t–1. First, each student in the accountability subset in t–1 is assigned a

pass probability for each exam equal to the statewide fraction of students with the same test score

in t–2 who actually pass the exam in t–1.25 Second, we calculate the expected pass rate for all

students and each student subgroup on each exam ( R̂ gj ), as well as the standard deviation in

these rates ( σ gj ), in t–1 by aggregating the student-level pass probabilities.

    If these performance measures were independent, we could readily calculate the probability

that a school meets the relevant targets for each rating by calculating the probability each student

group exceeds the requirement for each subject and then multiplying these probabilities across

subjects and groups. However, shocks to a student’s performance may be correlated across


    25
       All of the calculations are done separately by grade. For grades 4 though 8, we group students who earned
identical scores in the prior year on the math, reading, or writing exam, depending which is the outcome of interest.
If students are missing prior year scores for certain subjects, we use prior year scores on the other subjects if
available. If all prior year scores are missing, we assign the average estimated probability of passing among
students who earned the same score in the current year. For grade 10, since students are not tested in grade 9, we
group students based on scores in grade 8 (two years earlier), and then apply the same procedures as for the other
grades. A few 10th grade students automatically count as passing the exam, because they passed the exam
previously, and we set these students’ pass probabilities equal to one. For grade 3, since this is the first grade of
testing and prior scores are never available, we assign the same pass probability to all students within a school,
based on the scores of the previous year’s cohort within that school. We use the same method for third graders as
described in the previous section: finding the statewide percentile associated with the lowest-scoring third grade
student who passed in the current year and calculating the fraction of students in each school’s third grade that
scored at that percentile or better in the prior year.


                                                          19
exams, and all students contribute to the overall pass rate as well as possibly to that of a

race/ethnicity and/or the economically disadvantaged subgroup. For tractability, we assume that

math and reading performance are independent, but assume that writing requirements will

always be satisfied if reading requirements are satisfied.26 In aggregating across groups, we use

the lowest of the following three probability measures for math and reading: (1) the product of

the probabilities that each accountable racial subgroup meets the required threshold, (2) the

product of the probabilities that the economically disadvantaged subgroup and the White

subgroup, if accountable, meet the required threshold,27 and (3) the probability that the overall

campus pass rate meets the required threshold.28 We are implicitly assuming that whenever the

most binding subset of indicators satisfies the requirements, so will the remaining indicators. For

example, if it is less likely that a school meets the required pass rate for all race/ethnicity

subgroups than for the overall student population, then we presume that the overall pass rate

exceeds this threshold in the event that the pass rates for all race/ethnicity subgroups do.

    Given this method of using individual student pass probabilities to determine the likelihood

that a school obtains a certain rating, we can easily calculate the change in this likelihood if one

additional student becomes exempted. We determine the most advantageous exemption for each

campus as that which generates the greatest increase in the probability of attaining any of the

three ratings, and identify the ratings category most relevant to the campus as the one associated

with the maximum increase. We then treat that student as exempted, determine which subgroups

continue to meet the minimum size requirements, adjust the expected pass rates and standard

deviations, re-calculate the probabilities that the school meets the relevant performance
    26
        This assumption holds very well in the data; in 95 percent of the cases in which the reading pass rate
threshold is met, the writing pass rate threshold is also met.
     27
        While nearly two-thirds of minority students are economically disadvantaged, less than one-third of White
students are. Given that there is far less overlap, it is reasonable to treat the White subgroup as distinct.
     28
        We also account for dropout and attendance rates—setting the probability of attaining any given rating to zero
if these criteria (which are based on prior year outcomes) are not satisfied.


                                                         20
standards, and use these probabilities to determine the new likelihood that the school will obtain

the rating. We repeat this process until we have traced out the raw marginal benefit to a campus

for exempting various numbers of additional students.

    We follow the same process in order to simulate the raw marginal benefit curve in the

following year, t. We start with the accountability subset in t–1 as before, and the only

differences are that we adjust the student-level predicted pass probabilities for statewide trends

and update the policy parameters.29

    Figure 5 illustrates our resulting measures of the change in incentives for an example case.

We determine whether the raw marginal benefits to exempting an additional one, two, and three

percent of students in tested grades have all either increased or decreased.30 We can also

measure the amount by which the marginal benefit curve has shifted, shown by areas a, b, and c

in the figure. Assuming that the marginal costs of exempting additional students and the

marginal benefits to attaining the next highest rating (Zj) remain relatively constant across

consecutive years, schools should be more likely to increase exemptions from the prior year

when the raw marginal benefit has shifted up in the directly relevant range, as compared to when

it has shifted down.

    The baseline regression model that we estimate is:

         y jt = β1 × 1inc
                       jt + β 2 × 1 jt
                                   ambig
                                         + λct + η ct −1 + X jt   + Tijt × δ t + u jt ,                      (4)

where j and t denote the school and year, respectively. The dependent variable is either a

dummy variable indicating whether exemptions increased or the change in the exemption rate



    29
        We assign each student a predicted pass probability for each exam in t by upgrading the pass probability used
in the prior calculations to that at the same percentile of the statewide distribution of predicted pass probabilities
(calculated in exactly the same way as for students in t–1) for students in year t.
     30
        We chose to consider exemptions up to an additional three percent since that is the increase at the 75th
percentile of the distribution of one-year changes in exemptions.


                                                          21
from the prior year.31 Our key incentive measure is a dummy variable indicating that the raw

marginal benefit curve is higher at all three levels of additional exemptions in the second year of

                   jt ). If schools behave strategically, then we expect β 1 > 0 . The specification
the comparison ( 1inc

also includes an indicator for cases where the curve shifts up at some points and down at others

( 1ambig
   jt    ), so that the reference group includes cases where the curve shifts everywhere down. To

account for the fact that the relevant ratings category varies across campuses and perhaps from

the prior year, we include dummies indicating the ratings category predicted to be relevant in the

current ( λct ) and prior year ( η ct −1 ). Because our incentive measure is based on simulated

changes in the raw marginal benefit curve, we also present results where the sample is restricted

to campus-years when the relevant ratings category (and hence Z j ) is predicted to be the same as

the prior year.

    The vector X jt includes a variety of campus-level control variables related to the size and

demographic composition of students that may affect the marginal costs of exempting students.32

The predicted overall math and reading pass rates based on the accountability subset in t–1 are

also included to allow for heterogeneity in trends in exemptions related strictly to average

performance, so that the variation across campuses in the increase in incentives comes from

more subtle variation in the distribution of test scores and heterogeneity across student

subgroups. Finally, we include year-specific tax base quintile effects to capture secular time

effects and schools’ fiscal incentives to place students in exempt categories, particularly special


    31
        We estimate both models using ordinary least squares to facilitate the inclusion of campus fixed effects in
some specifications. We have estimated the models with the binary variable as the dependent variable that do not
include campus fixed effects using a Probit specification as well. The estimated marginal effects evaluated at the
mean are nearly identical to the point estimates that we report for our key variables from the linear model.
     32
        We control for the prior year level and change in the following variables: the fraction of students who are in
one of the tested grades, the grade and race/ethnicity distribution of students across tested grades, and a five-part
spline measuring the number of students in tested grades at the school.


                                                          22
and bilingual education, that arise from the structure of the school finance system (Cullen, 2003).

   In addition to estimating equation (4), we also present results from models that add campus

fixed effects to allow for campus-specific random growth in exemptions. This model identifies

strategic responses from differential behavior on the part of campuses across years when

incentives have increased and years when they have decreased. Finally, we also estimate a

variation that adds an interaction between the indicator for an increase in incentives and the

magnitude of the increase, to test whether campuses are more likely to react when there is a

greater upward shift in the marginal benefit curve.



5. Results

   In this section, we present the empirical results for our two tests. The first test explores

whether campuses broadly target exemptions to subgroups for which exemptions are most

advantageous from the perspective of attaining or maintaining a higher rating. The second test

considers strategic behavior at a finer level—whether campuses respond to short-run increases in

incentives to exempt more students that are determined by expected positioning relative to the

phased-in pass rate targets.

5.1 Comparison of subgroups within schools

   The sample for this analysis includes campus-years that have variation in the “under” status

of race/ethnicity subgroups over the period 1995 through 1998. We lose 36 percent of

observations for which either only one subgroup is held separately accountable or all are

predicted to exceed the less restrictive requirements for the most relevant rating. We exclude an

additional 5 percent of observations for campuses that have variation across years in the set of

race/ethnicity subgroups that are represented (i.e., at least 5 students in the subgroup in tested




                                                  23
grades). This leaves us with 11,026 campus-year observations, representing 59 percent of

regular education campuses in those years.33

    Table 2 presents the summary statistics for this sample. White and Hispanic subgroups are

represented at most campuses in our analysis sample, while Black subgroups are represented at

only 72 percent of campuses. The disparities in achievement shown in Figure 1b across

subgroups underlie the differences in the rates at which the various subgroups are predicted to be

holding the campus back from the next highest rating. When present, White, Hispanic, and

Black students are predicted to be “under” 24, 64, and 54 percent of the time, respectively.

Although Hispanics tend to outperform Blacks, Black subgroups are more likely to be too small

to be separately accountable. When White students are “under” they are most commonly in a

school with Hispanic and Black peers that are not necessarily out-performing them, but that are

not separately accountable. For the majority of cases where the Hispanic and Black subgroups

are classified as “under,” the White subgroup is predicted to exceed the ratings requirements.

    Table 3 presents the regression results for the independent variables of most interest from

estimating variants of equation (3). In all cases, the dependent variable is the change in the

subgroup’s exemption rate from the prior year and the control set includes campus-year fixed

effects. The findings confirm our hypothesis that campuses target exemptions toward student

subgroups when they are likely to prevent the campus from earning a higher rating. The

estimates presented in the first column suggest that membership in a subgroup that is “under”

(i.e., a subgroup whose pass rate is expected to be below the required threshold) is associated

with a statistically significant 0.6 percentage point increase in exemptions. However, there does

not appear to be a differential effect on exemptions for subgroups that have a high fraction low-


    33
      Although we analyze a restricted sample, the mean rates at which students in the three race/ethnicity
subgroups are exempted are nearly the same as in the full sample.


                                                         24
income when the low-income subgroup is predicted to be “under.” There is also evidence of a

secular trend toward relative decreases in exemptions for Hispanic and Black subgroups.34 This

underlying tendency may have been partly due to aforementioned longitudinal changes in the

feasibility of certain types of exemptions; mobility exemptions became more difficult in the

middle of the sample period and schools knew that limited English proficiency exemptions

would disappear with the introduction of Spanish exams after our sample period.

    Column 2 is a more demanding specification that adds fixed effects for subgroups by

campus. These estimates are identified from the relative changes in exemptions, as compared to

peers in the same campus, across years when the subgroup is predicted to be holding the campus

back and years when there is not an incentive to target exemptions to that subgroup.35 Here the

effect of being “under” rises to a 1.7 percentage point (or more than a five percent) increase in

exemptions that is also highly statistically significant.

    Columns 3 and 4 consider whether the effect varies by race/ethnicity subgroup, with the

second set of estimates from the specification that includes campus-subgroup fixed effects.

There is strong evidence of strategic targeting for Hispanic and Black students, but no similar

shifting to White subgroups when the subgroup is “under.” The net increases for Hispanic and

Black subgroups are 1.1 and 1.2 percentage points, respectively, in the model without campus-

subgroup fixed effects, and 2.3 and 3.9 percentage points when those are included. These

statistically significant one-year changes are equivalent to .15 and .36 standard deviations of

their respective mean exemption levels. Incentives related to subgroup performance appear to

negate schools’ underlying tendency to shift exemptions away from Hispanic and Black students

    34
        Point estimates reveal similarly-sized (although statistically insignificant) negative trends in exemption rates
for Hispanic and Black students in the sample of 355 campus-years for which there are no differential incentives to
exempt low-performing students from any particular subgroup (i.e., no student subgroup is large enough to be
separately accountable).
     35
        Approximately one-third of campuses have variation across years in the status of at least one group.


                                                           25
and towards White students over our sample period.

   The final two columns of Table 3 test for an exacerbating effect on subgroups that are

predicted to be low-performing, and that also have a high share low-income in campus-years

when the low-income group is predicted to be “under.” In these cases, exempting members of a

particular race/ethnicity group may be particularly beneficial. This prediction appears to hold,

particularly when the model includes campus-subgroup fixed effects. Consider a racial subgroup

that has 50 percent of its students in the low-income category, which is approximately the mean

rate. The estimates in column 6 imply that, compared to cases in which neither this

race/ethnicity subgroup nor the low income subgroup is “under,” when both are “under”

exemptions increase by 2.1 percentage points, an effect that is 1.25 times as large as our baseline

estimate in column 2.

   In results that are not shown, we find that the estimates are quite similar if we split the

sample into two periods: pre-1997 and post-1997. We also find that the results are robust to the

inclusion of race-year fixed effects. We also do not find any evidence of differential

responsiveness depending on whether subgroups are holding the campus back from escaping a

low rating or from attaining a high rating.

5.2 Relationship between changes in campus-level exemption rates and incentives

   The sample for this analysis is based on campuses for the years 1996 through 1998. We lose

observations from 1995 since this is the first year for which there are two years of prior data

available for calculating incentives (we require information on 8th graders in t–2), and this year

serves as the basis for determining whether incentives have increased or not in 1996. After

excluding five percent of observations where the relevant ratings category does not remain

constant as we trace out the raw marginal benefit curve for increasing exemptions by up to three




                                                 26
percentage points, 16,567 campus-year observations remain.

   Table 4 presents summary statistics for this sample. On average, 25.3 percent of students are

excluded from the accountability subset, and the majority of these students are exempt due to

special education placement. Slightly less than half of campuses increase exemptions between

years. The incentives to exempt students on the margin are also predicted to have increased from

the prior year nearly half of the time. Conditional on increasing, the mean magnitude of the

increase is 22.1 percentage points. To interpret this value, recall that we calculate the raw

marginal benefit as the change in the probability that the campus meets the requirements for the

most relevant rating associated with exempting an additional three percent of students, and that

this variable captures the change in this marginal benefit from the prior year.

   Table 5 presents ordinary least squares regression results from specifications based on

equation (4). Each cell in the table reports the estimated coefficient on an indicator for whether

incentives increased from the prior year from a separate regression. The top panel shows results

for the full sample, while the bottom panel restricts the sample to campus-years when the

relevant ratings category is predicted to remain the same as in the prior year. For the latter

sample, there is less uncertainty about whether marginal benefits including the scaling factor Z j

have increased conditional on determining that the raw marginal benefit curve has shifted up.

   The results in column 1 are based on specifications where the dependent variable is a binary

indicator signaling whether the exemption rate increased from the prior year. In the full sample,

campuses with increased incentives are 1.6 percentage points more likely to increase overall

exemptions. The effect is larger in the sample with no change in the relevant ratings category.

Here, the increase is 3.4 percentage points, or approximately seven percent of the sample mean.

These effects for overall exemptions appear to be driven by special education exemptions and



                                                 27
exemptions due to absences and other miscellaneous reasons. The specifications in column 2

control for campus fixed effects, allowing for differential growth rates across campuses.

Although the point estimates are somewhat attenuated, the loss of statistical significance is

primarily explained by loss of precision. Only slightly more than half of the campuses in our

sample experience both years with increased incentives and years with decreased incentives.

    The dependent variable in column 3 is the change in the exemption rate. While the point

estimate is not statistically significant in the full sample, increased incentives lead to a

statistically significantly 0.41 percentage point increases in overall exemptions in the restricted

sample. Again, the effect can be attributed to special education and absences, which increase by

0.23 and 0.08 percentage points respectively. Only the statistical significance of the overall

exemption rate survives the inclusion of campus fixed effects in column 4. These effects are

relatively small, ranging from 0.04 to 0.08 standard deviations of the distribution of annual

changes. Recall that the theoretical prediction for the size of the change in the level of

exemptions is not as clear as for the likelihood that exemptions increase.

    Table 6 presents results from specifications that add an interaction term between the indicator

for an increase in incentives and the magnitude of the increase to the control set. A larger

increase is associated with a greater probability of increasing exemptions between years. To

interpret the magnitude of these estimates, compare two administrators: one that has no increase

in incentives from the prior year, and one for whom the likelihood of meeting the ratings criteria

through additional exemptions has increased by 50 percentage points (one standard deviation

above the mean increase). The estimates for the full sample in columns (1a) and (1b) imply that

the overall exemption rate would be 2.8 percentage points more likely to increase at the school

where the administrator faces enhanced incentives. For the restricted sample, the predicted




                                                  28
increase in the likelihood is 5.1 percentage points (or 11 percent). The estimated responsiveness

is slightly larger for the second specification that controls for campus fixed effects.

   Table 6 also reveals that there are no statistically or economically significant relationships

between the magnitude of the change in incentives and the change in the level of exemptions.

Although exemptions are more likely to increase at all when there is a large upward shift in the

marginal benefit curve associated with incremental exemptions, relatively strong incentives

measured locally do not systematically lead to relatively large increases in exemptions.



6. Conclusions

   Given the difficulties associated with designing an accountability system that is both fair and

manipulation proof, we investigate the extent to which administrators appear to exploit loopholes

that allow for exemptions for students that are at an academic disadvantage. We first develop a

simple model of the incentives to exempt marginal students in order to secure more favorable

ratings under the system that was in place in Texas during the mid 1990s. The model generates

two testable predictions that motivate our empirical analyses. In our first empirical test, we find

that, regardless of whether incentives to exempt additional students increase or decrease from the

prior year, campuses actively preserve or increase those exemptions that are most advantageous.

This leads to a targeting of exemptions toward low-performing Hispanic and Black students. In

the second test, we find that campuses respond to short-run increases in incentives to expand

exemption rates between consecutive years by classifying more students as special needs and

encouraging absences.

   The gaming that we observe involves potential real costs—costs to the schools that expend

resources to engage in this activity, and costs due to decisions that are made based on distorted




                                                  29
measures of performance. To the extent the accountability ratings reflect arbitrary differences in

classification practices, these misleading ratings can lead to inefficiencies such as misguided

educational policy decisions, misguided enrollment decisions, and unwarranted changes in

property values. There may be unintended, real (positive or negative) effects on student

outcomes if the induced changes in classifications change the type of instruction a student

receives or the student’s label. The social welfare implications of classifying additional students

in special programs depend on the level of pre-existing distortions. Cullen (2003) finds that

financial incentives under the school finance system already likely lead to excessive

classifications, so that the accountability system exacerbates rather than corrects existing

distortions.

    Texas’ accountability program served as the blueprint for the No Child Left Behind Act of

2001 (NCLB), a federal law requiring all states to adopt standardized testing for students in

grades three to eight and to use student proficiency rates in order to rate schools. A key

difference between current state systems and the early Texas system is the presence of a

minimum participation requirement of 95 percent of students in the tested grades. Critics of this

participation requirement are concerned that schools serving high fractions of high needs

students are at a disadvantage, but sacrifices in vertical equity may be warranted if the more

comprehensive participation requirement under NCLB reduces the inefficiencies described

above.



Acknowledgements

    The authors would like to thank the Communications and Student Assessment Divisions of

the Texas Education Agency for providing the student-level longitudinal test documents data, as




                                                 30
well as the Office of Tax Policy Research and the Department of Economics at the University of

Michigan for providing funding for data acquisition. We also thank Nora Gordon and Jim Ziliak

for particularly helpful discussions.




                                              31
                                            References

Anderson, K.H., Burkhauser, R.V., Raymond, J.E., 1993. The effect of creaming on placement

   rates under the Job Training Partnership Act. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(4),

   613-624.

Carnoy, M., Loeb, S., Smith, T.L., 2001. Do higher state test scores in Texas make for better

   high school outcomes? Consortium for Policy Research in Education Research Report RR-

   047.

Cullen, J.B., 2003. The impact of fiscal incentives on student disability rates. Journal of Public

   Economics 87(7-8), 1557-1589.

Deere, D., Strayer, W., 2001a. Putting schools to the test: school accountability, incentives, and

   behavior. Private Enterprise Research Center Working Paper 114. Texas A&M University.

Deere, D., Strayer, W., 2001b. Closing the gap: school incentives and minority test scores in

   Texas. Texas A&M University mimeo.

Figlio, D.N., 2005. Testing crime and punishment. National Bureau of Economic Research

   Working Paper 11194. Cambridge, MA.

Figlio, D.N., Getzler, L.S., 2002. Accountability, ability, and disability: gaming the system.

   National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9307. Cambridge, MA.

Figlio, D.N., Lucas, M.E., 2004. “What’s in a grade? School report cards and the housing

   market. American Education Review 94(3), 591-604.

Haney, W.M., 2000. The myth of the Texas miracle in education. Education Policy Analysis

   Archives 8(41) (http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v8n41/).

Hanushek, E.A., Raymond, M.E., 2005. Does school accountability lead to improved

   performance? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(2), 297-327.




                                                 32
Heckman, J.J., Heinrich, C.J., Smith, J., 2002. The performance of performance standards.

   Journal of Human Resources 37(4), 778-811.

Heckman, J.J., Smith, J.A., Taber, C., 1996. What do bureaucrats do? The effects of performance

   standards and bureaucratic preferences on acceptance into the JTPA program, in: Libecap, G.

   (Ed.), Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Growth, Volume 7.

   Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 191-218.

Jacob, B.A. 2005. Accountability, incentives and behavior: evidence from school reform in

   Chicago. Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6), 761-796.

Jacob, B.A., Levitt, S.D., 2003. Rotten apples: an investigation of the prevalence and predictors

   of teacher cheating. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 843-877.

Klein, S.P., Hamilton, L.S., McCaffrey, D.F., Stecher, B.M., 2000. What do test scores in Texas

   tell us? Education Policy Analysis Archives 8(49) (http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v8n49/).

Kreitzer, A.E., Madaus, G.F., Haney, W.M., 1989. Competency testing and dropouts, in: Weis,

   L., Farrar, E., Petrie, H.G. (Eds.), Dropouts from School: Issues, Dilemmas, and Solutions.

   Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Ladd, H.F., 2001. School-based educational accountability systems: the promise and the pitfalls.

   National Tax Journal 54(2), 385-400.

Reardon, S., 1996. Eighth grade minimum competency testing and early high school dropout

   patterns. Presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,

   New York, NY.

Reback, R., 2005. Teaching to the rating: school accountability and the distribution of student

   achievement. Unpublished working paper.




                                                33
Tyack, D., Cuban, L., 1995. Tinkering Toward Utopia: A Century of Public School Reform.

   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




                                              34
                                      Figure 1a. Mean school TAAS pass rate by subject

                    0.9
                   0.85
                    0.8
Fraction passing




                   0.75                                                                      Writing
                    0.7                                                                      Reading

                   0.65                                                                      Mathematics

                    0.6
                   0.55
                    0.5
                      1992     1993     1994    1995      1996   1997   1998    1999
                                                      Year



                             Figure 1b. Mean school mathematics TAAS pass rate by subgroup

                    1

                   0.9

                   0.8                                                                   White
Fraction passing




                   0.7                                                                   Hispanic

                   0.6                                                                   Economically
                                                                                         disadvantaged
                   0.5                                                                   Black

                   0.4

                   0.3
                     1992     1993     1994    1995     1996     1997   1998   1999
                                                   Year
                                        Figure 2. Percent of schools receiving each rating

                 100%
                  90%
                  80%
                  70%
                                                                                                 Low-performing
                  60%
                                                                                                 Acceptable
                  50%
                                                                                                 Recognized
                  40%
                                                                                                 Exemplary
                  30%
                  20%
                  10%
                   0%
                                1994        1995          1996          1997      1998
                                                          Year



                                       Figure 3. Mean share of students exempt by category

                          0.3

                         0.25
  Fraction of students




                                                                                             Absent/other
                          0.2                                                                Mobile
                                                                                             LEP tested
                         0.15
                                                                                             LEP not tested
                                                                                             Special ed tested
                          0.1
                                                                                             Special ed not tested
                         0.05

                           0
                                1993     1994      1995          1996    1997   1998
                                                          Year

Notes: During this period special education students were exempt regardless of whether they took any of the exams,
and LEP students were exempt unless they took the English exams. The shift in the composition of LEP exemptions
toward tested students is due to the introduction of Spanish exams for grades 3-4 in 1995 and grades 3-6 in 1996.
Mobile students are students who were not enrolled in the district as of October of the school year.
                                        Figure 4a. Illustrative raw marginal benefit to increasing exemptions

                            16
                            14
                            12
                                                                               A
                            10
   Density




                                                                     B                                                       Original
                             8
                                                                                                                             Shifted
                             6
                             4
                             2
                             0
                                 0.6     0.62   0.64   0.66   0.68       0.7     0.72   0.74   0.76   0.78   0.8
                                                                     Pass rate

Notes: The standard deviation in the illustration is set equal to 0.027—which is the average in our sample for
campuses of typical size (enrollment in the range of 200 to 400 students) with simulated mean expected pass rates in
the range of .65 to .75 in 1995.


                                           Figure 4b. Illustrative comparison of incentives across regimes
    Marginal benefit/cost




                                                                                                             MB high threshold


                                                                                                             MB low threshold


                                                                                                             Marginal cost




                             0         0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
                                                Rate of additional exemptions
                                Figure 4c. Illustrative comparison of incentives across regimes
Marginal benefit/cost




                                                                                           MB high threshold

                                                                                           MB medium threshold

                                                                                           MB low threshold

                                                                                           Marginal cost




                        0   0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
                                     Rate of additional exemptions



                                Figure 4d. Illustrative comparison of incentives across regimes
Marginal benefit/cost




                                                                                           MB high threshold

                                                                                           MB medium threshold

                                                                                           MB low threshold

                                                                                           Flat marginal cost

                                                                                           Steep marginal cost




                        0   0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
                                     Rate of additional exemptions
                                 Figure 5. Illustrative increase in the "raw" marginal benefit curve
"Raw" marginal benefit




                             a
                                  b                                                        "Raw" MB curve in t
                                        c
                                                                                           "Raw" MB curve in t–1




                         0   0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
                                        Rate of additional exemptions
Table 1. Key provisions of the Texas accountability system
         Minimum TAAS Pass Rate        Maximum Dropout Rate                       Minimum Attendance Rate
            E        R         A        E         R        A                        E       R        A
1993      90.0% 65.0% 20.0%           1.0%     3.5%       N/A                     97.0% 95.0%      N/A
1994        90.0%       65.0%       25.0%       1.0%        3.5%        N/A        94.0%       94.0%        N/A
1995        90.0%       70.0%       25.0%       1.0%        3.5%        6.0%       94.0%       94.0%        N/A
1996        90.0%       70.0%       30.0%       1.0%        3.5%        6.0%       94.0%       94.0%        N/A
1997        90.0%       75.0%       35.0%       1.0%        3.5%        6.0%       94.0%       94.0%        N/A
1998        90.0%       80.0%       40.0%       1.0%        3.5%        6.0%       94.0%       94.0%        N/A
Notes: Schools are assigned one of four ratings: exemplary (E), recognized (R), acceptable (A), or low-performing.
Schools are evaluated on three performance measures: current pass rates on the Spring TAAS exams for tested
grades, dropout rates for grades 7-12 from the prior year, and the attendance rate for students in grades 1-12 from
the prior year. All students and each separate student group (White, Hispanic, Black, and economically
disadvantaged) must satisfy the test score and dropout requirements. Except for in 1993 when the requirement
applied only to all tests taken combined, the pass rates apply separately to each subject area exam (mathematics,
reading, and writing).
       The dark shading indicates that there are additional requirements (such as sustained performance or required
improvement) that mean a school could achieve the indicated standard and still not obtain the indicated rating.
       The light shading indicates that there are alternative provisions (such as required improvement and single
group waivers) that mean the minimum standards are not always binding.
Table 2. Summary statistics for analysis of race/ethnicity subgroups
                                                                    Student subgroup
Variable
                                                             White      Hispanic                           Black
Exemption rate                                               0.211       0.310                             0.272
                                                            (0.089)     (0.153)                           (0.109)
Change in exemption rate                                     -0.003      -0.003                            -0.003
                                                            (0.072)     (0.103)                           (0.104)
Subgroup’s enrollment share (for tested grades)              0.466       0.381                             0.225
                                                            (0.262)     (0.277)                           (0.208)
Number of students in tested grades in subgroup                184         163                                92
                                                              (174)       (192)                             (112)
Fraction of students low-income in subgroup                  0.309       0.683                             0.643
                                                            (0.208)     (0.213)                           (0.227)
Fraction scoring 0-49 on the math exam in the prior year     0.038       0.096                             0.144
                                                            (0.051)     (0.087)                           (0.115)
Fraction scoring 50-59 on the math exam in the prior year    0.064       0.121                             0.153
                                                            (0.056)     (0.082)                           (0.094)
Fraction scoring 60-64 on the math exam in the prior year    0.048       0.077                             0.088
                                                            (0.040)     (0.056)                           (0.064)
Fraction scoring 65-69 on the math exam in the prior year    0.068       0.096                             0.103
                                                            (0.046)     (0.059)                           (0.067)

Fraction of campus-years:
  Subgroup is represented                                                  0.957           0.948           0.724
  Subgroup’s pass rate is below the standard                               0.233           0.605           0.392
  When subgroup’s pass rate is below the standard:
   White subgroup’s pass rate is above the standard                          0             0.669           0.741
   White subgroup’s pass rate is below the standard                          1             0.093           0.055
   White subgroup is not separately accountable                              0             0.219           0.121
   Hispanic subgroup’s pass rate is above the standard                     0.030             0             0.178
   Hispanic subgroup’s pass rate is below the standard                     0.242             1             0.387
   Hispanic subgroup is not separately accountable                         0.617             0             0.366
   Black subgroup’s pass rate is above the standard                        0.003           0.015             0
   Black subgroup’s pass rate is below the standard                        0.093           0.250             1
   Black subgroup is not separately accountable                            0.565           0.402             0
Number of observations                                                    10,552          10,449           7,983
Notes: There are 11,026 campus-years from 1995-98 that have variation across subgroups in their expected
performance compared to the relevant standard. For these campus-years, at least one subgroup’s expected pass rate
is below the standard, and at least one other subgroup either is expected to exceed the standard or has too few
students to be separately accountable. Each column in the table reports statistics for the campus subgroup indicated
in the column heading. There are a total of 28,984 campus-year-subgroup observations, with the number of
observations contributed by each race/ethnicity subgroup indicated in the final row. The top panel shows the mean
(and standard deviation in parentheses) for the variable indicated by the row heading. The bottom panel shows the
fraction of campus-years represented by alternative combinations of relative performance for each subgroup.
Table 3. Ordinary least-squares regression results for analysis of race/ethnicity subgroups
                                        Dependent variable = Change in exemption rate
Independent variable
                                    (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
                                            0.006**      0.017**      -0.001        0.002       -0.001       0.006
Subgroup is “under”
                                            (0.001)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.002)     (0.006)
Subgroup is Hispanic and                                              0.012**      0.021**
                                               —            —                                     —            —
“under”                                                               (0.004)      (0.007)
                                                                      0.013**      0.037**
Subgroup is Black and “under”                  —            —                                     —            —
                                                                      (0.004)      (0.008)
Share low-income in subgroup ×              -0.003        0.018       -0.002        0.015       -0.008       0.002
low-income subgroup is “under”              (0.007)      (0.012)      (0.007)      (0.012)      (0.009)     (0.017)
Share low-income in subgroup ×                                                                   0.004       0.008
                                               —            —            —            —
subgroup is “under”                                                                             (0.007)     (0.013)
Share low-income in subgroup ×
                                                                                                0.013**     0.019*
subgroup is “under” ×                          —            —            —            —
                                                                                                (0.006)     (0.010)
low-income subgroup is “under”
                                            -0.013**                 -0.017**                  -0.015**
Subgroup is Hispanic                                        —                         —                        —
                                             (0.002)                  (0.003)                   (0.002)
                                            -0.014**                 -0.019**                  -0.016**
Subgroup is Black                                           —                         —                        —
                                             (0.003)                  (0.003)                   (0.003)
                                             0.006       -0.010        0.007       -0.008        0.005      -0.003
Share low-income in subgroup
                                            (0.009)      (0.027)      (0.009)      (0.027)      (0.010)     (0.028)
Includes campus × year fixed
                                              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
effects
Includes campus × subgroup
                                               No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
fixed effects
Notes: The sample is restricted to campus-years for which there is variation across subgroups in their expected
performance compared to the relevant standard. There are 28,984 observations defined at the level of the campus,
year, and race/ethnicity subgroup for the years 1995-1998. Each column presents the results from a separate
ordinary least-squares regression. The dependent variable in each case is the change in the exemption rate from the
prior year for the subgroup. Standard errors that are robust to unspecified correlation across observations from the
same campus are shown in parentheses. In addition to the variables shown, all specifications include the share of
students in the subgroup scoring in various failing ranges on the math and reading exams in the prior year (the
measures included for reading are for the same ranges as for the math exam), the change in the share low-income
from the prior year, the prior level and change in the subgroup’s enrollment share, and the prior level and change in
the number of students in tested grades (measured by a five-part spline with cut-points defined by quintiles of the
size distribution). All specifications also include campus-year fixed effects, and the specifications in the even
columns add campus-subgroup fixed effects.
**
   Indicates significance at the 5-percent level * Indicates significance at the 10-percent level
Table 4. Summary statistics for campus-level analysis
Variable                             Mean     Variable                                                        Mean
Dependent variables                           Student characteristics
Fraction of students exempt          0.253    Fraction Hispanic                                               0.347
                                    (0.103)                                                                  (0.316)
                                    [0.461] Fraction Black                                                    0.135
  Fraction special education exempt  0.146                                                                   (0.199)
                                    (0.058) Fraction low-income                                               0.491
                                    [0.562]                                                                  (0.269)
  Fraction LEP exempt                0.044    Fraction in tested grades                                       0.580
                                    (0.090)                                                                  (0.263)
                                    [0.274] Enrollment in tested grades (3-8,10)                               351
  Fraction mobility exempt           0.049                                                                    (269)
                                    (0.027) Predicted overall math pass rate                                  0.816
                                    [0.395]                                                                  (0.090)
  Fraction absent/other exempt       0.014    Predicted overall reading pass rate                             0.744
                                    (0.019)                                                                  (0.126)
                                    [0.402]
raw marginal benefit                          Relevant ratings category
  Increased from prior year          0.477      Acceptable                                                    0.066
  Decreased from prior year          0.398      Recognized                                                    0.667
  Ambiguous change                   0.125      Exemplary                                                     0.267
  Magnitude conditional on           0.221    District per pupil tax base wealth in                            192
  an increase                       (0.260) prior year (thousands of 1998 $)                                  (223)
Notes: The summary statistics are based on the sample of regular schools for the fiscal years 1995 through 1998
described in the text, and includes a total of 15,657 campus-year observations. (We exclude the five percent of
campus-year observations where the most relevant ratings category changes as we trace out the marginal benefits to
exempting an additional three percent of students). We show the mean for the variable indicated in the row heading,
with the standard deviation in parentheses. For the exemption variables, the fraction of campuses with increases
from the prior year is also shown in square brackets. The predicted pass rates are based on the accountability subset
in the prior year, accounting for statewide increases in pass rates between the prior and current year as described in
the text. The relevant ratings category is the one we predict to be the “nearest” from either above or below given the
predicted overall and subgroup pass rates.
Table 5. Estimated relationships between one-year changes in exemptions and incentives
                                                         Dependent variable
                                       Indicator for exemptions
                                                                     Change in exemptions
Sample and exemption type                      increased
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)

Full sample [N=15,657]

  Total exemptions                                   1.55*             1.27              0.16              0.08
                                                    (0.91)            (1.22)            (0.10)            (0.14)
  Special education exemptions                       1.52*             0.84              0.13*             0.08
                                                    (0.93)            (1.22)            (0.07)            (0.10)
  LEP exemptions                                     0.14              -0.76             -0.06             -0.10
                                                    (0.77)            (0.98)            (0.06)            (0.08)
  Student mobility exemptions                        0.02              0.14              0.01              0.04
                                                    (0.89)            (1.20)            (0.06)            (0.08)
  Absent/other exemptions                            1.48*             1.77             0.07**             0.06
                                                    (0.92)            (1.26)            (0.04)            (0.05)

No change in relevant ratings category from prior year [N=12,847]

  Total exemptions                                  3.40**            3.22**            0.41**            0.32**
                                                    (1.02)            (1.50)            (0.11)            (0.17)
  Special education exemptions                       2.00*             1.43             0.23**             0.17
                                                    (1.05)            (1.50)            (0.08)            (0.12)
  LEP exemptions                                     1.15              -0.17             0.02              0.02
                                                    (0.89)            (1.24)            (0.07)            (0.10)
  Student mobility exemptions                        0.40              0.47              0.07              0.10
                                                    (0.99)            (1.47)            (0.06)            (0.10)
  Absent/other exemptions                            1.79*             1.55             0.08**             0.04
                                                    (1.04)            (1.56)            (0.04)            (0.06)
Includes campus fixed effects                         No                Yes               No                Yes
Notes: Each cell presents the coefficient (multiplied by 100) on an indicator for an increase in incentives from the
prior year from a separate ordinary least-squares regression. The top panel shows results for the sample of regular
schools for 1995-98 described in the notes to Table 4. The bottom panel shows the results for the sub-sample with
“no change in ratings category” that excludes the 18 percent of campus-year observations where the ratings category
that is relevant for calculating incentives changes from the prior year. The rows indicate the type of exemption the
dependent variable is based on. The first two columns present results when the dependent variables are defined to
be indicators for whether the relevant exemption rate increased from the prior year. Columns 3 and 4 present results
when the dependent variables are expressed as changes in the rate from the prior year. Columns 2 and 4 also control
for campus fixed effects. Standard errors (multiplied by 100) that are robust to unspecified correlation across
observations from the same campus are shown in parentheses. All specifications include the prior level and change
in the student demographic characteristics shown in Table 4 (with enrollment in tested grades captured by a five-part
spline with cut-points defined by quintiles of the size distribution), the prior level and change in the grade
distribution of students in tested grades, predicted overall math and reading pass rates, indicators for the relevant
ratings category in the prior and current year, prior year per pupil tax base wealth quintile interacted with an
indicator for the year, and an indicator for an ambiguous change in incentives from the prior year.
**
   Indicates significance at the 5-percent level * Indicates significance at the 10-percent level
Table 6. Estimated relationships between one-year changes in exemptions and incentives
                                                        Independent variable
                                              1inc     1inc× MB       1inc      1inc× MB
Sample and dependent variable
                                              (1a)         (1b)       (2a)          (2b)

Full sample [N=15,657]

  Indicator for total exemptions increased                  0.59             4.46*           -0.74           8.94**
                                                           (1.03)           (2.37)          (1.41)           (3.14)
  Change in total exemptions                                0.11             0.21            -0.01            0.39
                                                           (0.11)           (0.19)          (0.16)           (0.27)

No change in ratings category [N=12,847]

  Indicator for total exemptions increased                  2.14*           5.93**           0.94           10.44**
                                                           (1.18)           (2.70)          (1.72)          (3.81)
  Change in total exemptions                               0.36**            0.24            0.29            0.17
                                                           (0.13)           (0.23)          (0.19)          (0.33)
Includes campus fixed effects                                        No                               Yes
Notes: The top panel shows results for the sample of regular schools for 1995-98 described in the notes to Table 4.
The bottom panel shows the results for the sub-sample with “no change in ratings category” that excludes the 18
percent of campus-year observations where the ratings category that is relevant for calculating incentives changes
from the prior year. The rows indicate whether the dependent variable is an indicator for an increase in exemptions
or the change in exemptions. Columns 1a and 1b present estimated coefficients on an indicator for an increase in
                                                                                                    inc
incentives from the prior year (1inc) and that indicator interacted with the size of the increase (1 × MB) in
specifications that include the full set of control variables describes in the notes to Table 5. Columns 2a and 2b
present the same results from specifications that add campus fixed effects as well. Standard errors that are robust to
unspecified correlation across observations from the same campus are shown in parentheses. All coefficients and
standard errors have been multiplied by 100.
**
   Indicates significance at the 5-percent level * Indicates significance at the 10-percent level
