                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            WOULD HIGHER SALARIES KEEP TEACHERS IN HIGH-POVERTY
              SCHOOLS? EVIDENCE FROM A POLICY INTERVENTION IN
                             NORTH CAROLINA

                                            Charles Clotfelter
                                            Elizabeth Glennie
                                               Helen Ladd
                                              Jacob Vigdor

                                         Working Paper 12285
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12285


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




We thank Kata Mihaly, Amber Gove and Audrey Beck for outstanding research assistance, Dale Ballou,
David Figlio, and participants at the 2005 AEFA and APPAM meetings for helpful comments on previous
versions, and the Spencer Foundation for financial support. Administrative data used in this study were
collected by the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction and made available by the North Carolina
Education Research Data Center. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Charles Clotfelter, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd and Jacob Vigdor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Would Higher Salaries Keep Teachers in High-Poverty Schools? Evidence from a Policy
Intervention in North Carolina
Charles Clotfelter, Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd and Jacob Vigdor
NBER Working Paper No. 12285
June 2006
JEL No. I2, J33, J45

                                            ABSTRACT

For a three-year time period beginning in 2001, North Carolina awarded an annual bonus of $1,800
to certified math, science and special education teachers working in high poverty or academically
failing public secondary schools. Using longitudinal data on teachers, we estimate hazard models
that identify the impact of this differential pay by comparing turnover patterns before and after the
program’s implementation, across eligible and ineligible categories of teachers, and across eligible
and barely-ineligible schools. Results suggest that this bonus payment was sufficient to reduce mean
turnover rates of the targeted teachers by 12%. Experienced teachers exhibited the strongest response
to the program. Finally, the effect of the program may have been at least partly undermined by the
state’s failure to fully educate teachers regarding the eligibility criteria. Our estimates most likely
underpredict the potential outcome of a program of permanent salary differentials operating under
complete information.

Charles T. Clotfelter                                  Helen F. Ladd
214A Terry Sanford Institute                           214A Terry Sanford Institute
Duke University                                        Duke University
Box 90245                                              Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708                                       Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                               helen.ladd@duke.edu
charles.clotfelter@duke.edu
                                                       Jacob L. Vigdor
Elizabeth Glennie                                      Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy
North Carolina Education Research Data                 Duke University
Center                                                 Box 90312
Duke University                                        Durham, NC 27708
Box 90545                                              and NBER
Durham, NC 27708-0545                                  jacob.vigdor@duke.edu
eglennie@duke.edu
       The twin topics of teacher quality and teacher compensation have garnered considerable

attention from researchers and policy-makers in recent years. This attention has been motivated

in part by the desire to increase the quality of individuals who select into the teaching profession,

and to prevent attrition from culling the most qualified individuals from the ranks of teachers

(Corcoran, Evans and Schwab 2004; Hoxby and Leigh 2004). A second motivation has been

concern about the uneven distribution of effective teachers across schools. Numerous studies

have documented the tendency for the most qualified teachers to gravitate toward schools that

serve relatively well-off children, even though salaries are often no higher in such schools

(Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff 2002; Scafidi, Sjoquist and Stinebrickner 2002; Hanushek, Kain

and Rivkin 2004; Reed, Rueben and Barbour 2006). As states and local districts feel increasing

pressure to comply with the No Child Left Behind Act’s mandate that each classroom contain a

“highly qualified” teacher, evidence on policy interventions that successfully recruit outstanding

candidates and distribute them equitably becomes more and more valuable.

       One obvious policy tool to deal with the quality and distribution of teachers would be to

increase teachers’ monetary compensation, perhaps in a targeted way. As straightforward as that

suggestion might seem, however, a large and growing body of evidence suggests that the power

of higher salaries to attract better teachers to the profession is limited (Hanushek, Kain and

Rivkin, 1999; Loeb and Page 2000), and that offering teachers pay differentials to take jobs in

low-performing schools is not a cost-effective means of improving test scores, particularly when

the pay differential consists of a one-time signing bonus rather than a permanent salary increase

(Fowler, 2003). Signing bonuses, absent other contractual provisions, may influence the

attraction of teachers to schools but offer no incentive for teachers to stay once they have arrived.



                                                  2
         Whether it is because of this evidence, the opposition of teacher unions, or just the sheer

expense, states and districts have shown little interest in ongoing financial bonuses or other

forms of salary differentials designed to attract and keep qualified teachers in low-performing

schools. This choice is somewhat surprising given the current policy interest in market-based

reforms in education; these reforms usually involve the expansion of parental choice of schools

and competition among schools. Yet the use of market incentives -- in the form of higher salaries

or bonuses for teaching in underperforming schools -- could, in theory, generate large benefits to

disadvantaged students. To be sure, the benefits of higher quality teachers come with the

obvious costs of paying more money for teaching services, and the question of whether the

benefits exceed the costs is inherently an empirical one. Moreover, the benefits of higher

teaching quality are contingent on administrators’ being able to pick the higher quality applicants

from the enlarged pool, an ability that has been questioned by recent research (Ballou and

Podgursky 1995).

         To gain insight into these questions, this paper focuses on a program implemented in

North Carolina from 2001/02 until 2003/04, which awarded annual bonuses of up to $1,800 to

certified teachers of math, science and special education in middle and high schools serving low-

income or low-performing students (henceforth, either the North Carolina Bonus Program or,

simply, the bonus program). The goal of the program was to make it easier for such schools to

attract and retain qualified teachers in these fields, by funding a permanent within-district salary

differential.1 We provide a broad overview of the program and discuss results of surveys

administered to eligible teachers and their superiors in Clotfelter et al. (2006).



1
  While the Bonus Program was intended to provide a permanent salary differential to teachers of eligible subjects in
targeted schools, in practice the program was canceled after its third year of implementation.
                                                         3
        Our analysis in this paper uses longitudinal data on North Carolina public schoolteachers

to estimate discrete-time hazard models predicting teachers’ decisions to end a spell of

employment at a particular school. Turnover rates are an important outcome to consider because

administrators often must fill vacancies in these schools with inexperienced teachers, who have

been shown to be less effective in their first years on the job than otherwise similar teachers with

more experience (Clotfelter Ladd and Vigdor 2006; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005; Rockoff

2004).2 We identify the impact of the $1,800 salary differential by incorporating data before and

after the program’s implementation, in schools that met and barely missed the eligibility criteria,

and for teachers who taught targeted subjects and other subjects. The net result is a form of

difference-in-difference analysis coupled with a regression discontinuity design. The results

suggest that the sum of $1,800 per year was sufficient to reduce turnover rates of the targeted

teachers by roughly 12%. Moreover, communication failures led many teachers to underestimate

the probability that they would receive a bonus payment if they remained at their school.

Evidence suggests that these failures reduced the program’s impact, making our result an

underestimate of the potential change that would be brought about by a truly permanent salary

differential.

        Beyond considering the impact of more money, a question of equal or greater importance

is whether the teachers influenced by such pay are the types that principals and other

administrators would most like to retain. Our tests for heterogeneity in impact reveal that the

bonus program was more effective in reducing turnover rates for teachers with ten to thirty years

of experience. As experience is one of the few observable teacher characteristics that reliably

2
  Although the ultimate test of the Bonus Program would be whether it raised student achievement, our analysis of
teacher retention rates suggests that any impacts would be too small to discern empirically except in samples
significantly larger than those at our disposal. Hence, we focus here on an intermediate outcome, one which, had the
program been maintained, might well have raised achievement further in the long run.
                                                         4
predict higher student achievement, this evidence further suggests that salary differentials may

be an effective strategy for improving the quality of education in high-poverty schools. The

bonus program also had stronger impacts on math teachers, and in middle schools rather than in

high schools.

       In section I of this paper, we provide a brief overview of the bonus program that

encapsulates information contained in Clotfelter et al. (2006). In section II, we describe the data

set we constructed for the survival analysis and the hazard function methodology. In section III,

we present our basic results, both on the average effects of the program and on how those effects

differ across various types of teachers and schools. In section IV, we analyze whether the

implementation difficulties described in section I reduced the effectiveness of the bonus

program. A brief conclusion in Section V completes the paper.



I. The Structure and Implementation of the North Carolina Bonus Program

       The North Carolina Bonus Program took effect in September 2001. The state, which

administers a centralized payroll system covering employees in each of the state’s 117 districts,

began providing an annual salary supplement of $1,800 to teachers certified in math, science,

and special education teaching those subjects in middle schools or high schools that met either of

the following criteria:

       (1) 80 percent or more of students had to be eligible for free or reduced price lunch, or

       (2) 50 percent or more of its students had to perform below grade level in both Algebra 1

       and Biology, as measured by the state’s end-of course tests.

Part-time teachers and those who taught both targeted and non-targeted subjects received a

prorated bonus amount. Uncertified teachers of math, science and special education received no

                                                 5
bonus payment. These teachers comprised roughly one-third of all teachers of these subjects

statewide and a significantly higher fraction in some schools. Over the next three years, nearly

two thousand teachers working in 148 schools in 65 districts were eligible for bonus payments in

at least one year.

        Although teachers needed to be employed in an eligible school to begin receiving the

bonus, continued receipt did not require continued school eligibility. The only requirement was

that the teacher continue to work in the same school, teaching one of the eligible subjects. This

provision was intended to eliminate both uncertainty and any perverse incentives for teachers to

keep test scores low so that the school would remain eligible.

        For reasons described more fully in Clotfelter et al. (2006), the vast majority of teachers

receiving bonus payments in the 2003/04 school year misunderstood the provisions of the bonus

program, according to responses to surveys we administered in 2004.3 The most common

misconception was that continued receipt of the bonus required that the school remain eligible.

Thus, although the program was designed to assure teachers that they would continue to receive

the bonus (if they did not change schools or subjects), many teachers did not understand this

provision. Misperceiving teachers making rational decisions to stay or leave based on the

expected stream of future bonus payments thus systematically erred, expecting payments lower

than what the enabling legislation specified.4 For teachers who inaccurately believed that their

continued receipt was linked to their school’s continuing eligibility, the expected value of future

3
  We administered surveys by mail, with telephone follow-up when necessary, to 1,165 principals and teachers in
eligible schools. The response rate was 83% for principals and 72% for teachers. More detail on the survey and our
findings can be found in Clotfelter et al. (2006).
4
  Ironically, events proved the doubters correct. Despite the program’s stated assurances, the state legislature
canceled the bonus program after the 2003/04 school year. Thus skeptical teachers may also have – correctly –
factored a lower probability of continued receipt into their calculations. The state’s decision to cancel the bonus
program was made rather abruptly in the summer of 2004. It is unlikely that the foreshadowing of this event directly
impacted the teacher decisions analyzed in this paper, as the latest moving decisions factoring into our analysis
would have occurred by Fall 2003.
                                                         6
bonus payments would be strongly linked to the criterion variable, either subsidized lunch receipt

rates or algebra and biology test failure rates, determining that eligibility. Because the criterion

variables fluctuate from year to year, a misperceiving teacher in a school with an 80.1% rate of

subsidized lunch receipt, for example, would have had a lower expected value of future bonus

payments than a similarly misperceiving teacher in a school with a 90% rate. In Section IV

below, we will use this fact to test whether misperceptions altered the impact of the bonus

program.

       Straightforward economic theory suggests that the extra pay provided through this bonus

program should increase the supply of teachers willing to work in an eligible school, and by

extension reduce the rate of departure for teachers currently employed at that school. The

magnitude of the impact is inherently an empirical question. The less elastic the labor supply

curve for teachers in disadvantaged schools, the less an effect we should expect to observe.



II. Data and Methods

       To estimate how the bonus affected the decisions of teachers about whether to remain in

particular schools, we estimated a series of hazard models. Such models predict the probability

that a teacher will depart from a school in year t+1, conditional on her being in the school in year

t. The key explanatory variable in each model is a dichotomous variable indicating whether or

not the teacher was paid a bonus in the particular year. Most of the estimated models include a

variety of teacher and school characteristics as control variables. In addition, in some models,

we interact the bonus indicator variable with selected teacher or school characteristics to test for

differences in program impacts.



                                                  7
         Our identification strategy has three basic components: we compare hazard rates (1)

before and after the implementation of the bonus program, (2) across eligible and ineligible

teachers working in the same schools, and (3) across teachers in eligible schools and in schools

that narrowly missed the eligibility criteria. Ours is thus a difference-in-difference-in-difference

strategy, with the third difference resembling a hybrid between a randomized experiment and a

regression discontinuity design. We now describe in some detail the process of designating

“treatment” and “control” schools.

         We ranked schools by averaging the criterion variables (percent of students receiving

subsidized lunch for middle schools and percent of test-takers failing Algebra I and Biology

exams for high schools) across four years, the two used to determine eligibility in the first two

years of the bonus program and the two previous years, 1998/99 through 2001/02. Because the

criterion variables fluctuate from year to year, some schools appearing in the “treatment”

category have averaged criterion variable values below the eligibility threshold. For example, a

middle school could have a long-run average subsidized lunch rate of 75%, yet exhibited a rate

of 81% in a single year, which would have triggered bonus eligibility in the subsequent year.5

Since there is not a strict threshold dividing eligible from ineligible schools using this metric,

ours is not a true regression discontinuity design. The departure is in the direction of a true

randomized experiment, however.

         To form a set of control schools, we selected a set of middle and high schools with mean

criterion variable values comparable to those of treatment schools. The results of the selection

process are summarized in Table 1. Treated middle schools had average criterion variables –


5
 Interestingly, the “treatment” schools in our analysis tend to be smaller than the “control” schools, which is to be
expected when eligibility is based on a noisy indicator. Smaller schools are more likely to have criterion variable
values that depart markedly from the mean in any particular year.
                                                           8
subsidized lunch receipt rates – that ranged from 0.633 to 0.932. Recall that 0.8 is the eligibility

threshold, based on a single years’ data point. Our selected group of control middle schools had

average criterion variables in the range from 0.725 to 0.841.6 While there is a noticeable

difference between the means of the average criterion variables in the treatment and control

samples, the distributions overlap completely. We excluded middle schools with average

criterion variables below 0.725, which is a natural break point in the distribution. We also

excluded middle schools that came into existence or ceased to exist at some point during the

sample period. Average criterion variables tended to be much lower in these excluded schools.

         Among eligible high schools, failure rates on biology and algebra test scores tend to be

quite a bit higher than the 50% eligibility threshold, particularly for biology exams. Note,

however, that there are eligible schools where the failure rate averaged over several years is

below the threshold. Selected control schools have average failure rates that generally fall close

to the eligibility threshold. Because high schools had to have failure rates in excess of 50% on

both exams to be eligible, it was possible to have very high failure rates on one exam without

attaining eligibility. Summing the average failure rates of the two exams to form a criterion

variable, each of the control high schools has a value of 83% or above.7 There is a natural break

in the distribution of criterion values just below this level. Treatment schools have criterion

variable values as low as 77%. High schools excluded from the analysis tend to have average

failure rates well below the eligibility threshold.




6
  Control group schools can have means that exceed the eligibility threshold if the criterion variable took on its
highest values in the years before the bonus program was initiated. Also, some schools included in the control group
became eligible for the bonus program in 2003/04, a year not included in our analysis. Excluding these schools
from the control group produces no significant change in the quantitative results.
7
  This information is not directly recoverable from Table 1, as the control school with the lowest biology failure rate
was not the same as the school with the lowest algebra failure rate.
                                                          9
         Finally, note that our treatment and control groups as constructed consist primarily of

high schools, even though the majority of secondary schools in the state of North Carolina were

middle schools. This likely indicates that the eligibility criteria were constructed in such a way

that made it easier for a high school to qualify than a middle school.

         Our longitudinal dataset on teacher workplace locations begins with the 1999/2000

school year, two years before the bonus program was implemented. Since the bonus program

was not passed into law until the 2001/02 school year had already started, we will consider

teacher decisions made following the first two years of our panel to be uninfluenced by the

program. The latest year for which administrative data is currently available is 2003/04. Hence

we constructed a four-year panel dataset, where the outcome of interest is whether a teacher

employed in a particular school in year t remains employed at the same school in year t+1.8

Summary statistics for the teacher/year variables included in the analysis appear in Table 2. The

teachers in our sample are roughly 65 percent female, 34 percent black, and 4 percent Hispanic

or other nonwhite. These racial proportions differ in important respects from the overall

population of secondary school teachers in North Carolina; in the excluded schools, only about

12 percent of the teacher/year observations are for black teachers.

         Within the treatment and control schools, about seven percent of the teacher/year

observations represent individuals in their first year of the profession, the median teacher has




8
  In our data, we observe multiple instances of teachers leaving a school in year t+1 and returning to the same school
in year t+2. These temporary absences most likely reflect maternity leaves or analogous situations. We treat any
departure from school, temporary or not, equivalently in our analysis. The clearest justification for adopting this
rule is our lack of knowledge regarding the ultimate outcomes of teachers who leave a school after the 2002/03
school year. Some of these teachers may return to the same schools in 2004/05, a year for which we do not
currently have data. Adopting our convention is the only way to ensure that all departures are treated consistently
regardless of the year in which they occur. When a teacher returns to work in a school, or begins work in a different
school, we consider it the beginning of a new “spell” for purposes of our hazard model.
                                                         10
between 10 and 19 years of experience, and 29 percent of the teachers in these schools had some

form of graduate degree. Roughly 9 percent of our observations correspond to teachers who

received a bonus payment in the relevant year.

         We estimate Cox proportional hazard models.9 Defining the conditional probability of

leaving a teaching position at the end of year t as λt, the Cox proportional hazard model predicts

the logarithm of the odds ratio, ln(λt/(1-λt)), as a linear function of independent variables. In the

tables below, we report the estimated coefficients as hazard ratios. Ratios above one correspond

to variables that positively covary with the probability of departure, and ratios below one

indicate variables that covary negatively with the probability of departure. Our primary goal is to

test the hypothesis that, all else held constant, teachers who receive the bonus are less likely than

other teachers to depart from their position in a particular year. Thus, the test is whether the

hazard ratio is less than one for such teachers.

         We rely on administrative payroll records to identify which teachers received the bonus

each year. In principle, the payroll records should correspond to eligibility as determined by the

requirements of the program. As described above, these requirements are that the teacher be

certified in and teaching a targeted subject at least part time in schools that currently meet the

eligibility criteria, or have been certified and teaching a targeted subject continuously in a school

since a time when it was eligible. Using information on teacher licensure, employment, and

teaching assignments, we have attempted to replicate the payroll records with limited success: 15

percent of teachers who appear to meet the eligibility criteria are not recorded as receiving the

bonus, and 25 percent of teachers receiving the bonus do not appear to meet the eligibility
9
 In principle, it would be interesting to estimate a second model analyzing whether the prospect of receiving a
bonus program encouraged teachers to take on a position in an eligible school. As discussed in Clotfelter et al.
(2006), the bonus program’s structure made it a poor tool for the recruitment of teachers. School eligibility for a
given academic year was usually not announced until that year had already started. For this reason, many school
and district administrators did not advertise the bonus program in their efforts to recruit teachers.
                                                          11
criteria. It is unclear at this time whether these discrepancies reflect errors in our coding of

eligible teachers, or errors in the administration of the program itself. Although we estimated

models using both approaches to identify who was eligible for a bonus, we report results mainly

based on the official payroll records.

       Under some circumstances, such as teaching an eligible subject part time, some teachers

received prorated bonuses. In some alternative models, we replaced the indicator for whether the

teacher received any bonus with the amount of the bonus received. Because the decision to teach

an eligible subject part time may be correlated with other unmeasured individual characteristics,

however, we relegate those results to footnotes.



III. Results



Simple difference-in-difference results

       Table 3 presents a basic hazard model controlling for three variables: a binary indicator

for whether a teacher received a bonus payment in a particular year, a second indicator for

whether the teacher was certified in one of the subjects targeted by the bonus program, and a

binary control for whether a school met the eligibility criteria for the bonus program in the year

in question. The hazard modeled in this specification, as well as later specifications, is departure

from the school of current employment after the end of the year.

       In this simple specification, indicator for bonus receipt is effectively a two-way

interaction of the other two binary indicators, implying a difference-in-difference identification

strategy. The eligible school main effect is significantly greater than one, indicating relatively

high turnover rates in those schools. This is one indication that the “control” schools in our

                                                   12
analysis were not fully comparable to the treatment schools. The individual eligibility indicator,

which applies to certified teachers in both eligible and ineligible schools, is also greater than one,

albeit not significantly. The interaction term, which compares the relative turnover of eligible

versus ineligible teachers in eligible versus ineligible schools, is statistically significantly less

than one at the 10% level. Relative to other teachers in the same schools, teachers who received

bonus payments were ten percent less likely to depart at the end of the school year.10

More refined estimates of the average program impact

         The specifications reported in Table 4 move beyond the simple partial correlations and

difference-in-difference style estimates by incorporating a growing number of additional

covariates. To begin, we introduce controls for the subject(s) taught by each teacher in each

year.11 Although coefficients associated with these controls are not included in the table, results

show significant variation across subject areas. Math, special education, and foreign language

teachers are significantly more likely to depart, while history, practical arts, and

technical/vocational teachers are significantly less likely to leave. Controlling for subject area

leads to a modest increase in the estimated impact of the bonus program: recipients are now

estimated to be 13 percent less likely to depart, other things equal. The hazard ratio is now

significantly less than one at the 5 percent level.

         In the second column of Table 4, we introduce controls for teacher gender and race.

While there is no significant difference in the departure rates of male and female teachers,

10
   Comparable difference-in-difference estimates using alternative bonus measures yield somewhat different results.
Using our proxy measure of whether a teacher should have been eligible for the bonus, rather than payroll records
indicating whether a teacher actually received a bonus, we find a hazard ratio insignificantly different from one.
Using the dollar amount of the bonus in place of a binary indicator for receipt, we find a statistically significant
pattern suggesting that teachers receiving the full $1,800 were 15% less likely to depart, while those receiving a
prorated bonus of $900 were 8% less likely to depart.
11
   Note that these variables are not mutually exclusive since teachers can teach multiple subjects in the same year.
Hazard ratios associated with these variables should be interpreted as the marginal impact of teaching a particular
subject in addition to the set of subjects one already teaches.
                                                         13
Hispanic and multiracial teachers display higher hazard rates, and Native American teachers

lower rates. Once again, these controls lead to a very modest change in the estimated impact of

the bonus program, with no change in its statistical significance.

         Controls for teacher experience and education levels, introduced in the third column,

reveal patterns consistent with many existing findings on teacher departure rates. Teachers in

their first year in the profession are 52 percent more likely to depart than those with 10 to 19

years of experience; departure rates are somewhat lower but still elevated for teachers in their

second or third years. Departure rates rise significantly once teachers reach 30 years of

experience. Teachers with graduate degrees are significantly more likely to depart schools in

this sample, perhaps because these teachers have access to a wider array of opportunities in other

schools and districts. Controlling for these factors has very little effect on our estimate of the

impact of the bonus program.

         The final specification permits hazard rates to differ for middle and high schools. A

substantial difference emerges across the two school types. The average likelihood of departing

in any year is 12 percent lower for teachers in high schools than for those in middle schools,

other things equal. Controlling for this factor reduces our estimate of the program impact

slightly, to a 12 percent reduction in the probability of departure, conditional on remaining in the

school until the year in question. This hazard ratio of 0.88, which is significantly different from

one at the five percent level, represents our best estimate of the overall mean impact of the bonus

program on the retention of eligible teachers.12

12
  Estimates employing our alternative proxy measure of teacher eligibility, rather than official records indicating
bonus receipt, continue to be statistically indistinguishable from one. Estimates using the dollar value of the bonus,
rather than a binary measure of receipt, imply that the effect of receiving the full $1,800 is a 17% reduction in the
hazard rate, while the impact of a prorated $900 reduction would be 9%. This in turn suggests a rough rule of thumb
that a $100 increase in the bonus reduces the probability of departure by approximately 1% -- not one percentage
point, but one percent.
                                                         14
Variation in program impacts

         Although the mean impact of the program is an important measure of program impact, it

is also helpful to know whether the program’s effects were selective in the sense of decreasing

the likelihood of departure more for some types of teachers than for others. We focus our

attention here on the potential differential impacts of the bonus program among teachers who

differ along easily observable dimensions, as well as differential impacts by year of

implementation and by type of school. In principle, it would also be desirable to examine

differences by teacher effectiveness. Although some studies have estimated measures of teacher

effectiveness in the form of so-called teacher fixed effects, in practice, that approach to

estimating the effectiveness of individual teachers is not feasible for this study.13

         We estimate the differential effects by interacting the various characteristics of interest

with whether the teacher received a bonus in the particular year. The results are shown in Table

5. The first specification in that table considers whether the program had a stronger impact in its

first or second year of implementation. The results suggest that the impact of bonus receipt on

the conditional probability of remaining in the school was strongest in the first year of

implementation, 2001/02. Teachers receiving the bonus in that year were 17 percent more likely

to remain in the same school in 2002/03, relative to ineligible teachers or teachers in ineligible

schools.14 Point estimates suggest an effect of roughly half the magnitude in the following year.

The estimates of the program’s impact in the second year blends the impact on teachers who

13
   In North Carolina, standardized tests in high schools are generally administered at the end of specific courses,
rather than to all students at the end of a grade. Thus, only a subset of teachers can be associated with student test
scores, and even for these teachers there is a sample selection concern, as less academically proficient students will
often not enroll in courses with a testing requirement. While more general end-of-grade tests are administered in
middle school, in most cases we lack the ability to match students to teachers. Moreover, standardized tests in math
and reading will provide little or no information regarding the quality of instruction in science and other subjects.
14
   Estimates from an alternative specification relating the amount of the bonus received to the conditional probability
of departure suggest that teachers receiving the full $1,800 bonus in the program’s first year were 25% less likely to
leave by 2002/03.
                                                          15
were receiving the bonus for the second time with newly eligible teachers. One possible

explanation for the reduced effectiveness may be that the quality of information available to

newly eligible teachers was poor relative to what teachers eligible the first year were told. It

should be noted, however, that it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the program’s

impact was the same in both years.

         We next examine how the response to the program differed among the eligible teachers

depending on the subject they teach. A clear significant pattern of selective impacts appears.

Math teachers receiving the bonus were 18 percent less likely to depart the following year when

they received the bonus.15 Point estimates suggest no response among teachers of science or

special education. This finding is particularly interesting in conjunction with the higher exit

probability for math teachers noted in Table 4. It thus appears that the bonus program was

particularly effective in lowering the hazard rates for those teachers at highest risk of departure.16

         The third column in Table 5 presents an intriguing pattern of differences in the program

impact by the experience level of the teacher. Point estimates suggest that responses to the

program were concentrated among more experienced teachers, with a statistically significant 37

percent reduction in departure rates for teachers with 10 to 19 years of experience.17 Teachers

with fewer than 10 years of experience appear to have been less influenced by the bonus

payment. It should be noted, however, that we are unable to reject the hypothesis that the

program impact was the same across all experience categories. Nonetheless, given previous

findings indicating greater classroom effectiveness of experienced teachers relative to novice
15
   Estimates from an alternative specification relating the amount of the bonus received to the conditional probability
of departure suggest that math teachers receiving the full $1,800 bonus were 24% less likely to leave.
16
   An alternative explanation is that math teachers perceived the eligibility criteria for the bonus program more
accurately, and thus considered it to be more valuable than their counterparts in other subjects.
17
   Estimates from an alternative specification relating the amount of the bonus received to the conditional probability
of departure suggest that teachers with 10 to 19 years of experience receiving the full $1,800 bonus were 43% less
likely to leave.
                                                          16
teachers (Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2005b; Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain 2005), and the greater

propensity for novice teachers to serve disadvantaged students (Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor

2005a), this pattern shows the importance of further investigation into the potential role of

monetary rewards as a tool for retaining experienced teachers in disadvantaged schools.18

         The final set of interaction results sheds light on the differential impact of the bonus

program by type of school.19 A large and statistically significant difference emerges. Middle

school teachers receiving a bonus payment were 27 percent less likely to leave at the end of the

year, while high school teachers exhibited no statistically significant response to the program.20

Once again, this result is interesting in light of the observation in Table 4 that teachers in middle

schools had significantly higher average likelihoods of departure than did teachers in high

schools.

         Taken at face value, these results suggest that the cost-effectiveness of salary differentials

could be increased by targeting them towards relatively experienced math teachers in middle

schools. The possibility remains, however, that variation in responses to the bonus program

reflected variations in teachers’ perceptions of the program’s generosity, rather than differences

in true behavioral parameters. The following section investigates the potential role of

misperceptions in undermining the bonus program’s impact.




18
   An alternative explanation for this pattern is that experienced teachers may have been more likely to understand
the eligibility criteria, either because of their greater experience with public school bureaucracy or because they
tended to teach in schools where the information flow was more reliable. Our survey evidence suggests that
experienced teachers were more likely to be aware of the program (Clotfelter et al. 2006).
19
   In additional unreported specifications, we tested for differential impacts of the bonus program by teacher race,
gender, and education level. Point estimates suggest that the program had its largest impact on white teachers,
female teachers, and teachers with masters degrees. In no case are we able to reject the null hypothesis of equal
impact across categories.
20
   Estimates from an alternative specification relating the amount of the bonus received to the conditional probability
of departure suggest that middle school teachers receiving the full $1,800 bonus were 31% less likely to leave.
                                                          17
IV. The Potential Role of Information

       Following the discussion in Section I above, we conducted additional hazard models that

introduced the bonus eligibility criterion variable – the same factor used to select control group

schools in our analysis – and interacted that variable with the teacher-level indicator of bonus

eligibility. Eligible schools with lower levels of the criterion variable were more likely to revert

to ineligible status in a subsequent year. Teachers who fully understood the structure of the

bonus program would have realized that this was of no concern to them. If all teachers had

understood the operation of the bonus program, therefore, there would be no reason to expect the

program to have been less effective at marginally eligible schools. If we consider working

conditions in a school to vary inversely with the criterion variable, then it actually would be

reasonable to expect a larger impact in marginally eligible schools. For example, suppose

working conditions in a marginally eligible school can be described as a scalar value a, and in

unambiguously eligible schools as a value b<a. Given an equal bonus amount in the two

schools, it is reasonable to think that a larger number of teachers would consider the bonus

adequate compensation for accepting conditions a rather than b.

       If, on the other hand, teachers widely misperceived the eligibility criteria, then the

program’s impact on retention rates might well be lower at marginally eligible schools. If this

were the case, estimates of the program’s impact based on schools that were markedly above the

eligibility threshold might be better indicators of what a fully comprehended bonus program

might accomplish.

       Column (1) in Table 6 presents a hazard model that introduces the criterion variable

alone. The criterion variable has been normalized so that a value of zero corresponds to a school

where the long-run average value equals the eligibility threshold. For middle schools, this is a

                                                 18
subsidized lunch receipt rate of 85%. For high schools, it is a combined failure rate on biology

and algebra exams of 100% (on a scale from 0 to 200%). This is a relatively crude method of

normalization, but provides a relatively straightforward interpretation. Note that including a

linear control for the criterion variable makes our estimated equation more like a true regression

discontinuity design.

       In this specification, the estimated mean impact of the bonus program is very similar to

previous estimates, a 14% reduction in turnover rates. The criterion variable enters significantly

and positively, consistent with the presumption that higher values of the criterion variable

correspond with less favorable working conditions at schools. The point estimate indicates that

middle schools with 90% subsidized lunch rate exhibits turnover rates 3 percent higher than

schools with 85% subsidized lunch rates, or that high schools where the failure rates on algebra

and biology exams are 55% each have turnover rates 6% higher than in schools where the failure

rates are 50% each.

       In column (2), we introduce an interaction between bonus receipt and the criterion

variable. The main effect of bonus receipt, which now represents the predicted impact in schools

where the average criterion variable equals the eligibility threshold, is a statistically insignificant

10 percent. The interacted effect is estimated imprecisely, with a point estimate clearly but

insignificantly below one. Taken at face value, this point estimate implies that the impact of the

bonus program on turnover rates increased by one percent for every five percentage point

increase in the criterion variable. Given the range of the criterion variable among middle schools

is roughly 0.3, this implies that the bonus program was more than twice as effective in the

eligible school with the highest criterion variable than in the school with the lowest criterion



                                                  19
variable. The range among eligible high schools was even greater, suggesting an even stronger

differential impact.

       How large might the bonus program’s impact have been if all teachers had correctly

perceived the eligibility criteria? Without formally modeling the process of teacher’s

expectation formation, any estimate we provide would be little more than an educated guess,

particularly given the imprecision of the estimates in Table 6. But it is not unreasonable to think

that the reduction in turnover rates could have been twice the magnitude in a perfectly informed

world. In sum, this analysis provides suggestive, but not conclusive, evidence that the state’s

failure to fully inform teachers of the program’s eligibility criteria at least partly undermined its

effectiveness. Thus the estimates we present of the program’s impact most likely understate the

potential impact of a program operating under conditions of complete information.



V. Concluding Discussion

       The ultimate goal of the N.C. Bonus Program was to improve the quality of math,

science, and special education instruction for students in disadvantaged schools. The fact that the

program appears to have reduced departure rates of teachers from the schools serving

disadvantaged and low-performing students means that the program could potentially have raised

student achievement had it remained in operation for a longer period of time. To the extent that

higher teacher turnover rates disrupt the delivery of educational services within a school, lower

turnover rates by themselves would be beneficial to students. In addition, lower turnover rates

are likely to reduce the hiring of novice teachers. Given that novice teachers are generally less

effective than more experienced teachers (Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2005b), any reduced

reliance on novice teachers in such schools would provide an additional benefit to students.

                                                  20
Unfortunately, however, the North Carolina Legislature ended the program even before the first

evaluation of the program was complete. Hence, it will not be possible to use the North Carolina

experience to determine the full potential of such a bonus program.

       Despite its premature demise, the North Carolina Bonus Program provides an important

example of a type of reform that deserves more attention. Though we were able to examine only

one outcome of the program in this study, the fact that the program generated positive effects,

especially for math teachers in middle schools -- despite the flaws in its implementation which

quite possibly diluted its impact -- bodes well for programs designed to target permanent salary

differentials to certain types of teachers in needy schools.




                                                 21
REFERENCES


Ballou, Dale and Michael Podgursky, “Recruiting Smarter Teachers,” The Journal of Human
Resources 30 (Spring 1995), 326-338.

Clotfelter, Chalres T., Elizabeth Glennie, Helen F. Ladd and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2006. “Teacher
Bonuses and Teacher Retention in Low Performing Schools: Evidence from the North Carolina
$1,800 Teacher Bonus Program.” Unpublished paper.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2005a. “Who Teaches Whom? Race
and the Distribution of Novice Teachers.” Economics of Education Review v.24 pp.377-392.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L.Vigdor. 2005b. “Teacher Sorting, Teacher
Shopping, and the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness,” Journal of Human Resources,
forthcoming.

Corcoran, Sean P., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab, “Changing Labor-Market
Opportunities for Women and the Quality of Teachers, 1957-2000,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings (May 2004), 230-235.

Fowler, R. Clarke. 2003. “The Massachusetts Signing Bonus Program for New Teachers: A
Model of Teacher Preparation Worth Copying?” Education Policy Analysis Archives 11 (April
22). Retrieved 10/4/04 from http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v11n13/.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and
Academic Achievement,” Econometrica 79 (March) pp.417-458.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2004. Why Public Schools Lose
Teachers,” Journal of Human Resources 39 (Spring 2004), 326-354.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin. 1999. “Do Higher Salaries Buy Better
Teachers?” NBER Working Paper #7082.

Hoxby, Caroline M. And Andrew Leigh, “Pulled Away or Pushed Out? Explaining the Decline
of Teacher Aptitude in the United States,” AER 94 (May 2004), 236-240.

Ladd, Helen F. 2002. Market Based Reforms in Education. Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy
Institute.

Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff, “Teacher Sorting and the Plight of
Urban Schools: A Descriptive Analysis,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24 (Spring
2002), 37-62.

Loeb, Susanna and Marianne E. Page. 2000. “Examining the Link Between Teacher Wages and

                                              22
Student Outcomes: The Importance of Alternative Labor Market Opportunities and Non-
Pecuniary Variation,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (August), 393-408.

Murnane, R.J., J.D. Singer, J.B. Willett, J.J. Kemple, and R.J. Olsen. 1991. Who Will Teach?
Policies that Matter. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Olson, Lynn. 2000. “Sweetening the Pot,” Education Week. Retrieved 10/4/04 from
http://www.edweek.com/sreports/qc00/templates/article.cfm?slug=recruit.htm.

Prince, Cynthia D. 2002. “Higher Pay in Hard-to-Staff Schools: The Case for Financial
Incentives,” unpublished paper, American Association of School Administrators, Arlington, VA
(June). Retrieved 10/4/04 from
http://www.aasa.org/issues_and_insights/issues_dept/higher_pay.pdf.

Reed, Deborah, Kim S. Rueben, and Elisa Barbour, Retention of New Teachers in California (X:
Public Policy Institute of California?, 2006) Retrieved 4/14/06 from
www.ppic.org/content/pubs/R_206DRR.pdf,

Rockoff, Jonah E., “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from
Panel Data,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings (May 2004), 247-252.

Scafidi, Benjamin, David Sjoquist, and Todd R. Stinebrickner, “The Impact of Wages and
School Characteristics on Teacher Mobility and Retention,”Unpublished paper, September 2002.




                                              23
                           Table 1: School Level Summary Statistics
                                             Treatment            Control            Excluded
                                              Schools             Schools             Schools

                                               0.631               0.625               0.382
             Proportion High Schools
                                              (n=103)             (n=56)              (n=791)

       Proportion Eligible for Free or          0.821               0.767               0.421
       Reduced Price Lunch (middle         [ .633 , .932 ]     [ .725 , .841 ]       [ 0 , .995 ]
                             schools)          (n=38)              (n=21)              (n=488)

                                                 0.743              0.501              0.348
       Failure rate on Biology Exam
                                           [ .479 , 1.000 ]    [ .310 , .938 ]        [0,1]
                        (high schools)
                                                (n=65)             (n=35)             (n=284)

                                                 0.648              0.474              0.238
       Failure Rate on Algebra Exam
                                           [ .233 , 1.000 ]    [ .273 , .708 ]        [0,1]
                       (high schools)
                                                (n=65)             (n=35)             (n=284)

Note: Unit of observation is the school. A school is defined to be in the “treatment” group if
it met the eligibility criteria for inclusion in the bonus program in the first or second year of
implementation. “Control” group schools were not eligible in either of the first two years,
but approached the thresholds for eligibility. Five of the 56 control group schools became
eligible for the bonus program in its third year. The range is in brackets, and the number of
observations are in parentheses




                                                 24
   Table 2: Teacher-Year Level Summary Statistics

                                               Mean

 Subject Taught (no omitted category):
                                  Math         0.225
                               Science         0.184
                                English        0.300
                                History        0.073
                         Social Studies        0.185
                     Foreign Language          0.044
                                   Arts        0.070
                     Special Education         0.068
                              Practical        0.093
                              Technical        0.038
 Female                                        0.646
 Race (White omitted)
                                  Black        0.339
                               Hispanic        0.013
                                  Asian        0.005
                       Native American         0.022
                            Multiracial        0.001
 Education Level (Bachelors omitted)
                                Masters        0.278
                 Other Graduate Degree         0.016
 Experience (10-19 Years omitted)
                                 1 Year        0.067
                                2 Years        0.054
                                3 Years        0.049
                              4-9 Years        0.216
                           20-29 Years         0.225
                           30-39 Years         0.070
                             40+ Years         0.002
 Paid Bonus                                    0.085

Note: Sample consists of teacher/school/year
observations for personnel working at least part time in a
treatment or control group school. N=29,584.




                            25
                   Table 3: Basic Estimate of the Program’s Impact
                                                                              0.902*
 Teacher Receives a Bonus Payment
                                                                              (0.053)
                                                                               1.007
 Teacher is Certified in Math, Science or Special Education
                                                                              (0.031)
                                                                              1.173**
 Teacher is Employed by a Currently Eligible School
                                                                              (0.044)

 N                                                                            29,562

 Log likelihood                                                             -56,644.23

Note: Table entries are hazard ratios, with standard errors in parentheses. The hazard
refers to the probability of exiting a school after period t, conditional on remaining in
that school until period t. Unit of observation is the teacher/school/year. ** denotes
a hazard ratio significantly different from 1 at the 5% level; * the 10% level.




                                            26
                           Table 4: Refined Estimates of the Program’s Impact
                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
 Teacher Receives a Bonus Payment                0.872**          0.870**         0.868**         0.878**
                                                 (0.051)          (0.051)         (0.051)         (0.051)
 Teacher is Certified in Math, Science or        0.864**          0.865**         0.857**         0.871**
 Special Education                               (0.035)          (0.035)         (0.035)         (0.036)
 Teacher is Employed by a Currently              1.167**          1.168**         1.155**         1.147**
 Eligible School                                 (0.044)          (0.044)         (0.044)         (0.043)
 Female                                             ---            0.963            0.982          0.977
                                                                  (0.026)          (0.027)        (0.027)
 Race (White omitted)

                                      Black         ---             1.022           1.021           1.010
                                                                  (0.028)         (0.028)         (0.027)
                                   Hispanic         ---            1.230*          1.202*          1.194*
                                                                  (0.131)         (0.128)         (0.127)
                                      Asian         ---             1.169           1.052           1.064
                                                                  (0.196)         (0.177)         (0.179)
                          Native American           ---           0.721**         0.739**         0.701**
                                                                  (0.071)         (0.073)         (0.070)
                                Multiracial         ---           1.905**         1.786**         1.762**
                                                                  (0.478)         (0.448)         (0.442)
 Education Level (Bachelors omitted)

                                    Masters         ---              ---          1.132**         1.140**
                                                                                  (0.032)         (0.033)
                    Other Graduate Degree           ---              ---          1.433**         1.454**
                                                                                  (0.131)         (0.133)
 Experience (10-19 Years omitted)

                                     1 Year         ---              ---          1.515**         1.510**
                                                                                  (0.068)         (0.067)
                                    2 Years         ---              ---          1.274**         1.269**
                                                                                  (0.067)         (0.067)
                                    3 Years         ---              ---          1.173**         1.173**
                                                                                  (0.065)         (0.065)
                                  4-9 Years         ---              ---          0.931**         0.932**
                                                                                  (0.033)         (0.033)
                               20-29 Years          ---              ---          0.644**         0.646**
                                                                                  (0.025)         (0.025)
                               30-39 Years          ---              ---          1.112**         1.116**
                                                                                  (0.055)         (0.055)
                                 40+ Years          ---              ---           1.566*         1.597**
                                                                                  (0.371)         (0.379)
 High School                                        ---              ---             ---          0.884**
                                                                                                  (0.026)
 Subject Area Controls                              Y                Y               Y               Y
 N                                                29,562          29,562           29,562         29,562
  Log likelihood                                 -56,612.39      -56,599.35       -56.418.01     -56,409.25
 Note: Table entries are hazard ratios, with standard errors in parentheses. The hazard refers to the
probability of exiting a school after period t, conditional on remaining in that school until period t. Unit
of observation is the teacher/school/year.
 ** denotes a hazard ratio significantly different from 1 at the 5% level; * the 10% level.

                                                     27
                             Table 5: Testing for Heterogeneity in the Program’s Impact

                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

                                                            0.826**
    Paid Bonus in 2002
                                                            (0.073)
                                                             0.914
    Paid Bonus in 2003                                                         ---             ---                 ---
                                                            (0.065)
                                                                            0.819**
    Paid Bonus, Teach Math                                     ---                             ---                 ---
                                                                            (0.065)
                                                                             0.946
    Paid Bonus, Teach Science                                  ---                             ---                 ---
                                                                            (0.080)
                                                                             1.084
    Paid Bonus, Teach Special Education                        ---                             ---                 ---
                                                                            (0.144)
                                                                                             0.888
    Paid Bonus, Teach 1 Year                                   ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.128)
                                                                                             0.965
    Paid Bonus, Teach 2 Years                                  ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.185)
                                                                                             0.958
    Paid Bonus, Teach 3 Years                                  ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.184)
                                                                                             0.891
    Paid Bonus, Teach 4-9 Years                                ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.099)
                                                                                            0.632**
    Paid Bonus, Teach 10-19 Years                              ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.081)
                                                                                            0.763*
    Paid Bonus, Teach 20-29 Years                              ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.114)
                                                                                             0.959
    Paid Bonus, Teach 30-39 Years                              ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.157)
                                                                                             0.731
    Paid Bonus, Teach 40 Years or more                         ---             ---                                 ---
                                                                                            (0.548)
                                                                                                             0.765**
    Paid Bonus, Teach in a Middle School                       ---             ---             ---
                                                                                                             (0.078)
                                                                                                              0.928
    Paid Bonus, Teach in a High School                         ---             ---             ---
                                                                                                             (0.061)
    N                                                        29,562         29,562           29,562          29,562
    Log likelihood                                         -56,408.81     -56,407.66       -56,402.57      -56,407.77
Notes: Table entries are hazard ratios, with standard errors in parentheses. The hazard refers to the
 probability of exiting a school after period t, conditional on remaining in that school until period t. Unit of
 observation is the teacher/school/year.
** denotes a hazard ratio significantly different from 1 at the 5% level; * the 10% level.
All specifications include controls for being certified in Math, Science or Special Education,
teaching at an eligible school, Subject taught, gender, race, experience, education and high
school (with the same omissions for categorical variables as listed in Table 4).


.


                                                          28
                  Table 6: The Role of Information Quality
                                                      (1)              (2)
                                                    0.863**           .901
 Teacher Receives a Bonus Payment
                                                    (0.050)          (0.063)
 Teacher is Certified in Math, Science or           0.893**         0.892**
 Special Education                                  (0.037)         (0.037)
 Teacher is Employed by a Currently                  1.014            1.011
 Eligible School                                    (0.041)          (0.041)

 Education Level (Bachelors omitted)
                                                    1.137**         1.137**
                                       Masters
                                                    (0.033)         (0.033)
                                                    1.409**         1.407**
                       Other Graduate Degree
                                                    (0.129)         (0.129)
 Experience (10-19 Years omitted)
                                                    1.500**         1.501**
                                        1 Year
                                                    (0.067)         (0.067)
                                                    1.266**         1.266**
                                       2 Years
                                                    (0.066)         (0.067)
                                                    1.171**         1.172**
                                       3 Years
                                                    (0.065)         (0.065)
                                                    0.932**         0.932**
                                     4-9 Years
                                                    (0.033)         (0.033)
                                                    0.650**         0.650**
                                  20-29 Years
                                                    (0.025)         (0.025)
                                                    1.109**         1.109**
                                  30-39 Years
                                                    (0.055)         (0.055)
                                                     1.549*          1.554*
                                    40+ Years
                                                    (0.367)         (0.369)
                                                    0.732**         0.795**
 High School
                                                    (0.028)         (0.026)
                                                   1.7318**         1.764**
 Criterion Variable
                                                    (0.117)         (0.122)
                                                                      0.791
 Paid Bonus*Criterion Variable                         ---
                                                                    (0.165)

 Subject Area Controls                                 Y               Y

 Gender and Race Controls                              Y               Y

 N                                                  29,562           29,562
 Log likelihood                                     -56377.23       -56376.59
Note: Table entries are hazard ratios, with standard errors in parentheses.
The hazard refers to the probability of exiting a school after period t,
conditional on remaining in that school until period t. Unit of observation is
the teacher/school/year.
** denotes a hazard ratio significantly different from 1 at the 5% level; * the
10% level.

                                       29
