                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE EFFECT OF DIVIDENDS ON CONSUMPTION

                                            Malcolm Baker
                                             Stefan Nagel
                                            Jeffrey Wurgler

                                         Working Paper 12288
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12288


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




We thank Yakov Amihud, John Campbell, Alok Kumar, Erik Hurst, Martin Lettau, Enrichetta Ravina, Hersh
Shefrin, and workshop participants at University of British Columbia, University of Colorado, NBER
Behavioral Finance, NYU Stern School of Business, and Stanford Graduate School of Business for helpful
comments. We thank Terrance Odean for providing data. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Malcolm Baker, Stefan Nagel and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Dividends on Consumption
Malcolm Baker, Stefan Nagel and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 12288
June 2006
JEL No. E2, G3, D1

                                            ABSTRACT

Classical models predict that the division of stock returns into dividends and capital appreciation
does not affect investor consumption patterns, while mental accounting and other economic frictions
predict that investors have a higher propensity to consume from stock returns in the form of
dividends. Using two micro data sets, we show that investors are indeed far more likely to consume
from dividends than capital gains. In the Consumer Expenditure Survey, household consumption
increases with dividend income, controlling for total wealth, total portfolio returns, and other sources
of income. In a sample of household investment accounts data from a brokerage, net withdrawals
from the accounts increase one-for-one with ordinary dividends of moderate size, controlling for
total portfolio returns, and also increase with mutual fund and special dividends. We comment on
several potential explanations for the results.

Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu

Stefan Nagel
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
nagel_stefan@gsb.stanford.edu

Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu
I.     Introduction

       Microsoft’s $32 billion cash dividend of December 2004 was the largest corporate payout

ever. Classical models of finance and consumption-savings decisions predict that this dividend

will have little effect on the consumption of Microsoft investors. Under the assumptions of

Miller and Modigliani (1961), for example, investors can always reinvest unwanted dividends, or

sell shares to create homemade dividends, and thereby insulate their preferred consumption

stream from corporate dividend policies. Thus, in traditional models, the division of stock returns

into dividends and capital gains is a financial decision of the firm that has no “real” consequence

for investor consumption patterns.

       Yet there are a number of reasons to think that dividend policy, and dividends more

generally, may indeed affect consumption. Most obviously, the popular advice to “consume

income, not principal” suggests a potentially widespread mental accounting practice—discussed

in detail in Thaler and Shefrin (1981), Shefrin and Statman (1984), and Shefrin and Thaler

(1988)—in which investors do not view dividends and capital gains as fungible, as in the

homemade dividends story and traditional theories of consumption, but rather place them into

different mental accounts from which they have different propensities to consume. Less exotic

but equally realistic frictions, such as transactions costs (of making homemade dividends) and

taxes, can also lead an investor to favor consuming dividends before capital appreciation.

       Although the dividends-consumption link is a potentially fundamental link between

corporate finance and the real economy, little empirical research has pursued the issue. This is

probably because the most easily available data on consumption and dividends is aggregate time-

series data, which have several limitations. Among other challenges, such data require one to

identify the effect of a smooth aggregate dividend series using a small number of data points;




                                                1
such data combine investors and non-investors; and such data face an essentially prohibitive

endogeneity problem: omitted third variables such as business conditions will jointly affect

consumption, dividends, and capital appreciation, making it difficult to establish the causality

behind any correlations.

       In this paper, we study the effect of dividends on investor consumption using two micro

data sets that provide powerful cross-sectional variation in dividend receipts and capital gains.

The first is the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which is a repeated cross-section with

expenditure measures and self-reported dividend income and capital gains (or losses). Our CEX

sample includes several hundred households per year between 1988 and 2001. The second data

set was introduced by Barber and Odean (2000) and includes the trading records of tens of

thousands of households with accounts at a large discount brokerage between 1991 and 1996.

While these portfolio data do not contain an explicit expenditure measure, they complement the

CEX by allowing us to accurately measure net withdrawals from the portfolio, a novel dependent

variable in its own right and a precursor to expenditure. The data set also allows us to measure

the withdrawal rates of different types of dividend income, including ordinary, special, and

mutual fund dividends, which allows for finer comparisons.

       We start with an analysis of the CEX data. Our most basic approach is to regress

consumption on realized dividend income, controlling for total returns including dividends. The

coefficient on dividend income thus captures differences between the consumption responses to

dividends and capital gains. We find that the coefficient on realized dividend income for total

consumption expenditure is large, positive, and significant. This basic result is robust to a variety

of control variables and estimation techniques, including specifications in first differences. It

suggests that, contrary to classical models, the form of returns does matter for consumption.




                                                 2
       We then use the brokerage account data in an effort to test the mechanism behind this

effect, i.e. we test whether dividends are indeed withdrawn from the household portfolio at a

higher rate than capital gains. The data strongly confirm this. On average, investors do not

reinvest ordinary dividends: the propensity to withdraw modest levels of ordinary dividends is

unity. A fraction of mutual fund and special dividends is also withdrawn. On the other hand, very

large dividends of any type are not fully withdrawn. As in the CEX data, the effect of capital

appreciation on net withdrawals is uniformly smaller than the effect of dividends.

       We conduct a variety of subsample splits and robustness tests on each data set. The

results suggest that the apparent differential effect of dividend income on net withdrawals and

consumption is at least partly causal, i.e. not arising only because investors who plan to consume

dividends in the future buy dividend-paying stocks. In particular, we find that investors tend to

withdraw from both predictable and unpredictable components of dividends. For instance,

investors often withdraw special dividend income, which is unpredictable by definition.

       In sum, although the CEX and the portfolio data involve completely different households

and somewhat different data concepts, they lead to qualitatively similar results, with both data

sets indicating that investor consumption is affected by the form of returns, not just the level.

What drives this effect? We first evaluate explanations based on well-understood frictions like

transaction costs, taxes, and borrowing constraints. Upon inspection, however, none of these

explanations is fully satisfactory. Borrowing constraints are irrelevant in this setting, because the

substitution of dividends for capital gains has no overall wealth effects, and homemade dividends

can be created by selling shares. Tax stories are varied, but none seems consistent with key

aspects of the data. Transaction costs cannot account for, for example, the fact that low-turnover

and high-turnover households withdraw dividends at similar rates.




                                                 3
       While our findings are surely driven by a combination of factors, mental accounting

seems among the most compelling. The notion that many investors do not view dividends and

capital gains as fungible seems especially plausible in light of the popular adage to “consume

income, not principal.” Mental accounting offers a natural explanation for both our main findings

and certain finer results. For example, ordinary dividends are more likely to be mentally

accounted for as “current income” than are large special dividends. Hence, the Shefrin and

Thaler (1988) mental accounting framework predicts a higher propensity to consume from

ordinary dividends than from large special dividends. This is what we find in net withdrawals

(where we can measure different types of dividends). Tax and transaction cost explanations, on

the other hand, do not predict this pattern.

       Our paper builds on an earlier literature that uses aggregate data. Early contributions

include Feldstein (1973) and Feldstein and Fane (1973), which viewed the equality of the

propensity to consume from dividends and corporate retained earnings, not capital appreciation,

as the null hypothesis of interest. Subsequently, Peek (1983) and Summers and Carroll (1987)

find that capital gains and losses have little effect on aggregate consumption. Poterba (2000)

surveys studies on the stock market wealth effect.

       To our knowledge, the only paper to use micro data in this context is a contemporaneous

paper by Rantapuska (2005). He analyzes Finnish investor registry data and finds that there is

little reinvestment within two weeks after receipts of dividends or tender offer proceeds. His

results are broadly consistent with and complementary to ours, but there are some important

differences. In particular, the CEX data allow us to look at actual consumption, not just

reinvestment. Moreover, reinvestment may occur over horizons much longer than two weeks, an

issue that our brokerage account data allows us to investigate. Finally, automatic reinvestment




                                                4
plans are absent in Finland but common in the U.S., so the effect of dividends on consumption

and reinvestment could be quite different in any case.

       Our results also relate to evidence that consumers have a relatively high propensity to

consume moderately-sized cash windfalls. For instance, Souleles (1999) finds that consumption

responds to federal income tax refunds whether or not the household faced borrowing

constraints, while Souleles (2002) documents that consumption responds to pre-announced tax

cuts. Related studies in this vein include Bodkin (1959), Kreinin (1961), Wilcox (1989), Parker

(1999a), Stephens (2003), and Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2005). Intuitively, ordinary

dividends are like moderate-size windfalls. However, our analysis differs in that we focus on the

relative propensity to consume two forms of income, dividends and capital gains, holding

constant the level of the total return, dividends plus capital gains. More broadly, this study falls

into a growing literature that Campbell (2006) terms “household finance.”

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II analyzes a sample from the Consumer

Expenditure Survey. Section III studies portfolio data from a discount brokerage house. Section

IV reviews explanations, and Section V concludes.



II.    Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey

       Our first data set is drawn from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). The strength

of the CEX is detailed data on household consumption and demographics. Its comparative

weakness, for our purpose, is that dividends and portfolio returns are self-reported and thus likely

to be noisy. (For this reason, the analysis below is followed by an analysis of a second,

complementary data set.) After introducing the data and definitions, we describe our empirical

methodology and then present regression estimates of the effects of dividends on consumption.




                                                 5
A.      Data and definitions

        The CEX has been conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics since 1980. It is a short

panel based on a stratified random sample of the U.S. population. Selected households are

interviewed quarterly for five quarters and are then replaced by new households. As we discuss

more fully below, the information on financial asset holdings and changes in these holdings over

the preceding twelve months is collected in the fifth interview; dividends, received interest, other

income variables, and demographic data are collected in the second and fifth interviews and

cover the twelve months prior to the interview date. We extract most of the variables from the

CEX family files, but the data on housing and credit are from the detailed expenditure files.

        Basic variables are as follows. We follow Parker (2001) and define non-durables

consumption, C, as the sum of food, alcohol, apparel, transportation, entertainment, personal

care, and reading expenditure, and we sum up consumption over the four quarters from the

second to fifth interview. We also consider the CEX total expenditure variable as a consumption

measure. Dividends, D, are based on the question asking for “the amount of regular income from

dividends, royalties, estates, or trusts” over the past twelve months. We also collect interest, I,

received by the household. We use reported income after taxes, Y, as a proxy for total income.

        Total wealth, W, is the sum of home equity (sum of property values minus sum of

outstanding mortgage balances) and financial wealth. Financial wealth is the sum of balances in

checking accounts, savings accounts, savings bonds, money owed to the household, and stocks

(holdings of stocks and mutual funds, but also corporate bonds and government bonds that are

not savings bonds), minus other debt.1 Before 1988, there is no information on the level of


1
  The surveys do not ask respondents to include retirement assets, but they also do not ask explicitly to exclude
them, so it is unclear whether some respondents include them. Also, the bond component of the “stocks” position
cannot be isolated in the CEX data, but it is likely to be very small for most households (see Brunnermeier and
Nagel (2005) for details).



                                                       6
mortgage balances, so we use the 1988 to 2001 data only. Also, while for financial assets we can

measure changes in over the twelve months preceding the fifth interview, for other wealth

components (home equity and “other debt”) we can compute only the change over the nine

months between the second and fifth interviews.

        Survey participants are asked about the amount of securities purchased and sold over the

preceding twelve months in their fifth interview. This information allows us to decompose the

change in the value of stock holdings into an active investment/disinvestment component and a

capital gains component. In order to compute capital gains, G, we need to make an assumption

regarding the timing of investment. We assume that half the reported investment was made at the

beginning of the period and half at the end.

        We employ a few filters to screen out unusual observations. We require that there is only

one consumer unit (family) in the household, and that the marital status of the respondent and the

size of the family remain the same from the second to fifth interview. We require that lagged

financial wealth be positive, and that a nonzero fraction of this wealth be invested in shares or

mutual funds. We delete observations where any wealth component or income is topcoded.2 We

use the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to deflate all variables to December 2001 dollars.

B.      Summary statistics

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for the CEX data. After filters, we have 3,106

household-year observations. In this sample, the mean non-durables consumption, reported in

Panel A, is $15,042, and the median is slightly lower. Total expenditure, including durables, is

three to four times higher. Panels B and C show wealth and income measures. Financial wealth is

typically around a third of total wealth. Total income, which includes dividends, but not capital

2
 To preserve the anonymity of respondents, the CEX administrators reset observations above certain thresholds on
wealth, income, and some other variables to a cutoff threshold value.



                                                       7
gains, has a mean of $56,566 and again a slightly lower median. Comparing Panels A and C, one

sees that on average, total income is slightly higher than total expenditure. For the mean

household, interest income is $1,264 and dividends total $935. Panel D shows that on average,

interest and dividends account for 4% and 2% of total income, respectively. The distribution is

skewed, with the median household reporting zero dividend income.

C.      Empirical Methodology

        The null hypothesis of interest is that capital gains and dividends are fungible, which

means that households should react similarly to wealth changes that come in the form of a capital

gain and in the form of a dividend. In other words, only the total return should matter, not the

split of that return into dividends and capital gains/losses.

        To test this hypothesis, we run specifications in levels, first differences, and log

differences. We describe and motivate these in turn. Our basic levels specification is as follows:

        Cit = a0 + a1′Z it + a2′ Fit + gRit + dDit + uit                                             (1)

where Cit is household i’s consumption in t (specifically, in the levels specification, consumption

is summed over the four quarters prior to the fifth interview); Zit is a vector of household

characteristics; Fit is a vector of financial variables that includes income, lagged wealth, and

interactions with Zit; Rit is the total dollar return on stocks including dividends; and Dit is the total

dollar dividend income. In Eq. (1), the total stock return is already accounted for with Rit, and

therefore d = 0 under the null. However, if for some reason a household has a higher propensity

to consume from dividends than from capital gains, we expect d > 0.

        The levels specification can be interpreted as an approximation to the consumption rule

used by households. Different consumption models map income, wealth, and other household




                                                           8
characteristics into consumption in different ways.3 We are agnostic as to which consumption

model is most accurate. Our goal is simply to distinguish between models in which capital gains

and dividends are fungible and those in which there is a wedge between the effect of dividends

and capital gains. Like Hayashi (1985), Carroll (1994), and Parker (1999b), we approximate the

consumption rule with a range of variables that may be relevant for consumption decisions,

allowing them to enter linearly, quadratically, and through interactions to approximate the non-

linear consumption function. In the end, the levels specification boils down to asking whether

two consumers in the same financial situation, with similar income, similar household

characteristics, and similar total return on financial assets, but different compositions of total

returns across dividends and capital gains, have different consumption.

         Household characteristics in Zit include the education of the household head (dummies

for high-school and college graduation), the age of the household head, age squared, family size,

family size squared, and a set of year-month fixed effects to absorb seasonal variation in

consumption as well as variation in macro factors. Financial variables in Fit include variables that

proxy for future income and for current cash-on-hand, including income after tax (excluding

dividends), income squared, lagged total wealth, lagged total wealth squared, lagged financial

wealth, lagged financial wealth squared, the percentage of financial wealth invested in stocks and

its square. We also allow for interactions of age and family size with income, lagged wealth, and

lagged financial wealth.

         In terms of interpreting an estimate that d > 0, the key question is whether this set of

controls is sufficient or whether there is some omitted variable that could be positively correlated


3
  Under the basic form of the permanent income hypothesis, permanent income determines consumption, so the
right-hand side variables in Eq. (1) matter to the extent that they are correlated with permanent income. In models of
buffer-stock saving with impatience such as Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1997), consumption depends on the level of
cash on hand (liquid wealth plus current income) relative to its target level.


                                                          9
with dividends and thus bias upwards the estimate of d. While all of these controls should do a

reasonable job of approximating households’ consumption rule, it is difficult to fully rule out the

possibility of some remaining unobserved difference between households that hold dividend

paying stocks and those that hold nonpaying stocks. To address this omitted variables problem,

we also run regressions in first differences, which removes any household fixed effects that

could be correlated with dividend income.

        Differencing is also useful for addressing an important endogeneity concern, namely that

any relationship between dividends and consumption is not causal but rather reflects the fact that

households that expect to consume might decide, ex ante, to hold securities that pay the preferred

consumption stream in the form of dividends.4 While such an “ex-ante effect” would also mean

that fungibility does not hold, in the sense that some consumers anticipate their unwillingness to

consume from principal and adjust their portfolio accordingly, it would not imply a causal effect

from the composition of returns to consumption. However, to the extent that any such ex-ante

effect is largely a household fixed effect, with only slow time-variation, differencing should help

to eliminate it.

        Our basic differences specification is as follows:

        ∆Cit = b0 + b1′Z it + b2′ ∆Yit + gRit + d ∆Dit + eit .                                         (2)

We define ∆Cit as the difference between fifth and second interview quarter’s consumption, since

the CEX offers at most four quarterly consumption observations per household. As mentioned

above, dividends and income in the CEX are measured over overlapping 12-month periods

leading up to the second and fifth interviews. We define ∆Dit and ∆Yit as the difference in the

reported values. Because of the imperfect matching of measurement periods between ∆Cit and

4
 See Graham and Kumar (2005) and references therein for clear evidence of dividend clienteles. Graham and
Kumar show that the allocation to and trades of dividend-paying stocks depends on investor characteristics.



                                                         10
∆Dit, the d estimate is likely to be biased towards zero. (The same is true for b2.) Inferences about

the magnitude of d will thus be difficult, but a significant positive coefficient will still be

meaningful, as the null is still d = 0. As before, Zit is a vector of household characteristics and

time dummies. In some specifications, we also include the level of second-quarter consumption

as an explanatory variable, because it may pick up some noise that is introduced through the

measurement-period mismatch between ∆Cit and the income variables.

        Finally, to check whether the results are robust to functional form, we also try a third set

of specifications with log consumption growth as the dependent variable. In that case, we use an

indicator variable for the sign of dividend growth as our key explanatory variable, because we

don’t have a clear prediction about how consumption growth would be affected quantitatively by

dividend growth. For example, a 10% increase in dividends would presumably have a different

effect on the percentage growth in consumption when dividends are a small proportion of total

income than when they are a large proportion. By using an indicator variable, we simply estimate

the average difference in consumption growth between households with dividend increases and

those with dividend decreases.5

D.      Effects of dividends on household consumption

        Table 2 reports estimates of Eq. (1). Specifications in the left columns use non-durables

consumption as the dependent variable, and those in the right columns use total expenditure. The

first specification includes total returns, dividends, and a dummy for zero dividends, plus a large

number of controls described above. The estimates indicate that there is little relationship

between total returns and consumption, both in economic and statistical terms. But dividends are

positively related to the level of consumption, and the effect is statistically significant. A $1

5
  See Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2004) for a similar dummy variable approach to analyze the effect of tax
rebates on log consumption.


                                                     11
difference between households in dividends is associated with a 16-cent difference in non-

durables consumption.

       The second specification includes the lag of dividends, as a first step toward

distinguishing between the “ex-ante” (endogenous dividend-consumption clientele) and “ex-

post” (causal) effects that d could capture. (As mentioned previously, our main approach to deal

with this issue is differencing, which follows below.) Specifically, if ex-ante matching of

anticipated dividends and consumption were the full story, then lagged and contemporaneous

dividends should have about the same correlation with current consumption. As it turns out,

however, the effect of current dividends is far stronger than the lagged coefficient, consistent

with a causal effect from dividends on consumption that goes beyond ex-ante matching.

       The third and fourth specifications look at the sum of dividends and interest income, Dt +

It. It seems possible that mental accounting consumers, for example, would treat interest income

and dividend income similarly; likewise, spending from interest income allows households to

skirt transaction costs of selling bonds in the same way that spending from dividends avoids the

costs of selling stock. The results provide some support for these analogies, as the effect of Dt +

It on consumption is similar to that of Dt.

       The last specifications in Table 2 use total expenditure as the dependent variable. The

estimated coefficients on Dt and Dt + It are roughly four to five times as high as in the regressions

with non-durables consumption. As total expenditure is proportionally higher than non-durables

consumption, on average, these results suggest that dividend income is not used exclusively for

non-durables consumption but rather boosts expenditures of all types. In all other respects, the

results in these specifications are similar to those for non-durables.




                                                 12
        It is interesting that there is no evidence of a significant effect of capital gains; indeed the

point estimates on total returns are negative. Of course, a low (but positive) propensity to

consume capital gains would not have been surprising. Under the permanent income hypothesis,

for instance, forward-looking consumers spread the consumption from an unexpected increase in

wealth over their lifetime, so the coefficient on capital gains is expected to be on the order of the

real interest rate. From this perspective, what is striking about the results in Table 2 is the far

higher consumption from the return component that is labeled “dividends.” The very large

effects of dividends on total expenditure, in particular, strongly suggest that individuals consume

dividends disproportionately in the period in which they are received.

        Table 3 reports estimates of Eq. (2). The first specification includes total returns, the

change in dividends, and other controls including a dummy for zero dividends over the prior and

current 12-month period and, in some specifications, lagged consumption. Since we are

regressing the change in quarterly consumption (from the second to the fifth interview) on

changes in dividends measured over 12-month periods (preceding the second and fifth

interview), we would expect the coefficient estimates on ∆Dt to be about one quarter of those on

Dt in the levels specifications.

        The results indicate that multiplying the coefficient estimates on ∆Dt by four yields

numbers of the same order of magnitude as the estimates in Table 2, though somewhat lower.

The moderate decrease is consistent with some ex-ante effect in the levels estimates, but it could

also reflect the noise that is introduced through the imperfect matching of dividends and

consumption measurement periods. Consistent with the latter possibility, we find that controlling

for lagged consumption, which should pick up some noise, raises the magnitude of the

coefficient on dividend changes. But for the non-durables specifications overall, standard errors



                                                  13
are large, and the coefficient estimates are at best marginally significant. For total expenditure,

on the other hand, all coefficient estimates for ∆Dt and ∆Dt + ∆It are statistically significant.

       Table 4 presents specifications in log differences. As mentioned above, the analysis here

focuses on a dividend-increase dummy variable. Its coefficient measures the average difference

in consumption growth between households with dividend increases and those with dividend

decreases. In all specifications, the coefficient estimates on the ∆Dt > 0 dummy is positive, and it

is also significantly different from zero in all but the first two non-durables specifications. But

even there, the point estimate is economically large: the average household that experiences an

increase in dividend income increases its consumption by 2% relative to the average household

with non-increasing dividend income.

       In summary, the best available U.S. micro data on consumption suggests that dividends,

controlling for total returns, have a significant effect on consumption. The relationship is

generally robust across specifications in levels, simple differences, and log differences.



III.   Evidence from household portfolios

       A concern with the CEX data is that dividends and capital gains are likely to be measured

with substantial error, as they are both self-reported. It is not clear to what extent measurement

error influences the foregoing results. Furthermore, the results would be made even more

convincing if we could verify the intermediate, mechanical step between receipts of dividends

and consumption expenditure—that dividends are in fact withdrawn from brokerage accounts,

and done so at a higher rate than capital gains. Our second micro data set, based on household

portfolios, achieves these objectives and thus nicely complements the CEX data. Furthermore, it

allows us to study net withdrawals from investment portfolios, an interesting and novel



                                                 14
dependent variable in its own right.6 And finally, the larger sample size and detail of the portfolio

data allow for certain robustness tests and sample splits that are not possible in the CEX data.

A.         Data and definitions

           Our household portfolio data set was introduced by Barber and Odean (2000). It contains

monthly position statements and trading activity for a sample of 78,000 households that had

accounts at a large discount brokerage firm. To enter the sample, households were required to

have an open account during 1991. For sampled households, position statements and accounts

data were gathered for January 1991 through December 1996. The data include all accounts,

including margin and retirement accounts, opened by each sampled household at this brokerage.

For our sample, we exclude margin accounts, IRAs, Keogh accounts, and accounts that are not

joint tenancy or individual accounts. Securities followed include common stocks, mutual and

closed-end funds, ADRs, and warrants and options held in these accounts. We focus on common

stock and mutual funds, which represent all, or nearly all, of most households’ portfolios. See

Barber and Odean (2000) for additional data details.

           We use household-month level observations on net withdrawals, portfolio value, capital

gains, and total dividends. Net withdrawals C (we use C in analogy with our earlier definitions,

although, to be precise, we are studying net withdrawals in this data set) are inferred as the

starting value of assets in the portfolio A, plus capital gains G, plus dividends D, minus the

ending value of the portfolio. That is, for household i,

            C it = Ait −1 + G it + Dit − Ait ,                                                                         (3)

where the components that can be directly estimated include total portfolio value, the product of

price P and quantity Q held in investment j and summed across investments,


6
    Similar in spirit, Choi et al. (2004) use shifts in savings into 401-K plans to identify changes in consumption.



                                                            15
        Ait = ∑ Q jt Pjt ,                                                                    (4)
                 j



capital gains,

        Git = ∑ Q jt −1 (Pjt − Pjt −1 ) ,                                                     (5)
                 j



where prices are adjusted for stock splits, and total dividend income,

        Dit = ∑ Q jt −1 D jt .                                                                (6)
                 j



For simplicity, we suppress the household i subscript on the quantity of each security Q.

       To estimate these quantities from the brokerage data, we pool each household’s accounts

to obtain positions and trades by household-month. The brokerage data do not directly identify

dividend income; we match portfolio holdings to the CRSP stock file to measure dividends on

common stocks and the CRSP mutual fund file to measure dividends on mutual funds. Dividends

are estimated as the security’s dividend yield from CRSP in month t applied to holdings as of the

end of month t-1. For common stock dividends, we follow DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner

(2000) in using CRSP distribution codes 1232, 1212, 1218, 1222, and 1245 to identify ordinary

dividends and 1262 and 1272 to identify special dividends.

       The data contain outliers due to account openings and closings that do not reflect actual

consumption and savings decisions. We exclude household-month observations where we cannot

identify a CRSP mutual fund or common stock match for at least 75 percent of the account value

at month t-1, and we exclude households where account value falls below $10,000. This leaves

93,312 household-months of data on lagged account value, dividends, capital gains, and net

withdrawals. These data still contain some outliers; for instance, the minimum value for net

withdrawals as a percentage of lagged account value is -2,807.7, indicating a proportionately

large net inflow of funds. To prevent a few such data points from driving results, we exclude



                                                16
household-months in which net withdrawals exceed 50% in absolute value. This screen excludes

about 0.96% of the sample.7 The final sample includes 92,412 household-months.

        The advantages of household portfolio data vis-à-vis the CEX data are fairly clear, but

these data nonetheless do have limitations of their own. One is that we usually do not know how

important the accounts we observe are in terms of the household’s total wealth, although in a

fraction of the sample we do have self-reported data on household net worth. In any case, it is not

clear that this should lead to bias as opposed to just adding noise. Another limitation is that we

observe net withdrawals, not consumption. While as mentioned above this means that the

portfolio data is a useful complement to the CEX, a concern is that dividends and realized capital

gains may be deposited into a cash account that we cannot observe. If so, and if a portion of

these funds are eventually reinvested and ultimately reappear in the portfolio, we should not be

counting that portion as potential consumption. Therefore, an important part of the analysis

below is to examine the extent to which contemporaneous withdrawals are offset by delayed

reinvestment; for consumption, we care only about long-run withdrawals.

B.       Summary statistics

        The size and composition of portfolios are described in Panel A of Table 5. The mean

account value is $54,400 and the median is $28,400. For the mean household, 82.7% of this

value is due to common stock holdings and 13.5% reflects mutual funds.

        Changes in portfolio value are in Panel B. In order to make cross-household comparisons,

we scale net withdrawals, capital gains, and dividend estimates by portfolio value at the end of

month t-1. The mean household-month in our sample has slight net withdrawals at the rate of


7
  The results below are robust to choosing different cutoffs. For example, they are quantitatively similar when 5% or
0.5% of the most extreme observations is eliminated. But some process is necessary: as the most extreme single
observation would account for about one third of the total sum of squared net withdrawals (even though there are
close to 100,000 observations in total), and so any analysis would be practically meaningless.



                                                        17
0.06% per month, while net savings in the median household-month is zero. The average total

monthly return is positive, at 1.11%. The average dividend income per month, 0.20% of

beginning-of-month portfolio value, is a significant fraction of the average month’s total return,

but much less volatile.

       Dividend income is broken down in Panels C and D. Dividend income is positive in just

under half of the household-months. For these observations, an average of 77.92% of the

dividend income is due to ordinary dividends, with mutual funds accounting for almost all of the

remainder. Special dividends are rare, but can be very large when they do occur.

C.     Effects of dividends and capital gains on net withdrawals

       Figure 1 shows scatterplots of household-month observations of net withdrawals against

contemporaneous total dividends. The figure clearly shows two modal behaviors with respect to

dividend income. The line of points indicating a one-for-one increasing relationship between net

withdrawals and dividends evidences a “zero (contemporaneous) reinvestment” policy; the line

of points indicating a flat relationship indicates an “automatic reinvestment” policy. The many

thousands of observations that lie on neither line suggest a positive relationship more generally.

We omit an analogous scatterplot of net withdrawals as a function of capital gains because it

shows no visible patterns.

       Mean and median behaviors are plotted in Figure 2. In Panel A, we break dividend

income into eleven groups, one for household-months with no dividend income and ten deciles

for positive-dividend observations. Within each group, we plot median total dividends and net

withdrawals. The results suggest that median behavior is not to immediately reinvest moderate-

size dividends. Net withdrawals increase one-for-one with dividend income over the bottom

several deciles, i.e. in this range a modal behavior from Figure 1 is also the median behavior.




                                                18
       Mean dividend-withdrawing behavior is presented in Panel B. We show mean net

withdrawals for the zero-dividend group and for the mean level of dividends within each of the

ten positive-dividend deciles. The figure again shows a positive relationship between dividends

and net withdrawals. Note that the mean behavior is to contemporaneously withdraw most, but

not all, of larger dividends. (This could be consistent with a mental accounting practice in which

the large dividends that result from cash acquisitions, for example, are not treated like ordinary

dividends but rather as principal to be reinvested.)

       The bottom two panels provide an initial look at the effect of capital gains. The contrast

with the dividends pictures confirms the CEX results: the effect of capital gains appears to be

much smaller than that of dividends. Panel C shows that regardless of the level of capital gains,

median contemporaneous net withdrawals are zero. Panel D shows mean behavior, which

suggests that very high capital gains engender net withdrawals, on average, and very low capital

gains engender net inflows, on average. There is no clear effect in the intermediate range.

       In Table 6, we estimate the effects of contemporaneous dividends and total returns on the

rate of withdrawals. Our first specifications include linear effects only, and then we confirm the

additional structure suggested in the figures using a piecewise linear specification. Specifically,

we allow for a differential effect when dividends are in the top decile and a differential effect

when total returns (primarily capital gains) are smaller than 2.50% in absolute value:

         Ct            D       D ⎧D               ⎫      R      R ⎧⎪ R        ⎫⎪
               = a + d1 t + d 2 t ⎨ t > 90th Pctle⎬ + r1 t + r2 t ⎨ t < 0.025⎬ + vt .          (7)
         At −1         At −1   At −1 ⎩ At −1      ⎭     At −1  At −1 ⎪⎩ At −1  ⎪⎭

We suppress the household i subscripts.

       It may be helpful to explicitly interpret the coefficients. The first regression in the left

panel indicates that, on average, investors have a propensity to withdraw contemporaneous

dividends of about 0.35. The second regression shows that, on average, investors have a


                                                 19
propensity to withdraw contemporaneous returns of 0.02. The third regression shows that for a

given contemporaneous total return, investors have a 0.35 higher propensity to withdraw from

the dividends component than from the capital gains component. Because the propensity to

withdraw from contemporaneous capital gains is almost zero, this also means that the total

propensity to withdraw from dividends is around 0.35, as in the first regression. Although direct

comparisons are not appropriate, it is interesting that these coefficients are of the same order of

magnitude as the effects of dividends and capital gains on total consumption that we estimated in

the CEX data (Table 2 and Table 3). And again, what is most striking is not that the coefficient

on capital gains is so small, but that the coefficient on dividends is so large.

       As an aside, it may seem that the relatively small coefficient on returns implies that the

effect of capital gains on consumption is negligible, but this is not obvious. In fact, because the

range between the 10th and 90th percentile is about 30 times bigger for returns than for dividends

(see Table 5), the point estimates in Table 6 suggest that the variation in withdrawals caused by

dividends and capital gains may be of roughly similar magnitude. (Of course, we found at best

weak effects of capital gains in the CEX, so unlike in the case of dividends we are unable to find

strong evidence that capital gains lead to withdrawal-financed consumption.) In any case, given

our particular hypotheses, the appropriate focus is on the relative magnitude of the dividend and

capital gains effects for a given change in wealth, not on the proportion of withdrawal variance

explained by each effect.

       Moving to the second panel of Table 6, with piecewise linear effects, the first regression

indicates a propensity to withdraw contemporaneous dividends of 0.77 for typical levels of

dividend income and 0.33 (0.77 – 0.44) for unusually high levels of dividend income. The last

regression shows that for small levels of total returns, investors have a propensity to withdraw




                                                  20
from contemporaneous capital gains of -0.03 (0.02 – 0.05), i.e. they do not withdraw at all, while

the differential propensity to withdraw contemporaneous dividends stays the same. All of these

results are consistent with Figure 2.

D.     Delayed reinvestment

       While the analysis so far suggests large differences in the withdrawal behavior of

dividends versus capital gains, and hence that dividends may indeed affect consumption, several

questions remain. One is the possibility that a portion of dividends (and perhaps capital gains),

rather than being withdrawn for consumption, may just have been temporarily moved to a cash

account and reinvested in subsequent months. To the extent that this is the case, estimates based

on contemporaneous effects will overstate the true potential impact on consumption.

       To investigate this effect, we augment our previous model to allow for up to one year of

delays in reinvestment. The resulting model is unsightly but easy to interpret:

 Ct            D       D ⎧D               ⎫     1 11 D        1 11 D ⎧ D                   ⎫
       = a + d1 t + d 2 t ⎨ t > 90th Pctle⎬ + d3 ∑ t − s + d 4 ∑ t − s ⎨ t − s > 90th Pctle⎬
 At −1         At −1   At −1 ⎩ At −1      ⎭     11 s =1 At −1 11 s =1 At −1 ⎩ At −1        ⎭

               Rt         R ⎧ R        ⎫      1 11 R        1 11 R ⎧ R            ⎫
        + r1         + r2 t ⎨ t < 0.025⎬ + r3 ∑ t − s + r4 ∑ t − s ⎨ t − s < 0.025⎬ + vt .     (8)
               At −1     At −1 ⎩ At −1 ⎭     11 s =1 At −1 11 s =1 At −1 ⎩ At −1  ⎭

Under this specification, when the monthly total return is greater than 2.5% in absolute value, the

long-run propensity to withdraw capital gains is (r1 + r3). When the monthly total return is

smaller than 2.5% in absolute value, the long-run propensity to withdraw capital gains is (r1 + r2

+ r3 + r4). Likewise, the differential or “extra” long-run propensity to withdraw a small or

medium dividend income realization is (d1 + d3), while the differential long-run propensity to

withdraw a top-decile dividend realization is (d1 + d2 + d3 + d4). Note that in this setup, any

effect of delayed reinvestment shows up empirically as a negative estimate for d3 and d4 (r3 and




                                                 21
r4), as dividends (capital gains) that are reinvested will be detected as reduced net withdrawals as

a function of lagged dividends (capital gains).8

         Table 7 shows that allowing for the possibility of a full year of delayed reinvestment does

not alter earlier inferences about the effects of dividends. In the simple linear regressions, the

contemporaneous coefficients are as before, and the effects of lagged dividends are nil. The full

piecewise linear model in the rightmost column shows that the long-run propensity to withdraw

small or medium dividends is 0.73 (0.80 – 0.07) greater than that of capital gains, statistically

indistinguishable from the 0.77 gap in the short-run propensities to withdraw that we found in

Table 6, and thus indicating little or no reinvestment of such dividends. On the other hand, the

differential long-run propensity to withdraw very large dividends is still positive, but is

considerably smaller, at 0.33 (0.80 – 0.47 – 0.07 + 0.07), which is also the same as the estimate

we obtained without allowing for delayed reinvestment. Finally, there is little evidence that

capital gains engender reinvestment.

         Thus accounting for delays in reinvestment does not change the conclusion that there is a

large difference in the propensities to withdraw dividends and capital gains. Unless households

in this sample are out of steady state, systematically accumulating cash balances (and doing so

out of dividends, not capital gains), the results are consistent with the notion that a substantial

portion of dividend income is permanently withdrawn to finance consumption.

E.       Household characteristics

         For robustness tests, Table 8 splits the sample across several household and portfolio

characteristics. First, we split by portfolio size. These accounts typically represent a rather small


8
  In principle, one could also include individual lags of Dt and Rt instead of the summation terms and then sum up
the estimated coefficients on the individual lags to calculate the total effect of delayed reinvestment. The approaches
are equivalent when Dt and Rt and their lags, respectively, are uncorrelated. In our data, these correlations are low,
so both approaches lead to similar results. For simplicity, we report results from the summed lags approach.



                                                         22
fraction of net worth, but for about a fifth of the sample, we have self-reported data on net worth

and tax rates supplied to the brokerage firm at the opening of the account, so we can test whether

the results extend to households for which the portfolio represents at least half of reported net

worth. Second, we split by net worth itself. Third, we split by tax rate, which is obviously also a

proxy for income. Fourth, we split the sample by portfolio turnover.

       The results suggest that the higher propensity to withdraw dividend income is broadly

robust across the available household characteristics. An apparent exception is that the difference

is insignificant for the below-median tax rate subsample, but this is inconclusive due to the large

standard errors in this small sample. Wealthier households appear more likely to reinvest very

large dividends, but again standard errors are too large for any confident conclusions.

F.     Composition of dividends

       Intuition and mental accounting theories suggest that it may be inappropriate to treat all

types of dividends as equivalent. The nonlinear effects documented in Figure 2 and Table 6 may

be due to differences in the treatment of special dividends and ordinary dividends, for example,

and the reinvestment of dividends could also vary by type.

       Figure 3 shows scatterplots of contemporaneous net withdrawals as a function of

dividends of each type. An immediate result is that the “automatic reinvestment” mode is

apparent only in mutual fund dividends, likely reflecting formal elections to automatically

reinvest. In addition, both mutual fund dividend recipients and many ordinary dividend recipients

engage in the “zero reinvestment” mode. Perhaps because large special dividends are so rare,

there is little visually apparent pattern in how they are withdrawn or reinvested.

       Median and mean net withdrawals by dividend type are in Figure 4. The median behavior

is to withdraw ordinary dividends one-for-one. For mutual fund dividends, the median behavior




                                                23
is to withdraw nothing. For special dividends, on the other hand, the median behavior is to

withdraw. In means, the patterns are rougher, as expected, and affected by the fact that the

average household is a net saver into its portfolio over this period. Even in means, however,

there are generally monotonic relationships for dividends of each type, although very high values

of mutual fund dividends do not increase mean net withdrawals one-for-one.

       These impressions are confirmed formally in Table 9. Ordinary dividends have a

propensity to be contemporaneously withdrawn that is 0.90 higher than capital gains, i.e. a

propensity to be contemporaneously withdrawn of near unity versus one near zero. Also,

reflecting the automatic reinvestment policy pursued by many mutual fund investors, mutual

fund dividends are withdrawn at a lower rate. Standard errors are too large to make finer

observations about reinvestment and how behavior changes for unusually large dividends. Small

special dividends are withdrawn at roughly the same rate as ordinary dividends, while the point

estimates suggest that large special dividends are mostly reinvested.

G.     Reverse causality

       As with our CEX results, the above results are potentially affected by an endogeneity

problem. Some households may have chosen their ordinary-dividend paying stocks and, to a

lesser extent, their mutual funds, ex ante in anticipation of consumption. If so, the evidence

presented so far does not clearly demonstrate that dividends, particularly ordinary dividends,

have a causal effect.

       For the ex-ante effect to dominate, there would have to be a large predictable component

in dividends such that it is feasible for households to match desired future consumption with

anticipated dividend streams. Unlike in our CEX analysis, dividends here are scaled by portfolio

value, which already reduces a potential source of cross-sectional predictability. As it turns out,




                                                24
scaled dividends in total (the sum of ordinary, mutual fund, and special) are unpredictable based

on lagged dividends, i.e. almost all variation is “unexpected”, with twelve months of lagged

dividends explaining only 4% of the variation in scaled dividends in the current month. Hence

reverse causality is empirically not a major concern in the total-dividends results that we reported

above, unless we are to believe that investors are rapidly rebalancing their portfolios in

anticipation of changing consumption needs.

       Ordinary dividends on their own (scaled by beginning-of-period portfolio value),

however, are highly predictable, with the one-year lagged value explaining 57% of the variation

in ordinary dividends, and the one-year and three-month-lagged values together explaining 81%.

Mutual fund dividends are less so, with the one-year lagged value explaining 43% and the three-

month-lagged value (as expected) adding little. Special dividends are, of course, unpredictable

by definition. Therefore, like our results for total dividends, the results for special dividends are

not subject to reverse causality concerns.

       The question in terms of understanding causality is whether this predictable component in

ordinary and mutual fund dividends alone explains consumption, or whether the unpredictable

component also plays a role. To examine this, our second specification in Table 9 includes the

twelve-month lag of dividends as an additional control for the potential ex-ante effect of

expected consumption on holdings of dividend-paying assets. If the ex-ante effect is the full

story, and it’s largely a household fixed effect with slow time-variation, then the twelve-month

lag of dividends and contemporaneous dividends should have about the same correlations with

withdrawals. And if the ex-ante effect does not explain everything, then the coefficient on the

contemporaneous dividend should be larger than the coefficient on the twelve-month lag,




                                                 25
because it captures effects on withdrawals related to the dividend component that is not

predictable by Dt-12.

        Consistent with a modest ex-ante effect, the coefficient estimate on Dt-12 is greater than

zero for both ordinary and mutual fund dividends, although the effects are statistically

insignificant. But the coefficients for the contemporaneous dividend terms remain highly

significant and much larger than the coefficients on the twelve-month lag. We find similar results

for mutual fund dividends.

        These results suggest that reverse causality in the form of ex-ante matching of

withdrawals and dividends most likely plays a fairly modest role in the case of ordinary and

mutual fund dividends. It plays even less of a role for our other results, including special

dividends and total dividends. While it is impossible to establish causality with complete

confidence, all of the results are consistent with an important element of causality running from

dividends to withdrawals—and, based on our analysis of the CEX data, to consumption.



IV.     Explanations

        Two quite different micro data sets both suggest that investors have a differentially

higher propensity to consume from dividend income than capital gains. So far we have focused

solely on documenting the basic facts and investigating their robustness. Now we move forward

to consider potential explanations.

A.      Borrowing constraints

        A standard explanation for the high the sensitivity of consumption to current income is

borrowing constraints.9 However, borrowing constraints by themselves do not predict a different

9
  A closely related, but behavioral, explanation for the high propensity to consume current income is hyperbolic
discounting as in Angeletos et al. (2001).


                                                      26
propensity to consume from dividends and capital appreciation. The substitution of dividends for

capital gains has no overall wealth effects, and homemade dividends can always be created by

buying and selling shares. Hence, borrowing constraints cannot be an important factor.

B.     Transaction costs

       The transaction costs of making homemade dividends are an a priori more relevant factor.

Perhaps households recognize that reinvesting dividends, especially the modest levels that accrue

in the smaller accounts in our sample, would require the purchase of an odd lot, which carries

relatively high transaction costs. To the extent such costs are substantial, rational households

should prefer to consume from recent dividends rather than from selling shares.

       The CEX data allow us to examine a transaction cost explanation in which the trading

costs (and perhaps taxes) of creating extra homemade dividends constrain consumption. For

households where income exceeds total expenditure, this constraint does not bind: These

households could create homemade dividends at no cost by simply saving less. In unreported

results, we find coefficients of a similar magnitude and generally lower standard errors among

households that save income, casting doubt on this effect as a complete explanation.

       The brokerage data results in Table 8 also contain results that cast doubt on transaction

costs as a complete explanation. First, if households view odd lot transaction costs as an

important consideration, one might expect a higher propensity to withdraw dividends in smaller

accounts, which face the odd lot costs more often. But the propensity to withdraw dividends

appears not to depend on the size of the portfolio. Second, the propensity to withdraw dividends

is similar, if not even higher, for high-turnover households. These households would be able to




                                               27
reinvest unwanted dividends at little, if any, marginal cost; in other words, again, the transaction

costs are not binding.10

C.      Taxes

        Perhaps investors fail to fully reinvest dividends (i.e., have a higher propensity to

withdraw them) because they have a policy of withholding a portion for federal and state taxes.

Of course, taxes can be paid from any source, so this story is founded on mental accounting.

Table 8 shows that high-tax households are more likely to withdraw dividend income. In fact, the

difference between lower-tax and higher-tax is much too large (although standard errors are also

large) to attribute to differential taxation: higher-tax households withdraw 100% of small and

medium dividends, far more than they would need to cover taxes.

        Another tax consideration is the higher tax rate of dividend income than capital gains that

prevails in our sample period. Perhaps households have made mistakes ex ante in buying the

highly-taxed dividend-paying assets or purchased them at a discount, and ex post, given their

holdings, it makes sense to finance consumption through dividends rather than capital gains. But,

developing this same idea further, many households in our sample have individual stocks with

accumulated capital losses at any given time, so from an ex post tax perspective these households

should consume from realized losses even before dividends. Yet Odean (1998) documents that

investors are more likely to sell winners than losers in every month except December.

D.      Different “permanence” of dividends and capital gains

        The results might be reconciled with fully optimizing, forward-looking behavior if stock

returns have permanent and transitory components. In our regressions we control for total

returns, and so dividends do not add any additional information about the size of wealth shocks,

10
  See Odean (1999) and Barber and Odean (2000) for more general arguments that investors trade too much and fail
to properly consider transaction costs.



                                                      28
but if changes in dividends are more strongly correlated with the permanent component of stock

returns than with the transitory component, changes in dividends could provide some

information about the permanence of wealth shocks.11 In this case, one would expect dividends

to be correlated with consumption even after controlling for total returns.

        At the level of the aggregate market, such an explanation could have relevance, although

it would be difficult to distinguish it from other explanations such as mental accounting. Poterba

and Summers (1988), Fama and French (1988), and Campbell and Shiller (1988) find that a large

proportion of market-level return variation is transitory, driven by temporary movements in

discount rates, and Lettau and Ludvigson (2004) find empirical support for the idea that

aggregate consumption responds more to permanent than to transitory changes in asset values.

        However, our results are driven by cross-sectional, not aggregate variation in returns and

dividends. This is an important difference, because movements in discount rates are systematic,

driven by macro variables. As a result, the return variation induced by changes in discount rates

is, to a large extent, a common component across stocks: Vuolteenaho (2002) and Cohen, Polk,

and Vuolteenaho (2005) find that only a small fraction of individual stock return variation

around the market return is transitory. The time fixed effects in our regressions absorb aggregate

movements in asset values, leaving the market-adjusted and largely permanent component of

returns. Thus different permanence of dividends and capital gains also cannot explain our results.

E.      Mental accounting

        Finally, a higher propensity to consume from dividends than capital gains is predicted by

typical mental accounting theories. Indeed, Shefrin and Thaler (1988) explicitly describe the


11
   Note that the issue of permanence of wealth shocks correlated with dividends is unrelated to the issue of whether
companies set dividends equal to the permanent component of earnings. It is perfectly possible that earnings of a
company have a strongly transitory component, while the stock returns are entirely permanent and vice versa. The
relevant issue here is the permanence of stock returns, not earnings.


                                                        29
higher propensity to consume from dividends than capital appreciation as an important untested

prediction of their mental accounting framework.

       In the Shefrin and Thaler model, households place wealth into one of three mental

accounts: “current income,” “current assets,” and “future wealth.” Like Shefrin and Statman

(1984), Shefrin and Thaler argue that the propensity to consume wealth categorized as current

income, such as dividends, is greater than the propensity to consume wealth categorized as

assets, such as capital and its appreciation. Their model thus is consistent with the popular advice

to “spend from income, not from principal.”

       Our main results fit well with these predictions. The propensity to withdraw and consume

dividends is indeed far higher for dividends than capital gains. Moreover, in the CEX data, the

propensity to consume dividends is similar to the propensity to consume labor income, consistent

with the notion that they are both placed in the “current income” mental account.

       In addition, mental accounting also seems to offer more natural explanations for some

finer aspects of our results than the other theories. For example, it is natural that ordinary

dividends and small special dividends are categorized as “current income” to a greater extent

than are special dividends, while special dividends, in turn, are still more “income-like” than

capital appreciation. Under mental accounting, one would expect a higher propensity to consume

ordinary than large special dividends and a higher propensity to consume large specials than

capital gains. Table 9 shows precisely this pattern.

       The underlying psychology behind this sort of mental accounting is an important open

question. Shefrin and Statman (1984) discuss self control and prospect theory as potential

psychological roots. Another anecdotally plausible possibility is that, although firm-level stock

returns are largely permanent, individuals do not view them as such. A quasi-rational rule of




                                                 30
thumb for a passive investor facing perceived stock market mispricing may then be to consume

dividends but not capital gains.

       Mental accounting of any type suggests bounded rationality, and so a natural way to close

this discussion is to comment on the welfare consequence of deviating from fully optimizing

behavior in this setting. We suspect that these consequences are relatively small for two reasons.

First, dividends make up a small fraction of total portfolio returns. Second, and more

importantly, dividends have a much lower standard deviation. Corporations smooth dividends,

adjusting only partially and only to the permanent component of earnings, as captured by the

Lintner dividend model. This behavior on the corporate side limits the welfare consequences of

an investor rule of thumb to “consume from dividends.”



V.     Conclusion

       How investors consume from dividends versus capital gains is important to a range of

questions in corporate finance, macroeconomics, behavioral economics, and tax policy. Classical

theories suggest that investor consumption patterns are independent of how returns are split into

dividends and capital gains, while mental accounting and various economic frictions motivate an

alternative hypothesis that investors are relatively more likely to consume dividends. The

contribution of this study is to exploit the cross-sectional variation in two household-level data

sets in order to document the effect of dividends on consumption.

       The main finding is that consumption indeed responds much more strongly to returns in

the form of dividends than returns in the form of capital gains. Data from the Consumer

Expenditure Survey (CEX) show a strong relationship between household consumption and

dividends, controlling for total returns (which includes dividends). A sample of household




                                               31
portfolio data also show that dividends are much more likely than capital gains to generate

withdrawals from the investment account, thus illustrating the mechanical process of translating

dividend income into consumption. A review of alternative explanations suggests that the results

may in part reflect mental accounting processes of the sort summed up in the adage, “consume

income, not principal.”




                                              32
References

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
      Weinberg, 2001, The hyperbolic consumption model: Calibration, simulation, and
      empirical evaluation, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 47-68.

Barber, Brad, and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common
       stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773-806.

Bodkin, Ronald G., 1959, Windfall income and consumption, American Economic Review 49,
      602-614.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel, 2005, Do wealth fluctuations generate time-varying
      risk aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals’ asset allocation, working paper, Stanford
      University and Princeton University.

Campbell, John, 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
     dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.

Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, 2005, Comparing wealth effects: The
       stock market versus the housing market, Advances in Macroeconomics 5, 1-32.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004, Consumption-
       wealth comovement of the wrong sign, Harvard University working paper.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1994, How does future income affect current consumption? Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 109, 111-147.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1997, Buffer stock saving and the life-cycle/permanent income
        hypothesis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1-56.

Cohen, Randolph, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, The price is (almost) right,
      Harvard University working paper.

DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas J. Skinner, 2000, Special dividends and the
     evolution of dividend signaling, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 309-354.

Deaton, Angus, 1991, Saving and liquidity constraints, Econometrica 59, 1221-1248.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Permanent and temporary components of stock
      prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-273.

Feldstein, Martin S., 1973, Tax incentives, corporate saving, and capital accumulation in the
       United States, Journal of Public Economics 2, 159-171.



                                             33
Feldstein, Martin S., and George Fane, 1973, Taxes, corporate dividend policy and personal
       savings: The British postwar experience, Review of Economics and Statistics 55, 399-
       411.

Graham, John R., and Alok Kumar, 2005, Dividend Preferences of Retail Investors, Journal of
      Finance, forthcoming.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1985, The effect of liquidity constraints on consumption: a cross-sectional
      analysis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 183-206.

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2004, Household expenditure
      and the income tax rebates of 2001, American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kreinin, Mordechai E., 1961, Windfall income and consumption: Additional evidence, American
       Economic Review 51, 388-390.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2004, Understanding trend and cycle in asset values:
       Reevaluating the wealth effect on consumption, American Economic Review 94, 279-
       299.

Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth and the valuation of
        shares, Journal of Business 34, 411-433.

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
      heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,
      703-708.

Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of Finance 53,
      1775-98.

Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review 89, 1279-98.

Parker, Jonathan A., 1999a, The reaction of household consumption to predictable changes in
       Social Security taxes, American Economic Review 89, 959-973.

Parker, Jonathan A., 1999b, The consumption function re-estimated, working paper, Princeton
       University.

Parker, Jonathan A., 2001, The consumption risk of the stock market, Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, 279-348.

Poterba, James M., and Lawrence Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock prices: evidence and
       implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.




                                              34
Poterba, James M., 1990, Dividends, capital gains, and the corporate veil: Evidence from
       Britain, Canada, and the United States, in: D. Bernheim and J. Shoven, eds., National
       Saving and Economic Performance (Chicago: U. Chicago Press), 49-71.

Poterba, James M., 2000, Stock market wealth and consumption, Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 14, 99-118.

Rantapuska, Elias, 2005, Do investors reinvest dividends and tender offer proceeds? Helsinki
      School of Economics working paper.

Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,
       Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.

Shefrin, Hersh M., and Richard H. Thaler, 1988, The behavioral life-cycle hypothesis, Economic
       Inquiry 26, 609-643.

Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, The response of household consumption to income tax refunds,
       American Economic Review 89, 947-958.

Souleles, Nicholas S., 2002, Consumer response to the Reagan tax cuts, Journal of Public
       Economics 85, 99-120.

Stephens, Melvin, Jr., 2003, ‘3rd of tha month’: Do Social Security recipients smooth
       consumption between checks? American Economic Review 93, 406-422.

Summers, Lawrence, and Chris Carroll, 1987, Why is the U.S. savings rate so low?, Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 607-635.

Thaler, Richard H., and Hersh M. Shefrin, 1981, An economic theory of self-control, Journal of
       Political Economy 39, 392-406.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57, 233-
       264.

Wilcox, David W., 1989, Social Security benefits, consumption expenditures, and the life cycle
      hypothesis, Journal of Political Economy 97, 288-304.




                                             35
Figure 1. Net withdrawals versus dividends: Scatter plot. We plot monthly net withdrawals against
contemporaneous dividends. Net withdrawals are equal to household monthly net withdrawals. All data are scaled
by household account value in period t-1 and expressed in percentage terms.
Figure 2. Net withdrawals of dividends and total returns: Decile plots. We sort the data into groups according to monthly dividends and total returns and
compute the corresponding level of net withdrawals. The first two panels show dividend sorts. The eleven groups include ten deciles for months with positive
dividends and a single group for months with zero dividends. The second two panels show total returns sorts. The ten groups break the sample into deciles
according to monthly total returns. We plot within group median (average) net withdrawals versus median (average) dividends in Panels A and C (Panels B and
D). Net withdrawals are equal to the monthly net withdrawals by household. All data are scaled by household account value in period t-1 and expressed in
percentage terms.

                    Panel A. Median net withdrawals versus dividends                                                                   Panel B. Average net withdrawals versus dividends
       1.50                                                                                                               1.50




       1.00                                                                                                               1.00




       0.50                                                                                                               0.50




       0.00                                                                                                               0.00




       -0.50                                                                                                              -0.50




       -1.00                                                                                                              -1.00
            0.00     0.20            0.40   0.60     0.80           1.00    1.20          1.40   1.60      1.80    2.00        0.00     0.20            0.40   0.60     0.80           1.00    1.20          1.40   1.60      1.80    2.00
                                                               Dividends                                                                                                          Dividends



                   Panel C. Median net withdrawals versus total returns                                                               Panel D. Average net withdrawals versus total returns
                                                             0.50                                                                                                               0.50


                                                             0.40                                                                                                               0.40


                                                             0.30                                                                                                               0.30


                                                             0.20                                                                                                               0.20


                                                             0.10                                                                                                               0.10


                                                             0.00                                                                                                               0.00


                                                            -0.10                                                                                                              -0.10


                                                            -0.20                                                                                                              -0.20


                                                            -0.30                                                                                                              -0.30


                                                            -0.40                                                                                                              -0.40


                                                            -0.50                                                                                                              -0.50
       -15.00               -10.00           -5.00               0.00              5.00            10.00          15.00   -15.00               -10.00           -5.00               0.00              5.00            10.00          15.00
                                                            Capital Gains                                                                                                      Capital Gains
Figure 3. Net withdrawals of dividends by type: Scatter plots. We plot monthly net withdrawals against contemporaneous ordinary, mutual fund, and special
dividends. Net withdrawals are equal to household monthly net withdrawals. All data are scaled by household account value in period t-1 and expressed in
percentage terms.

             Panel A. Net withdrawals versus ordinary dividends                         Panel B. Net withdrawals versus mutual fund dividends




                                                    Panel C. Net withdrawals versus special dividends
Figure 4. Net withdrawals of dividends: Ordinary, mutual fund, and special dividends. We sort the data into
groups according to monthly ordinary, mutual fund, and special dividends and compute the corresponding level of
net withdrawals. The first two panels show ordinary, common stock dividend sorts; the second two panels show
mutual fund dividend sorts; and the last two panels show sorts on the remaining dividends, including special
dividends, liquidating dividends, and cash acquisitions. In each case, the eleven groups include ten deciles for
months with positive dividends and a single group for months with zero dividends. We plot within group median
(average) net withdrawals versus median (average) dividends in Panels A, C, and E (Panels B, D, and F). Net
withdrawals are equal to the monthly net withdrawals by household. All data are scaled by household account value
in period t-1 and expressed in percentage terms.

 Panel A. Median net withdrawals vs. ordinary dividends Panel B. Average net withdrawals vs. ordinary dividends
 1.50                                                                                                                                                      1.50




 1.00                                                                                                                                                      1.00




 0.50                                                                                                                                                      0.50




 0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00




 -0.50                                                                                                                                                     -0.50




 -1.00                                                                                                                                                     -1.00
      0.00   0.10             0.20           0.30             0.40          0.50          0.60             0.70           0.80              0.90    1.00        0.00          0.20           0.40                   0.60                    0.80           1.00            1.20
                                                                     Ordinary Dividends                                                                                                                      Ordinary Dividends




     Panel C. Median net withdrawals vs. MF dividends                                                                                                         Panel D. Average net withdrawals vs. MF dividends
  1.50                                                                                                                                                     1.50




  1.00                                                                                                                                                     1.00




  0.50                                                                                                                                                     0.50




  0.00                                                                                                                                                     0.00




 -0.50                                                                                                                                                     -0.50




 -1.00                                                                                                                                                     -1.00
      0.00             0.50                         1.00                    1.50                    2.00                         2.50               3.00        0.00          0.50           1.00                   1.50                    2.00           2.50            3.00
                                                                   Mutual Fund Dividends                                                                                                                    Mutual Fund Dividends




 Panel E. Median net withdrawals vs. special dividends                                                                                                     Panel F. Average net withdrawals vs. special dividends
 25.00                                                                                                                                                     25.00




 20.00                                                                                                                                                     20.00




 15.00                                                                                                                                                     15.00




 10.00                                                                                                                                                     10.00




  5.00                                                                                                                                                      5.00




  0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00




 -5.00                                                                                                                                                     -5.00
      0.00      5.00                 10.00                 15.00           20.00            25.00                 30.00                 35.00      40.00        0.00   5.00          10.00          15.00           20.00           25.00          30.00          35.00   40.00
                                                                     Special Dividends                                                                                                                        Special Dividends
Table 1. Summary statistics: Consumer expenditure survey data, 1988-2001. We report means, medians, and
standard deviations for annual consumption, wealth, and income in the short-panel CEX. Non-durable consumption
is equal to the sum of food, alcohol, apparel, transportation, entertainment, personal care, and reading expenditure
over the four quarters from a household’s second to fifth interview. Total expenditure, which includes durables, over
the same period is taken directly from the CEX files. Income is the after-tax income over the prior four quarters, as
reported by households in their fifth interview. It includes income from dividends (income from dividends, royalties,
estates, or trusts) and interest income, but not capital gains. Total wealth is measured as the sum of home equity and
financial wealth. We define financial wealth as the sum of checking and savings accounts balances, holdings of
savings bonds, money owed to the household, and stock holdings (stocks plus mutual funds plus small positions in
corporate and government bonds other than savings bonds) minus other debts. We compute dollar capital gains as
the difference between the change in reported stock holdings over four quarters and the reported net investment in
stocks during the same period. We limit the sample to households with nonzero financial wealth invested in stocks
and nonmissing data on income and consumption. We also require that there is only one consumer unit (family) in
the household and that the marital status of the respondent and the family size remain unchanged from the second to
fifth interview, and that none of the wealth component is topcoded. We use the CPI to deflate all variables into
December 2001 dollars.

                                      N       Mean           50%           5%          95%          Min          Max
Panel A. Consumption
Non-Durable
Consumption                       3,106       15,042       13,698        4,463       30,003        1,347       78,548
Total Consumption                 3,106       48,076       44,582       15,549       91,892        4,955     201,559
Panel B. Wealth
Financial Wealth (t-1)            3,106       67,700       38,701        2,928     222,207            14     984,165
Total Wealth (t-1)                3,106     161,822      127,276        10,943     428,919           190   1,199,269
Panel C: Income
Income (Yt)                       3,106       56,566       52,316       12,282     115,505            49     303,793
Interest income (It)              2,869        1,264          145            0        6,383            0       86,391
Dividends (Dt)                    3,106          935            0            0        4,751            0     144,658
Other income                      2,869       54,128       50,526       10,192     112,245       -13,823     302,238
Capital gains (Gt)                3,106          363            0      -16,014       18,988     -301,407     181,503
Panel D. Composition of Income and Capital Gains (%)
Interest income                   2,869          4.2          0.2          0.0         19.1       -137.1      2,086.4
Dividends                         3,106          2.1          0.0          0.0         12.0        -36.4        236.7
Other income                      2,869         89.3         97.5         45.3        122.2    -13,249.2      3,996.0
Capital gains                     3,106          4.4          0.0        -27.3         38.2     -5,216.1     13,397.0
Panel E. Control Variables
Financial Wealth Invested
in Stock (%, t-1)                 3,106         56.2         60.3          3.8         97.9          0.0        100.0
Age                               3,106           52           49           30           80           21           93
Family Size                       3,106            2            2            1            5            1           11
Table 2. Consumption of dividends and other sources of income: Consumer expenditure survey data in levels.
OLS regressions of consumption on total returns, dividends, and interest income. Non-durable consumption is equal
to the sum of food, alcohol, apparel, transportation, entertainment, personal care, and reading expenditure over the
four quarters from a household’s second to fifth interview. Total expenditure, which includes durables, over the
same period is taken directly from the CEX files. Total returns, dividends, and interest income cover the same four
quarters. Lagged dividends cover the four quarters ending with the second interview. Household Controls: Family
Size, HS Education, College Education, Age. Income and Wealth: Income (covering the same four quarters),
Lagged income (covering the four quarters ending with the second interview), Financial Wealth (period ending four
quarters prior to the fifth interview), Total Wealth (period ending four quarters prior to the fifth interview), Percent
of Wealth in Stocks (period ending four quarters prior to the fifth interview). Interactions (HC x HC): HS
Education*Age, College Education*Age, Family Size*Age, Age2, Family Size2. Interactions (HC x IW): Financial
Wealth*Age, Income*Family Size, Total Wealth*Family Size, Income2, Total Wealth2, Financial Wealth2,
Percentage of Wealth in Stocks2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables deflated
by the CPI.

                                                    Non-durable consumer
                                                        expenditure                     Total consumer expenditure
                                                    1        2         3        4         5        6         7        8
Rt = Gt + Dt                                    -0.01    -0.01                        -0.01    -0.01
                                               (0.01)   (0.01)                       (0.02)   (0.02)
Dt                                               0.16     0.16                         0.75     0.72
                                               (0.04)   (0.05)                       (0.14)   (0.14)
Dt-1                                                      0.01                                  0.14
                                                        (0.04)                                (0.11)
{Dt = Dt-1 = 0}                                  -694     -688                        -915      -772
                                                (249)    (253)                        (639)    (641)
Rt = Gt + Dt + It                                                  -0.01    -0.01                        -0.02    -0.02
                                                                  (0.01)   (0.01)                       (0.02)   (0.02)
Dt + It                                                             0.13     0.12                         0.58     0.56
                                                                  (0.04)   (0.04)                       (0.13)   (0.13)
Dt-1 + It-1                                                                  0.03                                  0.06
                                                                           (0.03)                                (0.09)
{Dt + It = Dt-1 + It-1 = 0}                                        -595      -566                        -980      -922
                                                                   (267)    (268)                       (684)     (687)


Year-Month Fixed Effects                         Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Controls: Household Characteristics (HC)         Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Controls: Income and Wealth (IW)                 Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Interactions: HC x HC                            Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Interactions: HC x IW                            Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes


N                                              2,796     2,796    2,410     2,410    2,796     2,796    2,410     2,410
  2
R                                                0.52     0.52      0.52     0.52      0.63     0.63      0.64     0.64
Table 3. Consumption of dividends and other sources of income: Consumer expenditure survey data in
differences. OLS regressions of changes in consumption on total returns, changes in income, changes in dividends,
and changes in interest income. Non-durable consumption is equal to the sum of food, alcohol, apparel,
transportation, entertainment, personal care, and reading expenditure. Total expenditure, which includes durables, is
taken directly from the CEX files. We use the difference between quarterly consumption in the fifth (and last)
interview and the second interview three quarters earlier. Total returns are measured over the four quarters from a
household’s second to fifth interview. We take the difference between annual dividends, interest, and other income
ending in the fifth interview and the second interview three quarters earlier. Household Controls: Family Size, HS
Education, College Education, Age. Interactions (HC x HC): HS Education*Age, College Education*Age, Family
Size*Age, Age2, Family Size2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. All variables deflated by
the CPI.

                                   Changes in non-durable consumer
                                             expenditure                    Changes in total consumer expenditure
                                      1          2          3          4          5          6          7          8
Rt = Gt + Dt                     -0.003     -0.002                            0.006      0.004
                                (0.003)    (0.003)                          (0.008)    (0.008)
∆Dt                               0.017      0.005                            0.093      0.057
                                (0.009)    (0.010)                          (0.029)    (0.028)
{Dt = Dt-1 = 0}                    -279       -127                             -850       -833
                                   (92)      (110)                            (256)      (255)
∆(Yt - Dt)                       -0.001      0.000                            0.025      0.034
                                (0.003)    (0.004)                          (0.007)    (0.008)
Rt = Gt + Dt + It                                      -0.004     -0.004                            0.003      0.002
                                                      (0.003)    (0.004)                          (0.009)    (0.009)
∆Dt + ∆It                                               0.009      0.007                            0.056      0.056
                                                      (0.008)    (0.008)                          (0.028)    (0.028)
{Dt + It = Dt-1 + It-1 = 0}                              -268        -78                                0       -732
                                                        (105)      (127)                              (0)      (277)
∆(Yt - Dt - It )                                       -0.002      0.000                            0.028      0.039
                                                      (0.004)    (0.004)                          (0.008)    (0.010)
Ct-1                             -0.678                -0.703                -0.621                -0.627
                                (0.047)               (0.049)               (0.041)               (0.045)


Year-Month Fixed Effects            Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Controls: Household
Characteristics (HC)                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Interactions: HC x HC               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


N                                 2,796      2,796      2,410      2,410      2,796      2,796      2,410      2,410
 2
R                                  0.38       0.06       0.39       0.06       0.37       0.07       0.39       0.08
Table 4. Consumption of dividends and other sources of income: Consumer expenditure survey data in log
differences. OLS regressions of changes in log consumption on log total returns, changes in log income, changes in
dividends, and changes in interest income. Non-durable consumption is equal to the sum of food, alcohol, apparel,
transportation, entertainment, personal care, and reading expenditure. Total expenditure, which includes durables, is
taken directly from the CEX files. We use the difference between log quarterly consumption in the fifth (and last)
interview and the second interview three quarters earlier. Total returns are measured over the four quarters from a
household’s second to fifth interview. We use an indicator variable equal to one if annual dividends and interest
ending in the fifth interview exceed the second interview three quarters earlier. We use the difference between log
annual income in the fifth interview and the second interview three quarters earlier. Household Controls: Family
Size, HS Education, College Education, Age. Change in Income Controls: Change in Income (differenc in annual
income from the second to the fifth interview). Interactions (HC x HC): HS Education*Age, College
Education*Age, Family Size*Age, Age2, Family Size2. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.
All variables deflated by the CPI.

                                 Changes in log non-durable consumer             Changes in log total consumer
                                             expenditure                                 expenditure
                                      1          2          3          4          5          6          7          8
log (1+ (Gt + Dt)/FWt-1)         -0.034     -0.013                            0.011     -0.002
                                (0.025)    (0.029)                          (0.030)    (0.034)
{∆Dt > 0}                         0.026      0.020                            0.074      0.083
                                (0.026)    (0.029)                          (0.024)    (0.028)
{Dt = Dt-1 = 0}                  -0.035      0.002                           -0.017      0.017
                                (0.022)    (0.025)                          (0.021)    (0.025)
∆log (Yt - Dt)                    0.010      0.020                            0.035      0.047
                                (0.012)    (0.014)                          (0.012)    (0.014)
log (1+ (Gt + Dt + It)/FWt-1)                          -0.031     -0.003                            0.010      0.003
                                                      (0.027)    (0.032)                          (0.033)    (0.038)
{∆Dt + ∆It > 0}                                         0.036      0.042                            0.029      0.047
                                                      (0.018)    (0.021)                          (0.017)    (0.019)
{Dt + It = Dt-1 + It-1 = 0}                            -0.036      0.007                           -0.040     -0.003
                                                      (0.020)    (0.022)                          (0.018)    (0.020)
∆log (Yt - Dt - It)                                     0.009      0.022                            0.035      0.049
                                                      (0.013)    (0.015)                          (0.014)    (0.016)
log Ct-1                         -0.441                -0.451                -0.456                -0.440
                                (0.021)               (0.023)               (0.021)               (0.023)


Year-Month Fixed Effects            Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Controls: Household
Characteristics (HC)                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Interactions: HC x HC               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


N                                 2,764      2,764      2,369      2,369      2,764      2,764      2,369      2,369
 2
R                                  0.26       0.06       0.27       0.08       0.29       0.07       0.28        0.08
Table 5. Summary statistics: Household portfolio data. Monthly net withdrawals are estimated as a household’s
account value at t-1 (aggregating across all eligible accounts held by the household) less the account value at t plus
dividends and capital gains earned on the account holdings at t-1. Dividends are equal to the dividend yield from
CRSP and the CRSP mutual fund database in month t on common stock and mutual fund account holdings at t-1.
Capital gains are the capital appreciation from CRSP and the CRSP mutual fund database in month t on common
stock and mutual fund account holdings at t-1. Ordinary dividends are equal to the dividend yield from CRSP
(distribution codes 1000 through 1999 excluding codes 1262 and 1272) on common stock account holdings at t-1.
Mutual fund dividends are equal to the dividend yield from the CRSP mutual fund database on mutual fund account
holdings at t-1. Special dividends are all other dividends. All data are scaled by household account value in period t-
1 and expressed in percentage terms. We exclude observations where we cannot identify a CRSP mutual fund or
common stock match for more than 75 percent of the household account value at t-1; households where account
value falls below $10,000; margin accounts; and accounts that are not joint tenancy or individual accounts. We
further exclude observations where the absolute value of consumption exceeds 50%. This screen eliminates 900
observations, or 0.96% of the sample.

                                            N      Mean        50%         10%         90%          Min           Max
Panel A. Portfolio Composition
At-1 ($000)                            92,412        54.4       28.4       13.8         99.8        10.0       5,018.9
Common Stocks (%)                      92,412       82.69        0.0         0.0       100.0          0.0        100.0
Mutual Funds (%)                       92,412       13.49        0.0         0.0         0.0          0.0        100.0
Other Assets (%)                       92,412        3.82      100.0         0.0       100.0          0.0         25.0
Panel B. Dividends, Capital Gains, and Withdrawals (%)
Withdrawals Ct/At-1                    92,412        0.06        0.0        -0.7         1.0       -50.0          50.0
Dividends Dt/At-1                      92,412        0.20        0.0         0.0         0.5          0.0        102.4
Returns Rt/At-1                        92,412        1.11        1.1        -6.1         8.3       -74.0         153.5
Panel C: Dividends by Type (%)
Ordinary Dt/At-1                       92,412        0.12        0.0         0.0         0.4          0.0          3.0
Mutual Fund Dt/At-1                    92,412        0.07        0.0         0.0         0.1          0.0         29.9
Special Dt/At-1                        92,412        0.01        0.0         0.0         0.0          0.0        102.4
Panel D. Composition of Dividends by Type where Dt>0 (%)
Ordinary Dt/At-1                       44,509       77.92      100.0         0.0       100.0          0.0        100.0
Mutual Fund Dt/At-1                    44,509       21.79        0.0         0.0       100.0          0.0        100.0
Special Dt/At-1                        44,509        0.30        0.0         0.0         0.0          0.0        100.0
Table 6. Net withdrawals of dividends and total returns: Univariate regressions. OLS regressions of net
withdrawals on dividends and total returns. Net withdrawals is equal to household monthly net withdrawals. All data
are scaled by household account value in period t-1 and expressed in percentage terms. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors are in parentheses.

                                              Linear Regressions                 Piecewise Linear Regressions
                                              1            2             3            1             2            3
Dt/At-1                                    0.35                       0.35         0.77                       0.77
                                         (0.09)                     (0.09)        (0.09)                     (0.09)
Dt/At-1* {Dt/At-1 > 90th Pctle}                                                   -0.44                      -0.44
                                                                                  (0.11)                     (0.11)
Rt/At-1                                                 0.02          0.02                       0.02         0.02
                                                       (0.00)       (0.00)                     (0.00)        (0.00)
Rt/At-1* {|Rt/At-1| < 0.025}                                                                    -0.03        -0.05
                                                                                               (0.02)        (0.02)


N                                       92,412        92,412       92,412        92,412       92,412        92,412
 2
R                                       0.0025        0.0005       0.0029        0.0027       0.0005        0.0032
Table 7. Net withdrawals of dividends and total returns: The effect of delayed reinvestment. OLS regressions
of net withdrawals on dividends and total returns and 11-month lags of dividends and total returns. Net withdrawals
are equal to household monthly net withdrawals. All data are scaled by household account value in period t-1 and
expressed in percentage terms. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.

                                                          Linear Regressions            Piecewise Linear Regressions
                                                           1          2            3         1           2             3
Dt/At-1                                                  0.35                   0.35       0.81                  0.80
                                                       (0.09)                  (0.09)    (0.10)                (0.10)
                             th
Dt/At-1* {Dt/At-1 > 90 Pctle}                                                             -0.48                 -0.47
                                                                                         (0.12)                (0.12)
1
 11   Σs=1 to 11 Dt-s/At-1                               0.01                   0.01      -0.16                 -0.07
                                                       (0.10)                  (0.10)    (0.17)                (0.18)
1
 11   Σs=1 to 11 Dt-s/At-1* {Dt-s/At-1 > 90th Pctle}                                       0.14                  0.07
                                                                                         (0.18)                (0.18)
Rt/At-1                                                            0.02         0.02                  0.02       0.02
                                                                 (0.00)        (0.00)               (0.00)     (0.00)
Rt/At-1* {|Rt/At-1| < 0.025}                                                                         -0.03      -0.04
                                                                                                    (0.02)     (0.02)
1
 11   Σs=1 to 11 Rt-s/At-1                                         0.00         0.00                  0.00       0.00
                                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)               (0.01)     (0.01)
1
 11   Σs=1 to 11 Rt-s/At-1* {|Rt-s/At-1| < 0.025}                                                     0.03      -0.06
                                                                                                    (0.06)     (0.06)


N                                                      92,412   92,412     92,412       92,412     92,412     92,412
 2
R                                                      0.0025   0.0005     0.0029       0.0027     0.0005     0.0032
Table 8. Net withdrawals of dividends and total returns: By household type. OLS regressions of net withdrawals on dividends and total returns and 11-
month lags of dividends and total returns. Net withdrawals are equal to household monthly net withdrawals. All data are scaled by household account value in
period t-1 and expressed in percentage terms. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. Household portfolio value is the average monthly
portfolio value. Household net worth and tax rate are self-reported data supplied to the brokerage firm at the time of the opening of the account.

                                                                                                                                      Household Portfolio
                                               Household Portfolio Value           Household Net Worth      Household Tax Rate            Turnover
                                           <Median      >Median     >0.5*NW        <Median     >Median     <Median      >Median      <Median      >Median
Dt/At-1                                         0.77         0.80          0.84        0.67         0.81         0.44        1.00         0.75         0.89
                                              (0.12)       (0.13)       (0.43)        (0.32)      (0.36)       (0.29)       (0.40)       (0.07)       (0.19)
                      th
Dt/At-1* {Dt/At-1 > 90 Pctle}                  -0.43        -0.48          -0.54      -0.16        -0.72        -0.32        -0.57        -0.45       -0.52
                                              (0.15)       (0.16)       (0.44)        (0.32)      (0.36)       (0.30)       (0.41)       (0.11)       (0.21)
Rt/At-1                                         0.02         0.02          0.01        0.02         0.02         0.04        0.00         0.01         0.03
                                              (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.00)       (0.01)
Rt/At-1* {|Rt/At-1| < 0.025}                    0.00        -0.08          -0.02      -0.07        -0.01        -0.07        -0.01        -0.02       -0.07
                                              (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.08)        (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.08)       (0.02)       (0.04)


N                                            45,092       47,320         6,240       11,947       7,973       11,768        8,152       48,353       44,059
 2
R                                            0.0042       0.0026       0.0012        0.0035      0.0010       0.0021       0.0026       0.0062       0.0029
Table 9. Net withdrawals and the composition of dividends. OLS regressions of net withdrawals on dividends
and total returns and 11-month lags of dividends and total returns. Net withdrawals are equal to household monthly
net withdrawals. Ordinary dividends are equal to the dividend yield from CRSP (distribution codes distribution
codes 1000 through 1999 excluding codes 1262 and 1272) on common stock account holdings at t-1. Mutual fund
dividends are equal to the dividend yield from the CRSP mutual fund database on mutual fund account holdings at t-
1. Special dividends are all other dividends. All data are scaled by household account value in period t-1 and
expressed in percentage terms. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses.

                                                                                            Special and Other
                                   Ordinary Dividends        Mutual Fund Dividends             Dividends
                                          1             2             1             2             1             2
Dt/At-1                                0.82          0.71          0.40          0.35          0.75          0.75
                                     (0.11)         (0.13)        (0.12)        (0.14)        (0.13)        (0.13)
                      th
Dt/At-1* {Dt/At-1 > 90 Pctle}          0.16          0.16         -0.26         -0.23         -0.46         -0.46
                                     (0.12)         (0.12)        (0.13)        (0.13)        (0.19)        (0.19)
Rt/At-1                                0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02          0.02
                                     (0.00)         (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)
Rt/At-1* {|Rt/At-1| < 0.025}          -0.02         -0.02         -0.04         -0.04         -0.03         -0.03
                                     (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)
Dt-12/At                                             0.13                        0.05                       -0.08
                                                    (0.09)                      (0.06)                      (0.04)


N (000)                                92.4          92.4          92.4          92.4          92.4          92.4
 2
R                                    0.0023        0.0023        0.0007        0.0007        0.0021        0.0022
