NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INNOVATIVITY: A COMPARISON ACROSS
SEVEN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
Pierre Mohnen
Jacques Mairesse
Marcel Dagenais
Working Paper 12280
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12280
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2006

We have benefitted from useful comments by Elena Bontempi, Christian Debresson, Dominique Guellec,
Emmanuel Duguet, Nathalie Greenan and Petr Hanel. We thank particularly Bronwyn Hall for helpful
suggestions and a careful rereading of a (nearly) final version of the study. We are grateful to Eurostat for
providing, and giving us permission to use, the micro-aggregated CIS1 firm data. We also acknowledge
research assistance of Julio Rosa and financial support by Industry Canada, OECD, SSHRC and CNRS. A
summary account of some of the results of this study can be found in Mairesse and Mohnen (2001, 2002).
Note that what we called innovativeness in these two papers, we choose to name here more simply
“innovativity”. Marcel Dagenais passed away before this paper was completed. He could not read and correct
the last versions of it. The paper bears his input. We hope it also bears his standards. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2006 by Pierre Mohnen, Jacques Mairesse and Marcel Dagenais. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Innovativity: A Comparison Across Seven European Countries
Pierre Mohnen, Jacques Mairesse and Marcel Dagenais
NBER Working Paper No. 12280
May 2006
JEL No. C35, L60, O31, O33
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a framework to account for innovation similar to the usual accounting
framework in production analysis and a measure of innovativity comparable to that of total factor
productivity. This innovation accounting framework is illustrated using micro-aggregated firm data
from the first Community Innovation Surveys (CIS1) for seven European countries: Belgium,
Denmark, Ireland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and Italy for the year 1992. Based on the
estimation of a generalized Tobit model and measuring innovation as the share of total sales due to
improved or new products, it compares the propensity to innovate, and the innovation intensity
conditional and unconditional on being innovative, across the seven countries and low- and high-tech
manufacturing sectors. Even with relatively few explanatory variables our innovation framework
already accounts for sizeable differences in country innovation intensity. It also shows that
differences in innovativity across countries can be nonetheless very large.
Jacques Mairesse
INSEE, CREST
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr

1. INTRODUCTION
Industrial countries have reached a stage of economic development that many describe as
“the knowledge-based economy” (KBE). The concept of a KBE is appealing, but its
definition is far from being clear-cut. Some say that what distinguishes a KBE from the
past industrial economies is that growth is driven less by investments in buildings and
equipment than by the generation of ideas and the accumulation of knowledge (see for
example Aghion-Howitt, 1998; Foray, 2004; Neef, 1998). Others characterize a KBE by
the importance of information and communication technologies, skilled labor, continuous
learning, and globalization (see for example Quah, 2001). Whatever definition one comes
up with, innovation is certainly one of the pillars of the knowledge-based economy.
Competition among firms to attract customers is fought more and more via improved
products, entirely new products or more efficient ways to produce existing products.
How to measure innovation? So far, most of the work on science and technology
indicators has been based on R&D, patent or bibliometric data. R&D data have been
collected in a systematic fashion in OECD countries since the inception of the Frascati
Manual (OECD, 1963). Patent grants have been recorded by patent offices around the
world for a much longer time. Bibliometric data are also widely available in the form of
publications and citations, or innovation announcements. All of these indicators have
their shortcomings. R&D measures only research input with no guarantee that the
research eventually leads to a marketable and appropriable innovation output. Most
patents are worth little and the propensity to patent varies widely across sectors.
Bibliometric data are not always collected systematically or readily available, and they
suffer even more than patents from the absence of any associated value. It is only recently

5

that, under the guidelines of the Oslo Manual (OECD (1992), statistical agencies have
started conducting surveys directly asking firms about their innovations.1 In these
surveys, firms are asked to give information about the inputs, the outputs and the
behavioral and organizational dimensions of their innovative activities. On the input side,
we have data on R&D expenditures and on current innovation expenditures besides R&D
(such as the acquisition of patents and licenses, product design, trial production, and
market analysis). On the output side, we have the declaration of whether an enterprise has
introduced a new product or process and the shares of sales due to incrementally,
significantly changed, or entirely new products, which can be new to the enterprise or
new to the market. As other dimensions of innovative activities, we have indicators of
whether R&D is done on a continuous basis and/or in cooperation with others, and
categorical data on the sources of knowledge, the reasons for innovating, the perceived
obstacles to innovation, and the perceived strength of various appropriability
mechanisms.
In this paper, we take advantage of the first round of harmonized innovation
surveys conducted in Europe under the auspices of the Statistical Office of the European
1

There have been a number of more or less similar surveys conducted earlier, focusing on particular aspects

of firm innovation process. Probably the best known are the one conducted by the Science and Policy
Research Unit (SPRU) of the University of Sussex, which combined information on specific innovations
obtained from firms and from a panel of experts, the Yale survey on appropriability, and more recently the
Carnegie-Mellon survey. See for example Robson, Townsend and Pavitt (1988), and Geroski, Van Reenen
and Walters (1997) for analyses based on the SPRU innovation data; Levin, Klevorick, Nelson and Winter
(1987) and Cockburn and Griliches (1988) for analyses based on the Yale survey data; Cohen, Nelson and
Walsh (2000) and Arora, Ceccagnoli and Cohen (2003) for analyses based on the Carnegie-Mellon survey.

6

Community (Eurostat), the so called CIS1 surveys (for first Community Innovation
Surveys) covering the years 1990-1992. More precisely, we try to compare the innovation
performance for seven European countries: Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
the Netherlands and Norway, based on the CIS1 micro-aggregated firm data, as
assembled and harmonized by Eurostat. In an exploratory paper, Mohnen and Dagenais
(2001) compared the innovation performance of Denmark and Ireland. In the present
analysis, we could not consider France because the CIS1 micro-aggregated data available
for France did not include the variable on R&D expenditures. We also excluded Portugal
and Greece because their sample was not representative of the whole population but only
of innovating firms. Although the original data are firm data, Eurostat was entitled to
make them available only in micro-aggregated form for reasons of statistical
confidentiality.
“Micro-aggregation” is one among various methods to protect confidentiality. It is
a particularly simple and effective way to control for disclosure by adding “error terms”
to the raw micro-data, making it extremely difficult, if not fully impossible, to break the
anonymity of the individual firm (or more generally statistical unit) surveyed and find out
its identity, while preserving “most” of the information useful for statistical analysis. In
micro-aggregation methods, the error terms are not defined explicitly but included
implicitly in the procedure. The procedure used by Eurostat for CIS1 is micro-aggregation
by individual variable ranking (and groups of three observations). It is the following: for
any given (continuous) quantitative variable, all firms are first allocated into groups of
three on the basis of their ranking by increasing values of the variable; the (simple)
arithmetic averages of the variable are then computed for all groups (i.e. over the three

7

firms of each group); and finally the raw values of the variable are replaced for all the
firms by the corresponding average values. This amounts to adding to every (continuous)
variable, for a given firm (i), an error term ( ε i ) equal to the difference between the
average value of the variable ( yi ) for the group of three firms (i, j and k) in which this
firm is allocated and its individual value ( yi ).2 The procedure is similar for the (discrete)
qualitative variables (for more details see Eurostat, 1996 and 1997). Note that microaggregation is a sense a misnomer, since the number of observations (firms) is the same
in the micro-aggregated and the raw samples. One great advantage of micro-aggregation
is that the error terms added to the variables behave differently than the classical random
measurement errors in variables; they are not a source of bias in the estimation of linear
regression models for large enough samples. On the basis of the raw firm data of the
French CIS2 innovation survey and the corresponding micro-aggregated data, we have
also been able to show that the estimates of a non-linear model similar to the one
performed here were not sensitive to the micro-aggregation procedure (see Mairesse and
Mohnen, 2001).3

2

If i, j and k denote respectively the index of the three firms of a given group, when firms are ranked in

increasing order of the variable y, we can write equivalently

yi = yi + ε i with ε i = [( y j − yi ) + ( yk − yi )] / 3 ,
y j = y j + ε j with ε j = [( yi − y j ) + ( yk − y j )] / 3 and
yk = yk + ε k with ε k = [( yi − yk ) + ( y j − yk )] / 3 .
3

See also Hu and Debresson (1998).

8

yi = y j = yk = ( yi + y j +yk ) / 3 or

Besides contributing to the analysis of the information provided by innovation
surveys, and possibly to the improvement in their design, our main purpose in this paper
is to organize our thinking on measurement and comparison of innovation performance,
and to do so we propose and illustrate the idea of an accounting framework for innovation
similar to the now standard production (or output growth or productivity) accounting
framework. In this framework, the production of a country, an industry or a firm can be
traced back to the use of various factors of production and to other omitted, unobserved,
unknown or “residual” factors that are subsumed under the name of total factor
productivity, or multifactor productivity, or even simply productivity. Similarly,
innovation can be regarded as deriving in part from traceable factors such as R&D efforts,
and from contextual variables such as demand pull and technology push indicators, and in
part from yet-to-be-understood unmeasured factors that we propose to identify jointly as
total or multifactor innovative productivity, and to call “innovativity” for short. Total
factor productivity is generally considered as a measure of productive performance
controlling for a given set of factors of production, as well as a measure of our ignorance
in accounting fully for this performance. Likewise, innovativity can be viewed as both a
measure of innovative performance and a measure of our ignorance in matters of
innovation.
The production accounting framework is generally applied to comparisons in the
time dimension (i.e. between periods) of output or productivity performances of the unit
(or units) under analysis, but it can also be extended to the comparison of such
performances in the cross-sectional or spatial dimension, that is between units (in a given
period). Similarly, the innovation accounting framework can be applied to either the time

9

or the cross-sectional dimension. We shall illustrate it here by comparing innovation in
seven European countries in high-tech and low-tech manufacturing industries, based on
the CIS1 micro-aggregated firm data.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we develop the idea of an
accounting framework for innovation. In section 3, we lay out the econometric model
which underlies such framework and is consistent with the nature of the innovation
survey data. In section 4, we describe the CIS1 micro-aggregated data we use. In section
5, we present and interpret the estimation results. In section 6, on the basis of these results
and along the lines of our framework, we proceed with the comparison of the innovation
performance of the seven European countries. We summarize the main points of the
analysis in the concluding section.

2.

ACCOUNTING

FOR

INNOVATION

AND

ACCOUNTING

FOR

PRODUCTIVITY: A PARALLEL
The innovation surveys provide us with a very interesting new way of measuring the
output of firms’ innovative activities, namely the share of sales in the last year (i.e. 1992
for CIS1) due to new and substantially changed products introduced on the market during
the last three years (i.e., 1990-1992 for CIS1), or the share of innovative sales for short.
This measure can be viewed simply as a sales weighted number of innovations and seems
to be generally well understood by firm respondents. It also offers various possible
refinements such as distinguishing between incremental or radical improvements, or
between products new to the firm or new to the market. Of course such a measure only
captures product innovations, but the surveys indicate that most firms innovating in

10

processes also innovate in products.4 Process innovations do not directly show up in new
sales, if their only effect is to reduce the cost of producing old products. However, they
also lead in general to new or improved products through a change in product design or
quality.
Merely comparing statistics on the share of innovative sales or other innovation
indicators is useful but does not say why these indicators differ across firms, sectors or
countries. To understand why they do and possibly build more informative innovation
indicators, we need a model. If an exact model of innovation in its various dimensions
existed and we knew it, we should be able to understand precisely why, for example, one
country has a higher innovation performance than another country. Of course, such a
perfect model does not exist and we shall never be able to characterize and explain the
innovation process fully. Nevertheless, it is worth trying to model differences in
innovative performance. Even a rather crude model may allow us to assess, at least
approximately and tentatively, to what extent some important innovation factors, like
firm size or R&D efforts, account for differences in innovation output. In such an
endeavor, what remains to be explained is as important to measure as what can be
explained. On the one hand what we call innovativity reflects the ability to turn the
innovation factors accounted for in the model into innovation output, on the other hand it
corresponds to other factors not measured, let alone unveiled, that challenge the
researcher on innovation to probe further.

4

In CIS1 the proportion of firms that declared to be only process innovators (and not product innovators)

seemed particularly small; it is also relatively small in CIS2 and CIS3.

11

To be more explicit and better motivate our approach, it is helpful to draw a
comparison with the standard framework for output growth or productivity accounting.
Output is viewed as being produced by inputs in a process that can be represented and
analyzed by a production function. The production function in turn underlies an
accounting framework, in which the difference in output between two periods (years,
decades) or between two spatial units (firms, industries, countries) can be ascribed to
differences in the inputs, and to a residual difference in what is called total or multifactor
productivity (TFP or MFP), or simply productivity. Likewise, innovation output can be
viewed as resulting from a process of transformation which can be summarized by an
innovation function, even if this process is much less predictable than a production
process. This innovation model can also give rise to an accounting framework in which
differences in innovation output between two periods, or two spatial units, can similarly
be ascribed to differences in direct inputs of innovation, and more generally contextual or
environmental determinants, and to a residual difference in what can be called innovative
productivity or innovativity.
This parallel between productivity and innovativity is fairly straightforward when
both are measured on the basis of an econometrically estimated relationship. The analogy
is less clear when productivity analysis is based on “accounting data” and index number
computations. In this approach total or multifactor productivity is not estimated as a
residual but computed as the ratio of an output index to a weighted index of inputs, where
the weights are taken to be equal to the corresponding input shares (in total revenue or
total cost) available from firms'current accounts or country national accounts. In practice,
it is impossible to measure innovativity by such index number method in the absence of

12

similar accounting information for innovation outputs and inputs. In theory, that might
not be unconceivable if well developed and functioning markets for innovation outputs
and inputs existed in the economy, where one could assume that in the long run relative
prices and marginal productivities would tend to be equal. In such an hypothetical world,
firms’ current accounts (and balance sheets) could describe and measure innovation
activities, as they do for production activities, and thus provide the necessary information
for the computation of an index measure of innovativity, as for that of productivity.
The analogy between the two types of analyses could be pursued further to
highlight basic similarities, as well as essential differences. For example, the
methodological problems raised by extending a bilateral productivity comparison to a
multilateral one carry over to comparisons of innovation. In the case of a bilateral
comparison it is straightforward to compare the observations in one country with those in
the other country. In a multilateral comparison, it is useful to refer to a non-arbitrary fixed
point of comparison. If various firms of a given industry are compared, the reference
point would be the average firm; if various industries of a given country are compared, it
would be the average industry, and so on. As we are comparing here the innovation
performance in seven European countries, our choice for base of comparison will simply
be the hypothetical “average Europe”, where each of these countries is given equal
weight. 5
5 Our application of the innovation accounting framework bears a close resemblance to the interspatial
multilateral productivity comparisons introduced by Caves, Christensen and Diewert (1982). They
recommend the use of a transitive multilateral productivity index (based on an approximation to a general
production function), treating all countries symmetrically by comparing them to a hypothetical country,

13

In both types of analysis, the major challenge is to account for as many
explanatory factors as possible within the limits of available information. In our case, we
are strictly limited to the CIS1 micro-aggregated dataset. In addition to the usual R&D
intensity variable, we are able to consider a few other explanatory variables measuring or
proxying for firm organizational characteristics or external conditions propitious to
innovation activities. The econometric specification of the innovation model and its
estimation are thus largely conditioned by the availability and nature of the data. We now
turn to a presentation of the innovation model as we could specify it and estimate it on the
basis of the CIS1 data.

3. THE INNOVATION MODEL: ECONOMETRIC SPECIFICATION AND
ESTIMATION
The CIS questionnaires, like other innovation surveys, are set up in a way that gives rise
to censoring or selection problems. First, firms are asked some general questions such as
their total sales, their number of employees, their industry affiliation, and whether they
belong to a group of firms. Then, they have to answer a few central filtering questions to
determine whether or not they are “innovating” firms. Innovating firms are those
answering that in the last three years (i.e., 1990-1992 for CIS1) they have developed new
or changed products, or new or changed processes, or that they intend to do so in the near

which takes arithmetic average values for all variables entering the productivity formula (or geometric
averages if these variables are expressed in logarithms).

14

future.6 Only innovating firms have to fill out the full questionnaire, while non–
innovating firms are only asked about their perception of the degree of importance of
various obstacles hampering innovation. CIS surveys thus basically provide rich
information for firms which are innovating but little for firms which are not. If we limited
ourselves to use the information available for all firms, we could at best account for their
"propensity to innovate", but we would fail to exploit most of the information we have on
innovating firms, in particular regarding their innovation output and more precisely their
innovative sales. Therefore, we chose to specify an econometric model which exploits the
data of all firms, innovating or not, and which also accounts for firms’ innovation output
or “intensity of innovation”. The estimated model can then be used to compute expected
innovation intensity, controlling for a set of “exogenous” variables, and our indicator of
innovativity, defined as the residual difference between observed and expected innovation
intensity.7
More precisely, we adopt a generalized (Type 2) Tobit model consisting of two
equations, where the first one is a probit equation determining whether a firm innovates
6

This is the actual definition of innovating firms in CIS1. In CIS2 and CIS3 firms declaring that during the

last three years they have not yet completed or that they have abandoned innovation activities are also
considered as “innovating” firms.
7

Porter and Stern (1999) do a similar type of analysis, as we do here, although they do not cast it in terms

of an accounting framework for innovation. They define an expected innovation intensity index in terms of
expected international patents per head conditional on resource, environment and demand conditions. They
compute their index by estimating a regression on a panel of 17 OECD countries over a 21-year period.
While their measure is based directly on aggregated country data, ours is based on micro-data, and we
therefore need to model the propensity to innovate as well as the intensity of innovation.

15

or not, and the second one is a linear regression (or Tobit equation) explaining how much
the firm innovates (see for example Maddala, 1983; Amemiya, 1985; Greene, 2003; or
Wooldridge, 2002). We assume that there is a latent variable y1i* for firm i that is
generated by the first equation

y1*i = x1ib1 + u1i

(1)

where x1i is a vector of explanatory variables, b1 is a vector of parameters to be estimated,
and u1i is a random error term, which includes the effect of left-out variables omitted due
to the lack of appropriate data and our limited knowledge of the innovative process. This
equation is interpreted as saying that if y1*i is positive, incentives to innovate are large
enough for the firm to actually innovate. Denoting by y1i the binary variable indicating
that firm i is an innovating firm, we can thus write:

=1
y1i =
=0

if y1*i >0
if y1*i ≤0

(1’)

As explanatory variables x1i we can use industry dummies, firm size and group
membership. Industry dummies capture technological opportunity conditions (i.e. it is
easier to innovate in certain fields than in others), industry-targeted innovation policies,
an industry-specific differential demand growth effect (for instance, demand is growing
for electronic products but declining for textile products), or structural effects like the
intensity of competition. Size, measured by the number of employees, reflects access to
finance, scale economies, and differences in the organization of work. Firms that are part
of a group (i.e. controlled by another firm) are expected to benefit from intra-group

16

knowledge spillovers, internal access to finance, or various other synergies (in marketing,
distribution, etc), and therefore to be more innovative.
Three other variables are in principle available in CIS1 micro-aggregated data for
all firms irrespective of whether or not they are innovators. Past growth can be a
determining factor of innovation, as reflecting both a stronger demand and an easier
access to internal and external finance (see Brouwer and Kleinknecht, 1999).
Unfortunately, the growth rate in firm sales (in the three year period 1990-92) is missing
for Norway and Germany, and hence we could not actually use it to control for past
growth in a common model for all the seven countries considered. We could also have
considered the proportion of exports in total sales as an indicator of external competition
stimulating innovation. However, it would be a very unsatisfactory indicator, since it is
not likely to be exogenous. Exports can be driven by innovation, as new products open up
new markets abroad, and both innovative sales and export intensity can also result from
past innovative efforts. A third variable available with observations for both innovating
and non-innovating firms is the degree of importance of the obstacles to innovation.
Although this should be a priori a very important factor in explaining why firms will not
innovate, various authors have found that the obstacles to innovation are more strongly
perceived when firms actually innovate and face those obstacles than when they do not
innovate and hence do not encounter them (Baldwin and Lin, 2001, Mohnen and Rosa,
2002). Hence, this variable cannot be taken as exogenous to being innovative (actually it
can be negatively correlated with being innovative), and we prefer not to include it in the
model.

17

In the CIS surveys firms’ innovation intensity can be measured by the share of
innovative sales in total sales and thus their innovation output level by the magnitude of
innovative sales (measured as the share of innovative sales multiplied by total sales). It is
also possible to distinguish between innovative sales corresponding to products new to
the firm but possibly known to the market, which can be considered as imitations of
products already produced by other firms in the industry, and those corresponding to
products only new to the market, which can be regarded as true innovations (see, for
example, Brouwer and Kleinknecht, 1996). In the analysis here we preferred to simply
focus on the overall measure.8 The second equation of our generalized Tobit model is
thus specified in terms of a second latent variable y2*i , which is equal to the actual share of
innovative sales y2 i , if the firm is innovative (i.e. y1*i > 0 ). Since the share of innovative
1), it is actually preferable to specify this

sales is bounded by 0 and 1 (i.e., 0 < y2i

second equation in terms of the latent logit-share variable z2*i = ln( y2*i /(1 − y2*i )) which can
vary from -

to + . Because the resulting variable is closer to normally distributed, the

maximum likelihood estimator is then more likely to be consistent for the underlying
parameters. We have y2*i = e

z2*i /(1 + e z2*i ) .Similarly if

observed logit share variable, then y2i = e
8

z2 i = ln( y2 i /(1 − y2i ))

is the

z2i /(1 + e z2i ) .9

The information on shares of innovative sales for products new to the market is not available for all seven

countries. There is also a breakdown of sales with respect to various stages of the product life-cycle, but we
have not tried to exploit this information.
9

Note that the logit share variable

sales

z2i is not defined for the two bounds 0 and 1 of the share of innovative

y2i . In practice, we deal with the upper bound of 1 by simply setting the value of y2i to 0.99

18

The second equation of the generalized Tobit model is thus the following:

z2*i = x2ib2 + u2i

(2)

where x2 i > 0 is a vector of explanatory variables, b2 is a vector of parameters to be
estimated and u2 i > 0 is a stochastic error term reflecting omitted variables and other
sources of heterogeneity. Note that because of the logit share transformation of equation
(2), u2i varies from - to + . We can therefore write:

z2i =

= z2*i
=undefined

if y1*i >0
if y1*i ≤0

(2’)

or equivalently:

*

*

z
z
=e 2i /(1+e 2i )
y2i =
=0

if y1*i >0
if y1*i ≤0

(2’’)

Although it would be helpful for identification, we cannot exclude any of the
explanatory variables we have in x1i from x2i a priori. However, since for innovating
firms we have information on more variables, we can include in x2i six other variables
which are relevant for explaining innovation intensity: four relating to R&D (assumed to
be the main innovation input) and two binary indicators characterizing the environment in
which the firm operates - one for the strength of competition and the other for proximity
to basic research. Competition is deemed to be strong (the indicator is 1) when firms

whenever it is higher (and less or equal to 1). By symmetry, we also set the

y2i to be 0.01 whenever it is

smaller and positive. See for example Cragg (1971) for a rigorous treatment of a Tobit model with both a
lower and an upper bounded dependent variable.

19

declare that increasing or maintaining market share is an important objective of
innovation for them, and weak if it is not (the indicator is 0). Similarly, proximity to basic
research is significant when firms answer that universities/higher education or
government laboratories are significant sources of information for innovation.10 The four
R&D-related variables are a binary indicator for R&D-performing firms, the R&D/sales
ratio for R&D performing firms, a binary indicator for doing R&D on a continuous basis,
and one indicating whether R&D is done in cooperation with partners or not.11
Following the standard procedure we estimate our generalized Tobit model by
maximum likelihood, assuming that u1i and u2i are independently and identically jointly
distributed as a bivariate normal distribution with mean zero and contemporaneous

σ 12 σ 12
variance-covariance matrix Σ =
. Because σ 1 cannot be identified, it is
σ 12 σ 22

10

Firms have to provide answers on their innovation objectives and sources of information using a five-

point Likert scale, and the cut-off values we chose to define our dichotomous indicators correspond roughly
to the sample median responses.
11

Another potentially interesting innovation input variable contained in CIS 1 corresponds to the notion of

innovation expenditures, including R&D but also the expenditures on acquisition of patents and licenses,
product design, trial production, training and tooling-up, and market analysis. Unfortunately either this
variable was misunderstood by the respondents or firms were not used to keeping account of those
expenditures. In many cases, for example, this variable took values lower than the R&D expenditures,
declared elsewhere, that it is supposed to include. For these reasons we excluded this variable from the
analysis. We have also decided not to include in the explanatory variables the perceived strength of
appropriability of product or process innovations, because of the particular difficulty of assuming that it
enters exogenously in the model (likewise the perceived obstacles to innovation variable).

20

normalized to be equal to 1, and σ 12 = ρσ 2 where ρ is the contemporaneous correlation
coefficient between the two error terms.

The log-likelihood function of our sample is

the following:
ln L =
0

+
1

ln[1 − Φ ( x1i b1 )] +

ln Φ

x1i b1 + ρ / σ 2 ( z2i − x2i b2 )
1− ρ 2

1

(3)

ln{(1/σ 2 )ϕ[(ln( z2i ) − x2 ib2 ) / σ 2 ]}

with the index 0 and the index 1 under the summation signs referring respectively to noninnovating and innovating firms (i.e., y1i = 0 and y2i = 1), and Φ and ϕ being
respectively the standard normal univariate distribution and density functions.12
We estimate the model on the pooled data of the seven countries, accounting for
country-specific and industry-specific effects by way of country and industry dummy
variables. We thus assume a common structure that applies to all countries and that can
later be used to compare innovation performance across countries. We also put all seven
countries on an equal footing, irrespective of the size of their respective samples, by
weighting appropriately the variables pertaining to each country (that is by the square root
of NE/NC where NC is the number of firms in country C and NE is the average number of
12

The first term of the likelihood function (3) defined over the non-innovating firms is the same as the

corresponding term in the likelihood function for the probit equation, while, when =0, the second term
defined over the innovating firm becomes also the same as the corresponding term in the likelihood function
for the probit equation. The third term is the likelihood function for the linear regression over the innovating
firms. To ensure that the estimated

σ 2 is positive, it is replaced by exp(ω ) in the likelihood function, and

to ensure that the estimated ρ stays between -1 and 1, it is replaced by (exp(2ν ) − 1) /(exp(2ν ) + 1).
Initial estimates are obtained from Heckman'
s two-step estimation (see Heckman, 1979).

21

firms per country, say in our hypothetical “average Europe”).13 Imposing a common
model structure and giving equal weight to the seven countries means that the estimated
coefficients b1 and b2 in the innovation propensity and intensity equations (and the
corresponding marginal effects) are to be viewed as “average Europe” coefficients. It
means also that our indicator of innovativity is to be interpreted as measuring not only the
effects of the unobserved factors of innovation, but possibly also differences across
countries in the model structure and estimated coefficients.14
However, in estimating our generalized Tobit model, we found that the loglikelihood function always increased with the value of the correlation coefficient
between the error terms in both equations, raising convergence problems in maximizing
the likelihood function. Various experiments with somewhat different specifications of
the model led to the same conclusion. A value of
13

close to one suggests that the error

We chose to give equal weight to each country. Another option, however, would have been to take as

reference a representative “average Europe”, by using grossing-up factors to “blow up” the country samples
to the entire country populations. Note that this option raises a number of practical problems. Even if one
would use the weighting factors for each stratum of firms (defined by size and industry) provided by
Eurostat, it would imply that non-responding units behave in the same way as the responding units. As a
rule of thumb, such an assumption seems unlikely when the percentage of non-responses exceeds 25% (see
Archibugi et al., 1994), and none of our seven countries satisfies this condition.
14

Estimating different models for each country would make it possible in principle to take apart these two

components, by allowing us to account separately for differences in expected innovation intensity arising
from differences in the model structure across countries and those arising from the differences in average
magnitudes of explanatory variables across countries (for a common model structure). In the present

22

terms in both equations are nearly collinear and that common unobserved factors of
innovation are omitted in both parts of the model.15 We therefore ended up fixing the
value of

to 0.95, the estimated coefficients of the model not being too sensitive to the

exact value of

around 0.90-0.99. It is clear, however, that we have an identification

problem, most likely due to the poor specification of the first equation (the probit
equation) as a result of the lack of variables that could predict when firms are
innovators.16 We intend to investigate further this issue in future work in which the CIS
surveys could be matched to complementary sources of data. Nonetheless we think that,
at least for our mainly illustrative purpose here, the compromise we finally adopted is
satisfactory.

4. COUNTRY SAMPLES AND SIMPLE DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

illustrative analysis, we did not pursue this possibility, many of the parameters of our model being poorly
estimated at the country level (and hence not significantly different across countries).
15

We were of course expecting a priori a high positive value of , if only because of the omission of

unobserved factors of innovation in the probit and Tobit equations, such as the quality of management and
the environment of the firm. Estimating a simple Tobit model, which in a sense corresponds to a limiting
case of =1 is unsatisfactory. In particular we would be restricted to two explanatory variables, those
entering equation (1) of the generalized Tobit model (apart from the industry and country dummies).
16

As our model stands, the identification of the probit and Tobit equations is based on the functional

assumption of joint normality of u1i and u2i . We would have preferred to base identification on exclusion
restrictions, that is, on the exclusion in the Tobit equation (in x2i ) of variables belonging to the probit
equation (in x1i ). See for example Puhani, 2000.

23

As usual when working with firm level data, in order to construct country samples that
we could use in our analysis, we had first to clean the CIS1 micro-aggregated raw data for
outliers, missing observations, and inconsistencies. We thus eliminated all firms with less
than 20 employees, because these firms were not surveyed in four of our seven countries.
We also deleted firms with missing industry affiliation and restricted our samples to
manufacturing industries, since only two countries (Germany and the Netherlands) had
collected data on services. We also purged from our samples all firms with sales growth
rates between 1990 and 1992 higher than 250% and lower than -40%, R&D/sales ratios
higher than 50%, current expenditures on innovations higher than 100% of their sales.
We set R&D/sales ratios to zero when they were positive but lower than 0.1%. As the
Italian sample resulted from a census and not a survey, the Italian sample was ten times
greater than the second largest country sample, Germany. We therefore took (after
cleaning) a random subsample for Italy consistent with the sampling frame adopted by the
other countries, by keeping 5% of all firms with 20 to 49 employees, 10% of all firms
between 50 and 249 employees, and all firms with more than 250 employees. In the end
we were left with 8146 observations overall: 542 in Belgium, 572 in Denmark, 1910 in
Germany, 715 in Ireland, 2254 in Italy, 1678 in the Netherlands, and 475 in Norway.
We distinguished eleven industries in total manufacturing, whose definition,
abbreviated names and related NACE codes are listed in Table B1 in Appendix B. In
defining these industries we made sure that we had enough observations per industry in
each country, starting from the industry aggregate classification used by Eurostat (1997)
in presenting the descriptive statistics of the CIS 1 survey, and aggregating it further when
needed. In our analysis, we considered separately the high-R&D industries (Vehicles,

24

Chemicals, Machinery and Electrical) and the low-R&D industries, or high-tech and lowtech industries, based on previous econometric evidence of important differences between
them (see for example Griliches and Mairesse, 1984). The numbers of firms per industry
in the seven countries are given in Table B2 in Appendix B.
We have defined innovating firms in a somewhat more restrictive way than in the
CIS1 surveys, where they are all the firms that answer yes to any of the questions “Have
you introduced a new or technologically changed product during 1990-1992?”, “Have you
introduced a new or technologically changed process during 1990-1992?”, “Do you
intend to innovate in the next three years?”. Nearly 10% of the firms, however, declaring
that they have introduced new or changed products do not answer the questions on the
shares of innovative sales for incrementally changed, significantly changed or newly
introduced products, or they report zero shares. One explanation is that they do not know
the answer to the question or that there can be a significant time lag between the
introduction of a new product on the market and the realization of non negligible sales
from this new product. As we have only cross-sectional data, we have decided to be more
restrictive in the definition of an innovating firm by characterizing it as one that declares
a non-zero share of innovative sales for incrementally changed, significantly changed or
newly introduced products in the three years 1990-1992.17 Finally, about 4% of the firms

17

Alternatively, we could have treated as zero responses all the non-responses on the share in sales of

innovative products by firms that declare to be innovators, and we could have replaced all these zero shares
by a 0.01 share because of our logit-share transformation. Some experiments led us to conclude that this
alternative treatment would have little bearing on the results. Note that the distinction between nonresponses and zero responses is not reliable both because it is unlikely that firms themselves always make

25

report that their sales are entirely due to new or improved products. Since the logit-share
transformation is not defined in this case, we have simply assumed that the share of
innovative sales is at most 0.99, and, by symmetry, for the handful of firms for which the
share of innovative sales was positive but less than 0.01, we set it to be at least equal to
0.01 (see footnote 9).
Table 1 gives the means of all the variables used in our analysis for our seven
country samples, separately for the high-tech and low-tech sectors. Table 1 gives also
these means for our hypothetical average Europe, which serves as our reference country,
where these means are simply computed as the arithmetic average of the corresponding
seven country means (thus giving equal weight to each country). About 35-40% of the
firms in the country samples belong to the high-tech sectors, with the exception of
Germany where this proportion is as high as 55%. Overall, firms in the high-tech sectors
differ from those in the low-tech sectors in many respects. They are larger and therefore
account for a relatively greater fraction of total employment. They are more often part of
a group; they have a higher percentage of innovators (73.8% as opposed to 55.8%); they
feel more pressure from competition (69.7% as opposed to 53.1%) and are more closely
connected with basic research (58.1% as opposed to 41.1%). Firms in high-tech sectors,
when they innovate, have on average a higher share of innovative sales (46.8% against
38.9%); they perform R&D more frequently (90.2% against 77.7%) and more intensively
(with an R&D to sales ratio of 4.4% against 2.0%). When they do R&D, they do it more
often in a continuous fashion (81.9% against 72.2%) and in cooperation with others
such distinction, and because it seemed that the coding and subsequent micro-aggregation of CIS1 data
could also not be trusted in making this distinction consistently across countries.

26

(81.9% against 42.5%). The simple dichotomy between “high-tech” and “low-tech” firms
in the analysis thus controls for quite a number of systematic differences.
Across the country samples, there are also a number of important differences. The
size distribution is more skewed towards large firms in Belgium and Germany than in the
other countries, especially in the high-tech sectors. Ireland on average has the smallest
firms. Germany has the highest proportion of innovating firms and the highest share of
innovative sales in both the high- and low-tech sectors. The lowest percentages of
innovating firms are in Italy and Norway. Norwegian innovating firms, however, have
almost the same share of innovative sales (48.2%) in the high tech sectors as the country
leader Germany. Doing R&D continuously is most common in Belgium and Italy and
least frequent in Denmark, whereas cooperative R&D is often encountered in Denmark
and Norway, but only rarely in Italy. Pressure of competition and proximity to basic
research are strong in Belgium and Germany and weak in Italy and Norway.

5. ESTIMATION RESULTS: COEFFICIENTS AND MARGINAL EFFECTS

Our estimation results are presented in details in Tables 2 and 3. Table 2 shows the
pooled estimates of the coefficients of the generalized Tobit model, estimated separately
for firms in the high-tech and low-tech sectors, and controlling for unexplained industry
and country heterogeneity by introducing industry and country dummies in each of the
two equations of the model. Size is measured by the logarithm of the number of
employees in deviation from the size of the average European firm and the R&D/sales
ratio is also defined in deviation from the corresponding ratio of the average European
country. The reference group is the food industry for the low-tech sectors or the motor

27

vehicles industry for the high-tech sectors, in Denmark, with no R&D, not belonging to a
group, experiencing little competition and not benefiting much from basic research.18
Most estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero, although there
are not too precisely estimated. Many of them are also markedly different from each other
in the high- and low-tech sectors, even if not statistically so (at the conventional level of
significance of 5%). We find an estimated coefficient of R&D in the low-tech sectors that
is twice as high as that in the high-tech sectors, although R&D-doing firms in these
sectors innovate much less in average than those in high-tech sectors. Low-tech firms also
appear to benefit less from size, from being close to basic research, from the pressure of
competition, and from cooperation in R&D. In contrast, they are more likely to innovate
if they are part of a group.
For a better assessment of the estimated coefficients, we proceed in Table 3 to an
analysis of the marginal effects of each variable (the equivalent of the slope in a linear
regression). We distinguish three types of marginal effects, those on the expected
propensity to innovate, those on the expected intensity of innovation unconditional on
being innovative and those on the expected intensity of innovation conditional on being
innovative. These expected functions are respectively given by:
18

In Germany we have many instances of missing values for the variable “belonging to a group”. Small

firms had a separate questionnaire to fill out in which this question was not listed. Instead of considering
these firms as not belonging to a group, we have introduced a separate dummy variable to control for these
missing values. We have also introduced other dummy variables to control for missing R&D/sales ratios for
a number of R&D doing firms in the quantitative part of the model, instead of considering these firms as
non-R&D performers or dropping them from our samples. The coefficients of these missing values control
dummies are not reported in Table 2.

28

E ( y1i x1i , x2i ) = E ( y1i | x1i ) = Φ( x1i b1 )
E ( y2i | x1i , x2i ) =

∞

∞

−∞ −∞

(4)

y2i f (u1i , u2i )du1i du2i =

E ( y2i | x1i , x2i , y1i = 1) =

∞

∞

− x1i b1 −∞

∞

∞

− x1i b1 −∞

y2i f (u1i , u2i )du1i du2 i

(5)

y2 i f (u1i , u2i | u1i > − x1i b1 )du1i du2i

or

(6)

E ( y2i | x1i , x2 i , y1i = 1) = [ E ( y2i | x1i , x2 i )] / Φ( x1i b1 )

We evaluate all three expected functions at the estimated values of the model
coefficients (b1, b2,

and

19
2).

We compute the corresponding marginal effects at the

mean values of the explanatory variables, respectively for all the firms in the case of
E ( y1i | x1i ) and

E ( y 2i | x1i , x 2i )

and the innovating firms only in the case of

E ( y2i | x1i , x2i , y1i ≥ 0) .20 For the continuous variables, size and R&D intensity, we take

the derivatives of the expected functions with respect to those two variables. For the
binary indicators, other than industry and country dummies, we calculate the marginal
effects as the differences in the values of the expected functions when the indicator goes
19

We have directly computed the unconditional expected intensity of innovation by the following formula

E[ y2 i | x1i , x2 i ] =

∞

∞

− x1i b1 −∞

exp( x2 i b2 + σ 2 u2*i ) /(1 + exp( x2i b2 + σ 2u2*i )) f (u1*i , u2*i ) du1*i du2*i

where u 2i = u 2i / σ 2 , u1i = u1i and f (u1i , u 2i ) is the bivariate standard normal distribution with
*

*

*

*

correlation coefficient . We compute these integrals using a Gauss-Legendre quadrature with Gauss
software. Note that if we had not preferred to make the logit-share transformation, we could have more
simply written E[ y2 i | x1i , x2i ] =

∞

∞

− x1i b1 −∞

( x2 i b2 + u2 i ) f (u1i , u2 i ) du1i du2 i , which can easily be expressed as

E[ y2i | x1i , x2i ] = Φ ( x1i b1 )( x2i b2 ) + ρσ 2ϕ ( x1i b1 ) , that is Heckman’s formula (see Greene, 2003).
20

Note that, if the expected functions were linear, the marginal effects would be constant (and that they

would not depend on the values the variables).

29

from 0 to 1. We express the marginal country effects as the differences between the
values of the expected functions when having the country-specific dummy and the
average of the country dummy coefficients for the seven countries, and we similarly
define the marginal industry effects as the differences between having the industryspecific dummy coefficient and the average of the industry dummy coefficients weighted
by the average industry composition in the seven countries. The country and industry
effects are thus interpreted as deviations from the average country and average industry
effects (see Suits, 1984).21
The two first columns of Table 3 show that a 1% increase in size for the average
European firm in the high-tech sectors (corresponding roughly to 6 additional employees)
and in the low-tech sectors (corresponding roughly to only 3 additional employees) would
increase the probability of innovating by about 10%. They also show that a firm
belonging to a group has on average a higher probability of innovating than one which
does not, by about 5% in the high-tech sectors and 10% in the low-tech sectors. It appears
that German firms are more often innovative than the average European firm (by about
10% in the high-tech sectors and 15% in the low-tech sectors). So are the Irish and Dutch
firms, and the Belgian firms in the low-tech sectors. By contrast, for reasons to be
investigated (other than average industry composition, the average size or being part a
group), far fewer firms are innovative in Italy (by about 15% in the high-tech sectors and
35% in the low-tech sectors). The frequency of innovation is higher in the industries
21

Note that if the expected functions were linear, the sum of the country effects and that of the industry

effects weighted by the average industry compositions would both be equal to zero (and that any deviation
from zero in the sum of these effects is thus due to the nonlinearity).

30

producing machinery and equipment and electrical and electronic products than in those
producing vehicles and chemicals. Among the low-tech sectors, the proportion of
innovators is particularly low in the wood-based and textile-producing industries.
Turning to the marginal effects of the explanatory variables on the expected
intensity of innovation for firms that already innovate (given in the third and fourth
columns of Table 3), we see that we see that returns to scale are practically constant for
the average European innovating firm in the high-tech sectors and slightly decreasing in
the low-tech sectors in the low-tech sectors. Being part of a group has also a very small
impact. Doing R&D also entails a rise of the share of innovative sales of about 4% in the
high sectors and 1.5% in the low-tech sectors; and doing it continuously an additional rise
of about 4.5% in both sectors. A one percentage point raise of the R&D/sales ratio for
R&D doing firms corresponds respectively to an increase of the share of innovative sales
of 0.25% in the high-tech sectors and one of 0.55%, more than the double, in the low
tech-sectors.22 The effects of competition and proximity to basic research are quite
sizeable in the high-tech sectors, much less in the low-tech sectors.
If we do not limit ourselves to the innovating firms, the marginal effects
encompass the combined effects on the propensity to innovate and on the intensity of
innovation when firms innovate. These marginal effects (given in the fifth and sixth
columns of Table 3) tend to be smaller than the corresponding conditional effects.
However, the joint effects of size and group, those of doing R&D and doing it
continuously and in cooperation, and those of proximity to basic research and perceived

22

These estimated marginal impacts of R&D intensity on innovation intensity (conditional on both doing
R&D and being innovative) seem particularly small, which may be due to various specification problems to
be investigated in future work..
31

competition remain very substantial in the high-tech sectors, and to a large extent in the
low-tech sectors as well. It is interesting to observe that the marginal effect of the R&D to
sales ratio variable (computed at the average European ratio in both sectors) remains
about 50% higher in the low-tech sectors than in the high-tech sectors.

6. ACCOUNTING FOR INNOVATION: AN ILLUSTRATION

We can now move to the illustration of our accounting for innovation framework and the
measurement of innovativity. In Table 4, we provide, separately for the high-tech and
low-tech sectors, a decomposition of the innovation performances for each of the seven
countries in terms of “structural effects” (the effects of the main explanatory factors of
innovation that we have been able to consider) and of innovativity, respectively for the
propensity to innovate (panel A), the innovation intensity for the innovating firms (panel
B), and innovation intensity unconditional on being innovative (panel C). As it is set up,
Table 4 allows for a comprehensive comparison of the innovation performance of any
given country relative to the average European country, and hence for any bilateral or
multilateral comparison between any two or more of the seven countries. A detailed
explanation of how this table is constructed, based on our estimated model, is given in
Appendix A.
The different structural effects and innovativity are all expressed in the three
panels of Table 4 in terms of deviations from the average European country. We thus start
in the first column, for each country, from the common average European values for the
innovation propensity and the conditional and unconditional innovation intensity
indicators. We show next, in the following columns, the estimated structural effects

32

grouped in four categories: industry composition, size and belonging to a group, the four
R&D variables (R&D intensity and the indicators for doing R&D, continuous R&D and
cooperative R&D), and the two environment indicators (perceived competition and
proximity to basic research).23 We then have, in the following two columns, the sum of
structural effects and the expected innovation propensity and intensity indicators, which
are themselves computed by adding the structural effects to the corresponding average
European indicators (in the first column).24 Finally we find for each country, in the last
two columns, the estimated innovativity and the observed innovation propensity and
intensities, where innovativity is obtained as the difference between the observed and
expected values.25
As we have been able to illustrate it here, for many of the possible pair-wise
country comparisons, our framework imputes most of the differences in innovation
performance to innovativity. and attributes relatively little of these differences to the

23

We have only the first two groups of structural effects for the innovation propensity in panel A. We have

added the dummy variable for missing values on the variable belonging to a group to the German country
effect (as it affects German firms only), and have regrouped the dummy variable for the missing values on
R&D/sales ratios for the R&D doing firms with the four R&D variables.
24

Note that the expected marginal effects so computed are the ones we directly estimate for each country

from equations (4), (5) and (6), but up to an approximation error due to the linearization of the effects
around the average European country (see Appendix A).
25

Note that the country effect is not treated as a structural effect, but that it constitutes the main component

of innovativity, the two other components of innovativity, as we compute it here, being the two
approximation errors due to the intrinsic non linearity of the expected marginal effects and to the
linearization around the average European country (see Appendix A).

33

structural effects. This is particularly true for all three innovation indicators in the lowtech sectors, but much less so in the high-tech sectors. Let us consider two extreme cases:
firstly the comparison between Germany and Italy, which appear respectively as the most
and the least innovative of the seven countries, both in the low- and high-tech sectors and
for the three innovation indicators; and secondly the comparison of Denmark and the
Netherlands, which are on the contrary very close to each other and to the average
European country in terms of innovative performance.
In the high tech-sectors, the structural effects account for about one-third of the
overall differences between Germany and Italy in the unconditional and conditional
innovation intensities (respectively 5.5% out of 18.2%, and 3.8% out of 10.2%), but for
none of the overall difference (23.0%) in the innovation propensity. In the low-tech
sectors, the structural effects account only from 5 to 10 percent of the large overall
differences in the three innovation indicators (respectively 27.3%, 15.4% and 45.4%). Of
the 5.5% (3.8%) total difference in unconditional (conditional) innovation intensity, that
can be attributed to the structural effects in the high-tech sectors, 3.3%, 1.8% and 0.9%
(2.0%, 0.8% and 1.2%) correspond respectively to relatively favorable differences in the
environment conditions, R&D activities and industry compositions, while only -0.5% (0.1%) relates to unfavorable size and group membership effects.
In the case of Denmark and the Netherlands, we have, at least at first sight, a
different picture. In the high-tech sectors, very little of the (rather small) differences
between the two countries in their unconditional and conditional innovation intensity
indicators is related to innovativity (about -0.5%), while practically all is accounted for by
the structural effects (about 4%), mainly so by the industry composition effects (about

34

2.0%) and the R&D effects (about 1.5%). The situation is the same in the low-tech
sectors for unconditional innovation intensity, with innovativity accounting for little (0.3%) and the structural effects accounting fully for the small difference (1.8%) between
the two countries. It is the opposite, however, for the conditional innovation intensity,
where innovativity plays a larger role (3.6%) than the structural effects (0.8%). The
situation is also different for the innovation propensity in both sectors in the sense that
innovativity and the sum of structural effects are of the same order magnitude but of
opposite sign in accounting for the overall small differences (0.8% and -1.8%) between
the two countries.
In brief, we see that the divergence between the Germany-Italy and the DenmarkNetherlands pair-wise comparisons really concerns our estimates of innovativity, which
are very large in the first comparison and small or negligible in the second, but not our
estimates of the structural effects, which are more or less on the same order of magnitude
in both cases. Considering other bilateral comparisons show also distinct configurations,
with relative and absolute orders of magnitude of the structural effects (and their
components) and of innovativity that can be quite different.26 All country comparisons are
in fact case-specific, which of course is not surprising.

26

For example in the high-tech industries, the case of the Denmark-Netherlands comparison appears very
different from that of Ireland-Netherlands comparison, although the three countries are close to the average
European country. In the first case, the small differences in the conditional and unconditional innovation
intensities are mainly attributed to the structural effects, while in the latter case they are mainly imputed to
innovativity.
35

7. CONCLUSION

We propose in this paper an accounting for innovation framework and illustrate it
by an application based on the micro-aggregated firm data from CIS1 (the first European
Community Innovation Survey, covering the years 1990-1992) for the manufacturing
industries in seven European countries. In this application, we measure innovation
intensity by the share of innovative sales, but our framework can also be applied to other
sources of data and other measures of innovation. Trying to make the best use of the
qualitative and quantitative information available in the survey, we select a certain
number of explanatory variables for the propensity to innovate and the intensity of
innovation, and we specify and estimate an innovation function as a generalized Tobit
model. Based on this model, we compute the expected share of innovative sales and
define innovativity as the part of the observed share of innovative sales that remains
unexplained. Innovativity corresponds to the notion of total factor productivity (TFP), or
simply productivity, in production function analysis and the standard growth accounting
framework. As it stands with relatively few explanatory variables our innovation
framework already accounts for sizeable differences in country innovation intensity, more
so in the high-tech than in the low-tech sectors. It also shows, however, that differences in
country innovativity can be even more sizeable.
Given the limitations of our attempt, in particular that related to using only the
micro-aggregated data from CIS1, these initial results should be merely taken as
illustrative. We hope they will suffice to indicate the potential interest and advantages of
explicitly implementing an accounting for innovation framework, in order to compare
innovation performances between countries (as here), or between industries, or firms,

36

either in terms of absolute levels in a given period (as here) or in terms of changes over
time. These advantages are be similar to those of the standard growth accounting
framework, in spite of the fact that in both cases many conventional decisions have to be
made and many variants may be considered in setting up an appropriate framework. To
make progress in future work, besides gaining experience in using innovation surveys and
improving them, it will be important to be able to match the specific information they
provide with the usual current accounts, balance sheets and stock market data, as well as
with complementary data from other sources such as on patents and R&D. In view of the
fundamental role of research and innovation activities in our increasingly knowledgebased economies, it will also be of great interest to develop jointly productivity and
innovativity analyses by combining in some systematic way an integrated production and
innovation accounting framework.27

27

For analyses going in this direction, see Crépon, Duguet and Mairesse (1998), and in this volume:
Benavente (2006), Heshmati and Lööf (2006), Jefferson, Huamao, Xiaojing and Xiaoyun (2006), and Van
Leeuven and Klomp (2006).
37

REFERENCES

Arora, A., Ceccagnoli M. and W.P. Cohen (2003) R&D and the Patent Premium.
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 9431.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998) Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Amemiya, T. (1985) Advanced Econometrics, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Archibugi, D., P. Cohendet, A. Kristensen, and K.-A. Schäffer (1994) Evaluation of the
Community Innovation Survey (CIS) Phase I. EIMS publication no. 11, IKE Group,
Department of Business Studies, Aalborg, Denmark.
Baldwin, J. and Z. Lin (2001) Impediments to Advanced Technology Adoption for
Canadian Manufacturers. Working Paper 173, Microeconomics Analysis Division,
Statistics Canada.
Benavente, J.M. (2006) The Role of Research and Innovation in Promoting Productivity
in Chile. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(4/5). Forthcoming..
Brouwer, E. and A. Kleinknecht (1996) Determinants of Innovation: A Micro
Econometric Analysis of Three Alternative Innovative Output Indicators. In A.H.
Kleinknecht (ed.) Determinants of Innovation, the Message from new Indicators.
London: Macmillan Press, 99-124.
Brouwer, E. and A. Kleinknecht (1999) Keynes-plus? Effective Demand and Changes in
Firm-Level R&D: an Empirical Note. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 23, 385-391.
Caves, D., L. Christensen and E. Diewert (1982) Multilateral Comparisons of Output,
Input and Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers. Economic Journal, 92, 7386.

38

Cockburn, I. and Z. Griliches (1988) '
'
Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in
the Stock Market'
s Valuation of R&D and Patents'
'
. American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings, 78(2) 419-423.

Cohen, W.M., Nelson R.R. and J.P. Walsh (2000) Protecting their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent or Not.
Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper 7552.
Cragg, J. (1971) Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables with
Application to the Demand for Durable Goods. Econometrica, 39, 829-844.
Crépon, B., E. Duguet and J. Mairesse (1998) Research and Development, Innovation and
Productivity: An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level. Economics of Innovation
and New Technology, 7(2), 115-158.

Eurostat (1996) Manual on Disclosure Control Methods, 9E. Luxembourg: Statistical
Office of the European Communities,.
Eurostat (1997) Community Innovation Survey 1. Luxembourg: Statistical Office of the
European Communities, CD-ROM.
Foray, D. (2004) The Economics of Knowledge. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Geroski, P., J. Van Reenen and C. Walters (1997) How Persistently Do Firms Innovate?
Research Policy, 26, 33-48.

Greene, W. (2003) Econometric Analysis (5th ed.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse (1984) Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level. In Z.
Griliches (ed.), R&D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 271-297.

39

Heckman, J.J. (1979) Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error, Econometrica, 47,
153-161.
Heshmati A. and H. Lööf (2006) Knowledge Capital and Heterogeneity in Firm
Performance. A Sensitivity Analysis. Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
15(4/5). Forthcoming.
Hu, X. and C. DeBresson (1998) An Empirical Evaluation of the Eurostat MicroAggregation Procedure for the Analysis of the Community Innovation Survey.
Technical report.
Jefferson G., B. Huamao, G. Xiaojing and Y. Xiaoyun (2006) R&D Performance in
Chinese Industry. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(4/5).
Forthcoming
Levin, R., A. Klevorick, R. Nelson and S. Winter (1987) '
Appropriating the Results of
Industrial Research and Development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1987(3), 783-831.
Maddala, G.S. (1983) Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics,
Econometric Society Monographs in Quantitative Economics. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Mairesse, J. and P. Mohnen (2001) To Be or Not to Be Innovative: an Exercise in
Measurement. OECD STI Review, Special Issue on New Science and Technology
Indicators, 27, 103-129.

Mairesse, J. and P. Mohnen (2002) Accounting for Innovation and Measuring
Innovativeness: An Illustrative Framework and an Application. American Economic
Review, 92 (2) 226-230.

40

Mohnen, P. and M. Dagenais (2001) Towards an Innovation Intensity Index: The Case of
CIS-1 in Denmark and Ireland. In A. Kleinknecht and P. Mohnen (eds.), Innovation
and Firm Performance: Econometric Explorations of Survey Data. Hampshire and

New York: Palgrave.
Mohnen, P. and J. Rosa (2002) Barriers to Innovation in Service Industries in Canada. In
Maryann Feldman and Nadine Massard (eds.), Institutions and Systems in the
Geography of Innovation, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 231-250.

Neef, D. (ed.) (1998) The Knowledge Economy. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (1963) The Measurement of
Scientific and Technical Activities (Frascati Manual), new edition 1994. Paris: OECD.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (1992, 1996) Oslo Manual
(1st edition 1992, 2nd edition 1996). OECD: Paris
Porter, M. and S. Stern (1999) The New Challenge to America's Prosperity: Findings
from an Innovation Index. Washington, DC: Council on Competitiveness.

Puhani, P. (2000) The Heckman Correction for Sample Selection and its Critique. The
Journal of Economic Surveys, 14 (1), 53-68.

Quah, D. (2001) The Weightless Economy in Economic Development, in Matti Pohjola
(ed.), Information Technology, Productivity, and Economic Growth : International
Evidence and Implications for Economic Development. Oxford, UK: Oxford

University Press.
Robson, M., J. Townsend and K. Pavitt (1988) Sectoral Patterns of Production and Use of
Innovations in the UK: 1945-1983. Research Policy, 17, 1-14.

41

Suits, D. (1984) Dummy Variables: Mechanics v. Interpretation. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 66,177-180.

Van Leeuwen, G. and L. Klomp (2006) On the Contribution of Innovation to MultiFactor Productivity Growth. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 15(4/5).
Forthcoming.
Wooldridge, J. (2002) Econometrics Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

42

Table 1
Summary statistics: CIS 1 (1992), Micro-aggregated Data
High-tech and Low-tech Industries
Variable

Belgium

Denmark

Germany

Ireland

Italy

Nether-

Norway

lands
Number of firms

Average
country

High-tech (H)

182

223

1070

259

845

666

150

485

Low-tech (L)

360

349

840

456

1409

1012

325

678

33.6

39.0

56.0

36.2

37.5

40.0

31.6

41.7

Per cent of "hightech firms"
Average number of

H

1164.5

301.5

1619.7

128.7

767.0

340.2

267.5

655.6

Employees

L

403.0

208.0

655.9

116.8

289.5

222.5

151.6

292.5

59.4

48.1

75.9

38.5

61.4

50.2

44.8

61.6

Per cent employment
in "high tech firms"
Per cent of firms

H

79.7

64.6

43.5

69.1

58.5

63.7

75.3

64.9

belonging to a group

L

51.4

67.0

35.2

56.1

35.7

52.9

63.7

51.7

Percent of innovating

H

78.0

76.2

85.4

76.4

62.4

75.4

62.7

73.8

firms

L

65.3

54.2

74.6

64.0

29.2

55.9

47.1

55.8

43

Table 1 (continued)
Variable

Belgium

Denmark

Germany

Ireland

Italy

Nether-

Norway

lands

Average
country

Average share of innovative sales

H

48.6

48.3

51.2

46.1

41.0

44.1

48.2

46.8

in per cent, for innovating firms

L

44.1

37.3

50.2

39.7

34.8

32.9

33.2

38.9

Per cent of R&D doing firms,

H

96.5

94.7

93.1

95.5

83.3

81.9

86.2

90.2

among innovating firms

L

85.1

77.2

76.7

98.3

59.2

72.3

75.2

77.7

Average R&D/sales

H

3.6

6.1

4.9

4.0

4.2

3.6

4.1

4.4

in per cent, for R&D doing firms

L

1.3

2.2

3.0

2.1

2.5

1.5

1.7

2.0

Per cent of firms doing R&D

H

95.6

62.7

84.3

78.3

94.1

77.1

81.5

81.9

continuously, of R&D doing firms

L

81.5

64.4

75.1

63.1

85.2

63.1

73.0

72.2

Per cent of firms doing coop.

H

64.2

73.9

49.0

42.9

28.7

51.8

77.8

81.9

R&D, of R&D doing firms

L

45.0

66.4

37.8

35.9

6.6

41.8

64.3

42.5

Per cent of firms with above

H

73.1

70.4

87.7

71.8

64.5

69.2

51.3

69.7

average perceived competition

L

56.9

46.4

78.0

60.5

37.4

49.4

42.8

53.1

Per cent of firms with above

H

69.2

66.8

69.5

58.7

31.4

61.7

50.0

58.2

average proximity to basic rsrch

L

47.8

43.8

51.3

47.1

14.3

42.8

40.3

41.1

44

Table 2
Maximum likelihood Estimates of the Generalized Tobit model of Innovation,
Pooled across Countries
High-tech Industries

Variables

Low-tech Industries

Propensity to

Intensity of

innovate

innovation

innovate

innovation

Log of employees

0.28 (.02)

0.21 (.03)

0.23 (.02)

0.18 (.04)

Indicator for in a group

0.15 (.04)

0.20 (.07)

0.24 (.03)

0.30 (.07)

R&D/sales

--

1.47 (.48)

--

3.50 (.98)

Indicator for doing R&D

--

0.25 (.13)

--

0.11 (.18)

Doing R&D on a continuous basis

--

0.25 (.07)

--

0.29 (.06)

Doing cooperative R&D

--

0.15 (.06)

--

0.08 (.07)

Perceived competition

--

0.51 (.07)

--

0.25 (.07)

Proximity to basic research

--

0.36 (.06)

--

0.11 (.06)

1(assumed)

0.74 (.01)

1(assumed)

0.95 (.02)

Estimated standard error
Cross-equation correlation

0.95 (imposed)

Propensity to Intensity of

0.95 (imposed)

Estimated standard errors in parentheses.
Both the probit and Tobit regressions include one set of country indicators and one set of
industry indicators (see Table 4). The probit regression also includes a dummy for missing values
of the indicator for being part of a group, while the Tobit regression includes this dummy and
another one for missing R&D/ sales ratios for R&D doing firms (see footnote 18).

45

Table 3
Estimated Marginal Effects in Percentage Points
for the Generalized Tobit Model of Innovation
Effects on expected
propensity
Variables

To innovate

Effects on expected

Effects on expected

intensity of innovation

intensity of innovation

conditional on being

unconditional on being

innovative

innovative

Type of firm

H

L

H

L

H

L

Log employees

8.8

9.0

-0.6

-2.2

3.3

2.3

Part of a group

4.8

9.8

1.3

-0.6

3.0

3.4

R&D/sales

--

--

24.6

54.5

18.4

29.4

Doing R&D

--

--

4.2

1.7

3.2

0.9

Doing R&D continuously

--

--

4.3

4.6

3.2

2.5

Doing cooperative R&D

--

--

2.5

1.3

1.9

0.7

Perceived competition

--

--

8.5

3.9

6.3

2.1

--

--

6.1

1.7

4.5

0.9

Belgium

-3.1

9.1

4.9

9.2

2.1

9.3

Denmark

0.1

-2.0

3.5

5.0

2.7

1.7

Germany

10.1

17.4

-2.1

9.6

2.8

13.7

Ireland

5.9

13.1

2.7

1.4

4.9

6.2

-17.3

-35.7

-7.2

-11.1

-11.7

-16.0

3.9

0.9

-2.9

-6.7

-0.5

-3.1

Proximity to basic
research
Countries

Italy
Netherlands

46

Norway

-4.3

-0.5

3.4

-2.1

0.4

-1.3

Vehicles

-6.4

--

-0.5

--

-3.2

--

Chemical

-4.0

--

-10.1

--

-8.7

--

Machinery & Equipment

2.2

--

4.7

--

4.6

--

Electrical

3.8

--

2.9

--

4.1

--

Food

--

0.7

--

0.8

--

0.8

Textile

--

-1.4

--

6.1

--

2.7

Wood

--

-7.7

--

-3.1

--

-4.3

Plastic

--

11.0

--

0.5

--

4.9

Non-Metallic

--

3.7

--

-5.4

--

-1.4

Metals

--

0.7

--

-3.5

--

-1.5

NEC

--

3.7

--

7.5

--

5.8

Manufacturing Industries

H: High-tech industries; L: Low-tech industries.
The table shows the estimated marginal effects (in percentage points) for the generalized Tobit
model of innovation at the European means of the explanatory variables, with equal country
weights and average European industry structure. See Table 2 for the estimated model
parameters.

47

Table 4
Accounting for Inter-Country Differences in Innovation
A) Propensity to Innovate
Source:

European
propensity

Industry effects

Size and group

Sum of

Expected

Propensity

Observed

effects

structural effects

propensity

innovativity

propensity

High-tech Industries
Belgium

73.8

-0.3

6.2

5.9

79.7

-1.7

78.0

Denmark

73.8

0.8

-1.7

-0.9

72.9

3.3

76.2

Germany

73.8

0.8

2.3

3.1

76.9

8.5

85.4

Ireland

73.8

0.5

-6.0

-5.5

68.3

8.1

76.4

Italy

73.8

0.2

3.0

3.2

77.0

-14.6

62.4

Netherlands

73.8

-0.4

-2.9

-3.3

70.5

4.9

75.4

Norway

73.8

-1.6

-0.9

-2.5

71.3

-8.6

62.7

Average country

73.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

73.8

0.0

73.8

48

Low-tech Industries
Belgium

55.8

0.0

1.0

1.0

56.8

8.5

65.3

Denmark

55.8

0.4

2.4

2.8

58.6

-4.4

54.2

Germany

55.8

1.4

2.3

3.7

59.5

15.1

74.6

Ireland

55.8

0.5

-3.7

-3.2

52.6

11.4

64.0

Italy

55.8

0.2

0.1

0.3

56.1

-26.9

29.2

Netherlands

55.8

-1.4

-0.8

-2.2

53.6

2.3

55.9

Norway

55.8

-1.2

-1.2

-2.4

53.4

-6.3

47.1

Average country

55.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

55.8

0.0

55.8

Small discrepancies are due to rounding.

49

B) Intensity of Innovation Conditionally on Being Innovative

Source:

European

Industry

intensity

effects

Size
and Group

R&D effects

effects

Environ-

Sum of

ment

structural

effects

effects

Expected

Conditional

Observed

intensity

innovativity

intensity

High-tech Industries
Belgium

46.8

-1.4

-0.2

1.1

0.7

0.2

47.0

-0.2

48.6

Denmark

46.8

1.1

0.1

0.4

0.6

2.3

49.1

-0.8

48.3

Germany

46.8

1.4

-0.5

0.3

0.8

1.9

48.7

2.5

51.2

Ireland

46.8

-0.9

0.5

-0.4

-0.5

-1.2

45.6

0.5

46.1

Italy

46.8

0.2

-0.4

-0.5

-1.2

-1.9

44.9

-3.9

41.0

Netherlands

46.8

-0.8

0.2

-1.0

0.1

-1.5

45.3

-1.2

44.1

Norway

46.8

0.4

0.2

0.1

-0.5

0.2

47.0

1.2

48.2

46.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

46.8

0.0

46.8

Average
country

50

Low-tech Industries
Belgium

38.9

0.8

-0.4

0.3

0.1

0.8

39.7

4.4

44.1

Denmark

38.9

-0.6

-0.1

0.1

-0.1

-0.7

38.2

-0.9

37.3

Germany

38.9

-0.4

-0.6

0.4

0.4

-0.2

38.7

11.5

50.2

Ireland

38.9

0.9

1.3

0.0

-0.1

2.1

41.0

-1.3

39.7

Italy

38.9

0.5

-0.9

-0.3

-0.2

-0.9

38.0

-3.2

34.8

Netherlands

38.9

-1.1

0.2

-0.6

-0.1

-1.5

37.4

-4.5

32.9

Norway

38.9

-0.2

0.5

0.1

0.0

0.4

39.3

-6.1

33.2

38.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

38.9

0.0

38.9

Average
country

Small discrepancies are due to rounding.

51

C) Intensity of Innovation Unconditionally on Being Innovative
Sum of

Size
Source:

European

Industry

and Group

intensity

effects

effects

Environ-

structural

Expected

effects

intensity

Innovativity

intensity

R&D effects ment effects

Observed

High-tech Industries
Belgium

34.7

-1.2

2.6

0.9

0.7

3.0

37.7

0.2

37.9

Denmark

34.7

1.3

-0.7

0.4

0.4

1.4

36.1

0.7

36.8

Germany

34.7

1.3

0.6

0.9

1.7

4.5

39.2

4.6

43.8

Ireland

34.7

-0.6

-2.2

0.1

-0.1

-2.6

32.1

3.1

35.2

Italy

34.7

0.4

1.1

-0.9

-1.6

-1.0

33.7

-8.1

25.6

Netherlands

34.7

-0.8

-1.1

-0.6

0.1

-2.4

32.3

1.0

33.3

Norway

34.7

-0.5

-0.2

-0.7

-1.5

-2.9

31.8

-1.6

30.2

Average

34.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

34.7

0.0

34.7

country

52

Low-tech Industries
Belgium

22.3

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

1.0

23.3

5.5

28.8

Denmark

22.3

0.0

0.7

0.0

-0.1

0.6

22.9

-2.7

20.2

Germany

22.3

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.6

1.7

24.0

13.5

37.5

Ireland

22.3

0.4

-0.9

0.2

0.2

-0.1

22.2

3.3

25.5

Italy

22.3

0.7

-0.1

-0.4

-0.6

-0.4

21.9

-11.7

10.2

Netherlands

22.3

-1.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.1

-1.5

20.8

-2.4

18.4

Norway

22.3

-0.8

-0.2

-0.1

-0.2

-1.3

21.0

-5.4

15.6

Average

22.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

22.3

0.0

22.3

country
Small discrepancies are due to rounding errors.

53

APPENDIX A: Accounting for Innovation and Measuring Innovativity

Assume for simplicity that there are only two countries (A and B) and two industries (1 and
2). The expected intensity of innovation, whether unconditional or conditional on being innovative,
that is equations (5) or (6), can be written as (ignoring the firm subscripts to ease notation):
y = f (C , Z ) = f (α1 + α 2CB + β 2 I 2 , Z )
where we have taken country A and industry 1 for reference in expressing the general
country and industry specific constant C, with C B being the dummy for country B and I 2 the
dummy for industry 2, and where Z stands for a set of other explanatory variables (or innovation
factors). Note that the function f could as well represent the expected probability to innovate, that
is, equation (4). Note also that we could have made a different choice of normalization (so that for
example the two countries and the two industries be treated symmetrically); our final innovation
accounting decomposition in terms of structural effects and innovativity, as shown in Table A1,
does not depend on it.
Let y A , y B , and y E be the respective mean values of the observed intensity of innovation
for country A, country B and the average country of reference (say the hypothetical average
European country), and let y* A , y*B , and y*E represent the corresponding expected intensity of
innovation taken at respectively the mean values of the explanatory variables for these three
countries. Assuming for simplicity that we have the same number of observations for the two
countries (or giving them equal weight as we have done in our analysis), we have respectively
y A = y * A + e* A = f (α1 + w2A β 2 , Z A ) + e* A

y B = y *B + e*B = f (α1 + α 2 + w2B β 2 , Z B ) + e* B
y E = y* E + e*E = f (α1 + α 2 / 2 + w2E β 2 , Z E ) + e*E

where w2E = ( w2A + w2B ) / 2 is the average proportion of firms in industry 2 in the two
countries, Z E = ( Z A + Z B ) / 2 is the average value of Z in the two countries, and e* A , e*B , and e*E
are approximation errors due to the fact that the expected innovation intensity functions f(.) are not
linear. Going one step further, by considering a linear approximation of y* A and y*B around y*E
(i.e., in deviation to the mean values of the explanatory variables for the country of reference), we
can write the two following innovation accounting equations:
y A = y E + f CE β 2 ( w2A − w2E ) + f ZE ( Z A − Z E ) + f CE (−α 2 / 2) + e A + (e* A − e* E )

54

y B = y E + f CE β 2 ( w2B − w2E ) + f ZE ( Z B − Z E ) + f CE (α 2 / 2) + e B + (e* B − e* E )
where f xE represents the gradient of f(.) with respect to C and Z evaluated at the country of
reference average values for C and Z , and e A and e B are first-order approximation errors. Notice
that e E = (e A + e B ) / 2 = 0.
The first term of these approximations is the innovation intensity of the average country of
reference. The second and third terms are the deviations from this value of reference (for country A
or B) which are respectively accounted for by the industry effects and the explanatory variables Z,
these two terms summing to what we can label as “structural effects. The last three terms, the
country effect, the first-order approximation error and the non-linearity discrepancy, capture what
we call innovativity, the difference between the observed innovation intensity and the approximate
expected innovation intensity, practically computed as the sum of three first terms. If the function
f(.) was linear, the last two terms would be nil and innovativity will be nothing but the country
effect.28
The following Table A1 summarizes the resulting decomposition of the country differences
in innovation relative to the average country in terms of the structural effects of the various factors
of innovation taken into account in the analysis and of innovativity. It allows for an easy bilateral
comparison of the innovation performance of the couple of countries considered, or a multilateral
comparison when more than two countries are considered.

28

Note that we could have performed a similar decomposition without making a linear approximation. We could

have computed the effects of each explanatory variable sequentially, by starting from the value of innovation
intensity taken at the means of all explanatory variables for the country of reference, and replacing them one by
one by their respective country means. In this case, however, the size of the effects of the different variables
would not be independent of the order of the sequence. One advantage of the linear approximation, besides
being quite straightforward, is that the order in which we examine the separate structural effects makes no
difference.

55

Table A1: Accounting for inter-country differences in innovation
relative to the average country

Average

Industry effects

country of

Effects of

Total of

Expected

variable Z

structural

innovation

Innovativity

Observed
innovation

effects

reference
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6) = (7)-(5)

(7)

Country A

yE

f CE β 2 ( w2A − w2E )

f ZE ( Z A − Z E )

(2)+(3)

(1)+(4)

f CE ( −α 2 / 2) + e A

yA

Country B

yE

f CE β 2 ( w2B − w2E )

f ZE ( Z B − Z E )

(2)+(3)

(1)+(4)

f CE (α 2 / 2) + e B

yB

Average

yE

0

0

0

yE

0

yE

Country

56

APPENDIX B: Industry Definition and Composition
Table B1: Definition of Industries
INDUSTRY

a

INDUSTRY DESCRIPTION

NACE CODE

High-tech Sectors
Vehicles

34-35

Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, and other transport equipment

Chemicals

23-24

Manufacture of coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel, manufacture of chemicals and chemical products

Machinery

29

Electrical

30-33

Manufacture of machinery and equipment NEC
Manufacture of office machinery and computers, electrical machinery; Apparatus, radio, television and communication
equipment; Apparatus, medical, precision and optical instruments, watches and clocks

Low-tech Sectors
Food

15-16

Manufacture of food, beverages and tobacco

Textile

17-19

Manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel, dressing and dyeing of fur, tannings, and dressing of leather, luggage, handbags,
saddlery, harness and footwear

Wood

20-22

Manufacture of wood and products of wood and cork, except furniture, manufacture of straw and plaiting materials, pulp,
paper, and paper products, publishing, printing, and reproduction of recorded media

Plastic rubber

25

Manufacture of rubber and plastic products

Non-metallic

26

Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products

Basic metal

27-28

NEC
a

36

Manufacture of basic metals, fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
Manufacture of furniture, manufacturing Non Elsewhere Classified

Revision 1.

57

Table B2: Industry Composition by Country (in % of numbers of firms)
INDUSTRY

Belgium

Denmark

Germany

Ireland

Nether-

Norway

Italy

lands

Average
country

High-tech Industries
VEHICLES

12.6

12.5

11.9

6.6

13.7

42.0

15.1

16.3

CHEMICAL

33.0

15.3

15.2

32.0

30.1

12.0

20.6

22.6

MACH&EQ

25.8

43.5

43.6

19.3

36.2

27.3

37.3

33.2

ELEC

28.6

28.7

29.3

42.1

20.0

18.7

27.0

27.9

Low-tech Industries
FOOD

18.3

22.3

10.8

25.0

17.8

27.4

13.0

19.2

TEXTILE

23.9

7.2

10.8

15.1

9.9

6.5

30.1

14.8

WOOD

16.1

20.3

13.5

18.7

28.1

29.5

11.9

19.7

PLASTIC

5.3

9.2

14.6

11.6

0.3

2.8

4.8

6.9

NONMET

10.0

8.0

9.3

6.8

7.8

5.8

11.2

8.5

METAL

17.0

22.7

32.5

15.1

29.0

19.7

19.7

22.2

NEC

9.4

10.3

8.5

7.7

7.1

8.3

9.3

8.7

58

