                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ECONOMIC, NEUROBIOLOGICAL AND BEHAVIORAL PERSPECTIVES
                ON BUILDING AMERICA’S FUTURE WORKFORCE

                                              Eric I. Knudsen
                                            James J. Heckman
                                             Judy L. Cameron
                                             Jack P. Shonkoff

                                          Working Paper 12298
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12298


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Eric I. Knudsen, James J. Heckman, Judy L. Cameron, and Jack P. Shonkoff. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic, Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America’s Future
Workforce
Eric I. Knudsen, James J. Heckman, Judy L. Cameron and Jack P. Shonkoff
NBER Working Paper No. 12298
June 2006
JEL No. J24

                                            ABSTRACT

A growing proportion of the U.S. workforce will have been raised in disadvantaged environments
that are associated with relatively high proportions of individuals with diminished cognitive and
social skills. A cross-disciplinary examination of research in economics, developmental psychology,
and neurobiology reveals a striking convergence on a set of common principles that account for the
potent effects of early environment on the capacity for human skill development. Central to these
principles are the findings that early experiences have a uniquely powerful influence on the
development of cognitive and social skills, as well as on brain architecture and neurochemistry; that
both skill development and brain maturation are hierarchical processes in which higher level
functions depend on, and build on, lower level functions; and that the capacity for change in the
foundations of human skill development and neural circuitry is highest earlier in life and decreases
over time. These findings lead to the conclusion that the most efficient strategy for strengthening the
future workforce, both economically and neurobiologically, and for improving its quality of life is
to invest in the environments of disadvantaged children during the early childhood years.

Eric I. Knudsen                                        Judy L. Cameron
Department of Neurobiology                             Department of Psychiatry
Stanford University School of Medicine                 University of Pittsburgh
Stanford, CA 94305-5125                                Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aknudsen@stanford.edu                                  cameronj@ohsu.edu

James J. Heckman                                       Jack P. Shonkoff
Department of Economics                                The Heller School for Social Policy and
University of Chicago                                  Management
Chicago, IL 60637                                      Brandeis University
and NBER                                               Waltham, MA 02454-9110
jjh@uchicago.edu                                       shonkoff@brandeis.edu
               Economic, Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on
                    Building America's Future Workforce

       A growing proportion of the U.S. workforce will have been raised in disadvantaged
environments that are associated with relatively high proportions of individuals with
diminished cognitive and social skills. A cross-disciplinary examination of research in
economics, developmental psychology, and neurobiology reveals a striking convergence on
a set of common principles that account for the potent effects of early environment on the
capacity for human skill development. Central to these principles are the findings that
early experiences have a uniquely powerful influence on the development of cognitive and
social skills, as well as on brain architecture and neurochemistry; that both skill
development and brain maturation are hierarchical processes in which higher level
functions depend on, and build on, lower level functions; and that the capacity for change
in the foundations of human skill development and neural circuitry is highest earlier in life
and decreases over time. These findings lead to the conclusion that the most efficient
strategy for strengthening the future workforce, both economically and neurobiologically,
and for improving its quality of life is to invest in the environments of disadvantaged
children during the early childhood years.




       The future success of the U.S. economy will depend in part on well-educated and highly
resourceful workers who are capable of learning new skills so that they remain competitive in a
continually changing global market. That success is in jeopardy because a growing fraction of
the nation’s workforce will consist of adults who were raised in disadvantaged environments, a
segment of the population that has historically been less likely to attain high levels of education
and skill development than the general population (1, 2).
       Research in child development over the past several decades has led to an increasingly
refined understanding of the characteristics of disadvantaged environments (3). Central to this
concept is the statistical association between a select number of “risk factors” and the increased
probability of adverse outcomes in the domains of cognitive, emotional and social development,
leading to diminished economic success and decreased quality of life in adulthood. The most
extensively studied risk factor is poverty, but others include limited parent education, parental


                                                 2
mental health problems, significant social deprivation or neglect, and exposure to interpersonal
violence (3-7).
       Behavioral research confirms that the early years are foundational for a full range of
human competencies and are a period of heightened sensitivity to the effects of both positive and
negative experiences (3, 8). In a parallel fashion, studies of human capital formation indicate that
the quality of the early childhood environment is a strong predictor of adult productivity (9), and
that early enrichment for disadvantaged children increases the probability of later economic
success (10). Although explanatory mechanisms for interpreting these correlations are still being
developed, recent advances in neuroscience are illuminating, as they demonstrate the extent to
which early experience influences the development of neural circuits that mediate cognitive,
linguistic, emotional, and social capacities (11, 12).
       This paper focuses on the striking convergence of four core concepts that have emerged
from decades of mutually independent research in economics, neuroscience, and developmental
psychology. First, the architecture of the brain and the process of skill formation are both
influenced by an inextricable interaction between genetics and individual experience. Second,
both the mastery of skills that are essential for economic success and the development of their
underlying neural pathways follow hierarchical rules in a bottom-up sequence such that later
attainments build on foundations that are laid down earlier. Third, cognitive, linguistic, social,
and emotional competencies are interdependent, all are shaped powerfully by the experiences of
the developing child, and all contribute to success in the workplace. Fourth, although adaptation
continues throughout life, human abilities are formed in a predictable sequence of sensitive
periods, during which the development of specific neural circuits and the behaviors they mediate
are most plastic, and therefore optimally receptive to environmental influences.


Early Experience Shapes the Foundation for Adult Productivity
       A landmark study commissioned by the Institute of Medicine and the National Research
Council concluded that “virtually every aspect of early human development, from the brain’s
evolving circuitry to the child’s capacity for empathy, is affected by the environments and
experiences that are encountered in a cumulative fashion, beginning in the prenatal period and
extending throughout the early childhood years.” ((3), p.6).




                                                  3
        Independent econometric studies have reached similar conclusions. Extensive evidence
indicates that cognitive, social, and emotional capacities play important roles in the attainment of
adult economic productivity, and all are shaped by early life experiences. The most reliable data
come from experiments that provided substantial enrichment of the early environments of
children living in low-income families. Two of these investigations, the Perry Preschool Program
and the Abecedarian Program (Box 1), are the most informative for the purposes of this
discussion because they employed a random assignment design and collected long-term follow-
up data (10). Both of these longitudinal studies demonstrated substantial, positive effects of early
environmental enrichment on a range of cognitive (Fig. 1) and “non-cognitive” skills, school
achievement, job performance, and social behaviors (Fig. 2), long after the intervention ended
(13, 14). Data from non-controlled assessments of Head Start and the Chicago Child-Parent
Centers programs suggest similar conclusions, although the data from Head Start represent only
short-term effects.


Early Intervention Programs for Disadvantaged Children
Two different intervention programs, the Perry Preschool Program and the Abecedarian Program, have used
randomized child assignment and long-term follow-up to study the effects of early interventions on social behaviors
of severely disadvantaged children (19, 76). The Perry Program was an intensive preschool program that was
administered to 64 disadvantaged, black children in Ypsilanti, Michigan between 1962 and 1967 (see
Supplementary Material for details). The treatment consisted of a daily 2.5 hour classroom session on weekday
mornings and a weekly 90 minute home visit by the teacher on weekday afternoons. The length of each preschool
year was 30 weeks. The control and treatment groups have been followed through age 40. The Abecedarian Program
involved111 disadvantaged children, born between 1972 and 1977, whose families scored high on a risk index (see
Supplementary Material for details). The mean age at entry was 4.4 months. The program was a year-round, full-
day intervention that continued through age 8. The children were followed up until age 21, and the project is
ongoing.




In both the Perry and Abecedarian Programs there was a consistent pattern of successful outcomes for treatment
group members compared with control group members. For the Perry Program, an initial increase in IQ (Fig. 1, red


                                                        4
circles) disappeared gradually over 4 years following the intervention, as has been observed in other studies.
However, in the more intense Abecedarian Program, which intervened earlier (starting at age 4 months) and lasted
longer (until age 8), the gain in IQ (Fig. 1, red diamonds) persisted into adulthood (21 years old). This early and
persistent increase in IQ is important because IQ is a strong predictor of socioeconomic success.




Positive effects of these interventions were also documented for a wide range of social behaviors (Fig. 2). At the
oldest ages tested (Perry: 40 yrs; Abecedarian: 21 yrs), individuals scored higher on achievement tests, reached
higher levels of education, required less special education, earned higher wages, were more likely to own a home,
and were less likely to go on welfare or be incarcerated than individuals from the control groups. Many studies have
shown that these aspects of behavior translate directly or indirectly into high economic return. An estimated rate of
return (the return per dollar of cost) to the Perry Program is in excess of 17% (19). This high rate of return is much
higher than standard returns on stock market equity and suggests that society at large can benefit substantially from
these kinds of interventionnss.



         Several observations about the evidence from these intervention studies are relevant to
this paper (Fig. 3). First, skills beget skills. That is, all capabilities are built on a foundation of
capacities that are developed earlier. This principle stems from two characteristics that are
intrinsic to the nature of learning: (1) early learning confers value on acquired skills, which leads
to self-reinforcing motivation to learn more; and (2) early mastery of a range of cognitive, social,
and emotional competencies makes learning at later ages more efficient and therefore easier and
more likely to continue.
         Second, early intervention lowers the cost of later investment. For example, young
children at risk for school failure who participate in early childhood programs are less likely to
repeat grades or to require special education services (Fig. 2), thereby resulting in lower costs to
the education system over time.
         A more refined analysis of the intervention literature reveals significant increases in
achievement across a broad range of outcomes (e.g., academic achievement tests, years of



                                                          5
schooling completed, adult wages, and home ownership) among disadvantaged individuals as a
result of exposure to an enriched preschool environment (Fig. 2). In most studies, these results
are independent of IQ effects and are hypothesized to be related to differences in motivation,
perseverance, temperament, and other dimensions of social competence as a result of the
influence of enriched early experiences (10, 15-18). Some investigators have speculated that the
positive effects of the early intervention programs are due to improvements in the social skills
and emotional well-being of the children and that these effects, in turn, underlie the positive
outcomes in school performance and wages earned later in adult life (19).
       In contrast to the documentation of significant long-term effects from model preschool
interventions, later remediation efforts have been shown to be considerably less effective (Fig.
3). School-age remedial programs for children and youth with cognitive limitations, for example,
generally have had a poor record of success. Similarly, public job training programs, adult
literacy services, prisoner rehabilitation programs, and education programs for disadvantaged
adults have yielded low economic returns, with the returns for males often being negative (19).
Moreover, for several studies in which later intervention showed benefits, the performance of
these children was still behind the performances of children who experienced earlier
interventions in the preschool years (19).




       Although investments in older individuals realize relatively less return overall, such
investments are still clearly beneficial. Indeed, the advantages gained from effective early
interventions are sustained best when they are followed by continued high quality learning
experiences (19). The technology of skill formation shows that the returns on school investment
are higher for persons with higher ability, where ability is formed in the early years. Stated


                                                 6
simply, early investments must be followed by later investments if maximum value is to be
realized.
         The studies cited above support the conclusion that early childhood experience has a
powerful influence on the development of the cognitive, social, and emotional capacities that are
prerequisites for strong economic productivity in adulthood. It is important to note, however, that
the most convincing data for this assertion come from high quality intervention programs, which
are not representative of the effectiveness of a wide range of services typically available to
children from disadvantaged environments.
         Ethical, practical, and cost considerations impose stringent limitations on how far
research on humans can be pursued in rigorously controlled studies. Given these constraints, we
turn to the research literature on other species to assess what has been learned about the
fundamental principles of developmental neurobiology that might explain how early experience
shapes social, emotional and cognitive capacities in a way that has a lasting impact into the adult
years.


Early Experience Shapes Temperament and Social Development
         Many of the emotional and social behaviors that are exhibited by humans are also
observed in other species. Experiments with monkeys and rats, for example, have demonstrated
that certain fundamental emotional and social behaviors are shaped dramatically by early
experience (20-25). One of the most salient examples is the powerful influence of early
interactions between an infant and its mother in shaping the temperament and social behavior of
the developing animal. Much of this work has focused on the effects of early disruption of close
affiliative bonds (8, 26-28).
         In monkeys, considerable experimental work has demonstrated the extent to which the
disruption of an early affiliative bond has long-term effects on the nature of an animal’s
interactions with other monkeys, leading to a decrease in affiliative behaviors and an increase in
aggressive interactions later in life (26, 28, 29). Although much of the evidence for these effects
came originally from studies of monkeys reared in abnormal environments, such as in isolation
or only with other young animals (21, 28-30), recent investigations have shown significant
effects even when infants were reared in more normal, complex, social environments (Box 2).




                                                  7
Consequences of Early Affiliative Bond Disruption in Monkeys
Numerous studies have documented the effects of removing the mother on the development of social and emotional
behaviors in infant monkeys (23, 26). In a recent study, long-lasting behavioral effects were observed even when
the infant monkeys remained in an otherwise complex social environment, i.e., the infants remained in a rich home
environment, but their mothers were removed (26, 77).
Infants deprived of their mothers at one week of age developed normally in many respects. However, compared with
infants reared with their mothers, they exhibited a striking decrease in social interactions with other monkeys and a
sharp increase in self-comforting behaviors, such as thumb-sucking (Fig. 4, red open circles). In addition, they
rarely sought social comfort when placed in anxiety-provoking situations, such as a novel playroom, tending instead
to vocalize loudly and to engage in self-comforting behaviors. As they matured, they continued to exhibit fewer
social interactions, such as touching and sitting in proximity to other monkeys. When placed in new social groups,
they displayed other atypical social behaviors. For example, they exhibited a strong propensity to try social
interactions with unfamiliar monkeys, including unusual levels of both affiliative and aggressive behaviors.




The nature and severity of the effects of removing the mother changed with the age of the infants at the time of
separation. Once the infants had reached 6 months old, removal of the mother from the group had no apparent
impact on the infant (Fig. 4, blue filled circles). In contrast, infants who had their mothers removed at one month of
age exhibited acute withdrawal and depression, followed by increased seeking of social comfort from other monkeys
and a variety of atypical social behaviors, many of which persisted into adulthood. Attempts to remediate the social
and emotional consequences of early affiliative bond disruption generally had limited impact. Placing a nurturing
surrogate mother into a social group with an infant deprived of its mother at one week of age was capable of
normalizing many aspects of the infant’s behavior (increasing time spent in social contact and decreasing the display
of self-comforting behaviors) but only when the surrogate mother was introduced within the first month of the
infant’s life (Fig. 4, red triangles). Progressively later placement of the surrogate mother with the infant was
progressively less effective in remediating the adverse behavioral consequences of early affiliative bond disruption
(Fig. 4, red squares and diamonds).
These results demonstrate that, for monkeys, there is sensitive period when an early environment that lacks a close,
nurturing relationship with a primary caregiver (mother or surrogate mother) results in adult monkeys who respond
aberrantly to social signals and do not integrate well into social groups. The deleterious consequences of this
impoverished early experience on these social and emotional behaviors become extremely difficult and, therefore,
more costly to remediate at a later age.




                                                          8
         Studies in rodents also demonstrate that differences in affiliative behavior experienced
early in life can have long-term effects on social behaviors and anxiety in adulthood (Box 3).
These findings --- that both differences in, and disruptions of, close affiliative bonds early in life
can have life-long effects on the development of social behaviors --- raise important concerns
about the extent to which analogous early life experiences influence human development.
         Extensive animal research also demonstrates the existence of sensitive periods, usually
early in life, when the systems underlying the development of social skills are particularly
plastic, followed by a period during which this plasticity decreases with age (Boxes 3 and 4)(3,
20, 30, 31). Together these findings argue strongly for early intervention programs to counteract
adverse environmental circumstances that jeopardize the long-term development of social skills,
which, in turn, are likely to affect an individual’s long-term economic productivity. In a parallel
fashion, developmental research in humans indicates that there may be sensitive periods in early
childhood when greater responsiveness to therapeutic interventions might enhance life-long
outcomes and decrease the probability of later mental health problems, such as anxiety or
depression (32-36).


A Sensitive Period for Shaping the Temperament of Rodents
Certain aspects of the temperament of individual rats can be altered profoundly by early social experience (20, 24,
67). For example, rat pups that are cared for during the first week after birth by a mother who grooms them
extensively (high-grooming) and nurses them in a way that facilitates their access to milk (arched-back nursing)
become more adventurous, less fearful, less anxious, and less reactive to stress than rat pups raised by a mother who
does not act in this manner. These emotional traits, shaped by experience during this sensitive period, have positive
effects on the development of the individual’s social and cognitive behaviors that persist in adulthood.
Cross-fostering experiments show that the transmission of these traits is dominated by early experience, not by
genetics (67, 78, 79). Rats born to low-grooming mothers (non-attentive, little grooming, no arched-back nursing),
but raised by high-grooming mothers, become themselves calm, adventurous adults and high-grooming parents.
Conversely, rats born to high-grooming mothers, but reared by low-grooming mothers, become anxious adults and
low-grooming parents. Thus, the transmission of these emotional and social traits is non-genetic, although without
the intervention the traits would have seemed entirely genetically based. Experiments such as these demonstrate that
although genetics constrains the ranges of social and emotional characteristics that an individual rat can express,
early experience can modify these characteristics over remarkably large extents. The genetic and molecular
mechanisms that underlie this particular influence of early social experience on temperament (58, 63) are described
in Supplementary Material.



Early Experience Shapes Perceptual and Cognitive Abilities
         The effects of early experience on perceptual and cognitive skills have been studied
extensively by neuroscientists, and the same principles discussed above for social and emotional
development hold true. Complex cognitive capacities, which mature and change throughout our


                                                          9
lifetimes, depend on the analytic, synthetic, and recognition capabilities of specific neural
circuits (37). The properties of many of these brain circuits have been shown to be particularly
sensitive to the shaping influences of experience during early life (12, 31, 38-40).
        Language acquisition in humans is a well studied example of a complex cognitive ability
that is shaped by early experience (Box 4). All children at birth are capable of learning any of the
world’s languages. As they experience a particular language they become expert in analyzing,
interpreting and producing its distinctive sounds, and individuals who are exposed to multiple
languages during the early years of life learn to speak each with equal facility (41, 42). Social
factors play an important role in regulating this early learning process, as both the production and
the perception of speech are learned substantially faster when a child learns from a human tutor
rather than from taped or video speech (41). Learning a second language as an adult requires far
greater effort than learning it as a child, and the result is never as complete (Fig. 5). Thus,
language acquisition demonstrates both the hierarchical nature of learning, i.e., early skills
influence the ability to master later skills (43), and the phenomenon of sensitive periods in
development, i.e., times early in life when specific abilities can be mastered and shaped more
readily than later (42).




                                                  10
Sensitive Periods in the Acquisition of Language
Language is an excellent and familiar example of a cognitive skill that is acquired readily in early life, but with great
effort and never as thoroughly as an adult (42, 80). The dependence of language learning on age holds for first
languages and second languages (Fig. 5), and for spoken languages as well as sign languages. For most people, a
thorough command of language is attained when learning occurs before about 7 years of age. Statistically, language
proficiency decreases progressively as language learning is delayed beyond 7 years, and reaches adult levels by the
end of adolescence. People who have never experienced language throughout their childhood are apparently
incapable of acquiring a facility with language at a later age, despite intense training. Not all aspects of language
learning are subject to sensitive periods. For example, proficiency with phonetic comprehension and production,
grammar and syntax is learned most effectively early in life, whereas semantics and vocabulary are learned with
similar facility throughout life (41, 42, 81).




For language, as for many cognitive skills, early learning begets later learning (43). In the first stage of language
learning, young children learn to discriminate among acoustically similar sounds (phonemes) that convey different
meaning (41). This learning is critical to the next stage of language acquisition, which is to learn to segment
phonemes into words. Sound segmentation is critical, in turn, to attaching meaning to words and finally to deriving
meaning from grammar and syntax. As predicted by this hierarchy of information processing, the ability of children
to discriminate phonemes at 6 months of age predicts their ability to understand words and phrases at later ages, and
an inability to discriminate phonemes leads to pervasive language disabilities later in life (82).



Early Experience Shapes Brain Architecture
         In order to understand why early experience exerts such a powerful influence on skill
development, we must understand how experience shapes the neural circuits that underlie all
behavior. Although some capacity for plasticity persists in virtually all neural circuits throughout
our lifetimes, many circuits are particularly susceptible to the influence of experience during
sensitive periods as they are maturing(12) (Boxes 3 and 5).
         A classic example of a neural circuit whose architecture is shaped by early experience is
the circuit that conveys visual signals from the thalamus to the primary visual cortex in mammals


                                                           11
(44, 45). When the quality of vision in one eye is substantially worse than that in the other, the
axons conveying information from the disadvantaged eye disconnect from neurons in the visual
cortex and withdraw most of their branches. Conversely, axons conveying information from the
advantaged eye elaborate branches profusely and establish an abnormally high number of
connections with cortical neurons (46, 47). This change in architecture is associated with a
fundamental change in the function of the visual cortex, which becomes dominated by input
from the advantaged eye. This effect of experience on brain architecture only occurs during a
limited sensitive period in the development of this neural circuit, and once the circuit has
matured the major effects are irreversible (48, 49).
       The response of the brain to poor input from one eye is adaptive in that the nervous
system alters its circuitry so that it differentially processes input from the superior eye. However,
the inability of this circuit to recover normal architecture and function after the end of the
sensitive period, even when input to the disadvantaged eye is restored, has no apparent adaptive
advantage. This characteristic underscores the critical importance of normative early experience
for the development of this neural circuit. As with skill development, an impoverished early
environment results in a reduced capacity that is difficult or impossible to remediate at a later
age.
       In a different neural circuit, early experience has been shown to be capable of altering
brain architecture in a way that greatly expands the capacity of the adult brain to process
information adaptively (Box 5). In this case, early experience takes advantage of the increased
capacity for neural plasticity in young animals to create new architectures that then persist into
adulthood and support alternative ways of processing information (Fig. 6). As with the previous
example, the capacity of the brain to make fundamental architectural changes guided by
experience appears to be limited to a sensitive period in early life, in this case during the juvenile
period (50).




                                                 12
A Sensitive Period for Changing Brain Architecture in Owls
The ability of early experience to instruct the functional properties and architecture of neural circuits has been
studied in the central auditory system of barn owls. Sound localization is a critical auditory function that allows
animals to find mates, avoid danger, and target prey based on the sounds they hear. For barn owls, as nocturnal
predators, sound localization is vital. To localize sounds, the central auditory system measures a variety of acoustic
cues, such as interaural time differences (ITDs) and interaural level differences (ILDs), and associates particular cue
values with the location in space that produces them. Behavioral studies on barn owls have shown that these cue-
location associations are shaped by experience most dramatically during a sensitive period that lasts until the
individual approaches adulthood (83).
Neural circuits responsible for establishing cue-location associations in the owl’s central auditory system have been
identified (84). One pathway in the midbrain transforms a neural representation of ITD and ILD values into a
topographic map of space, in a structure called the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICX). This auditory
space map is then sent to another structure, the optic tectum, where it merges with a visual map of space.
The representation of cues in the auditory space map is customized for the individual owl based on experience (85,
86). Manipulations of experience that alter auditory orienting behavior also alter the functional properties of neurons
in this circuit. The magnitudes of the changes that are induced by experience depend greatly on the age of the animal
(Fig. 6A). Large changes in neuronal response properties occur readily in juvenile owls and are accompanied by
anatomical changes in the pattern of projections of axons into the space map (50). The change in circuit architecture
that results from learning is due to the elaboration of axons and synapses in atypical portions of the ICX, as
instructed by experience (Fig. 6B, learned axons). Similar structural changes have been observed in the visual cortex
of kittens deprived of vision in one eye during a sensitive period (46). Once this additional circuitry is acquired and
stabilized as a consequence of learning, it becomes highly resistant to elimination and can persist into adulthood
(87). Owls that have learned an alternative map of auditory cues as juveniles can re-express that alternative map as
adults should it become adaptive once again (Fig. 4C), much like adult humans can readily re-learn a language that
they have learned as children. Thus, for this circuit, early learning establishes a brain architecture in juveniles that
enables increased functional plasticity in adulthood.




                                                          13
       In the hierarchies of neural circuits that support complex behavior, sensitive periods for
circuits at lower levels in the hierarchy, which perform more fundamental computations, tend to
close before those for circuits at higher levels (38, 51, 52). For example, the sensitive period for
circuits responsible for combining visual inputs from the two eyes ends long before the sensitive
period for circuits responsible for recognizing biologically important objects (38, 53). This
sequencing of sensitive periods is logical, because higher levels in a hierarchy depend on precise
and reliable information from lower levels in order to accomplish their functions (i.e., early
learning begets later learning, and skills beget skills). Thus, experience-dependent shaping of
high-level circuits depends on the quality of the information provided by lower level circuits, and
the shaping of high-level circuits cannot be completed until the computations carried out by


                                                 14
lower-level circuits are stable and reliable. The sensitive periods for most lower-level circuits
end relatively early in life (12). In contrast, sensitive periods for some high-level circuits remain
open until the individual approaches adulthood (e.g., Boxes 4 and 5).


Early Experience Shapes Gene Expression and Neurochemistry
       The activation of neural circuits by experience also can cause dramatic changes in the
genes that are expressed (“turned on”) in specific circuits (54-56). The protein products of these
genes can have far reaching effects on the chemistry of neurons and therefore on their
excitability and architecture. For example, induced gene products can regulate the formation or
elimination of synaptic connections or the responsiveness of neurons to neural activity or to
specific hormones, neuromodulators, or neurotransmitters (57-62). These changes can have an
enormous impact on the properties of a neural circuit and on the behaviors that it mediates. Most
importantly, some genes are turned on or off, or can have their expression levels adjusted by
experience, only during a limited sensitive period in a circuit’s maturation (27, 54, 55, 63-66).
       A salient example of the effects of early experience on brain biochemistry and gene
expression is the influence of early mothering of young rats on the release of “stress hormones”
(glucocorticoids), and the subsequent life-long change in the expression of genes for
glucocorticoid receptors in key regions of the brain (Box 3). In this example, early social
interactions modify gene expression in a way that changes a critical set-point in a circuit that
influences the animal’s temperament throughout life(20, 67). Beyond changing homeostatic set-
points in maturing neural circuits, experience-induced alterations in gene expression can lead to
changes in patterns of connectivity, excitability, and biochemistry that alter how a circuit
processes information and how it responds to circulating hormones, neuromodulators, and
neurotransmitters well into adulthood (45, 60, 67).


Why Experience During Circuit Maturation Is So Effective
       The strong shaping influence of experience on neural circuits during their maturation
results primarily from two factors. First, the molecular and cellular mechanisms that mediate
neural plasticity during a sensitive period are highly active, enabling circuits to undergo
substantial changes in architecture, chemistry, and gene expression in response to experiential




                                                 15
influences (12, 31, 45, 68, 69). After a sensitive period has passed, one or more of these critical
mechanisms no longer operate or operate less effectively.
       A second factor is that it is far easier to form a pattern of connections in a neural circuit
that does not already have an established configuration. When a circuit first develops, patterns
and strengths of connections form according to genetically encoded mechanisms, but these
patterns tend to be relatively imprecise and the strengths tend to be relatively weak. Impulse
activity that results from experience sharpens and strengthens these innate patterns of
connections so that the circuit processes information in a certain way (12, 70, 71). This shaping
and strengthening process engages cellular and circuit level mechanisms that stabilize the
instructed pattern of connectivity (such as synapse consolidation and lateral inhibition).
Concurrently, these induced changes antagonize the formation of alternative patterns of
connectivity, making it more difficult for subsequent experience to change the initial
configuration (12, 72, 73). Thus, the earliest experience is particularly influential because it has
the unique advantage of instructing a pattern of connectivity in a circuit without interference
from an already established pattern.
       Both of these factors, the unique availability of highly effective plasticity mechanisms
and the relative ease of forming the first strong pattern of connections, contribute to the powerful
influence of early experience on the development of neural circuits. The first factor, however, is
the most critical. Thus, as long as the appropriate mechanisms required for mediating change
continue to operate effectively, experience that comes later in a sensitive period will overcome or
add to the effects of earlier experience. However, later experience requires relatively more
intensity and tends to be less efficacious (12).


Conclusions and Implications
       Decades of research in developmental psychology have documented the highly
interactive process through which children develop the cognitive, social, and emotional
capacities that are foundational for school achievement and for adult economic productivity (3).
In addition, extensive evidence from early intervention studies with disadvantaged children
indicates that experience during early childhood can have a significant and lasting impact on a
range of important adult outcomes (13, 14, 33): positive early experiences enable individuals to
become more fit cognitively and emotionally. These findings are complemented by an extensive



                                                   16
literature on human capital formation which indicates that later remediation of disadvantaged
environments is much less effective than the provision of growth-promoting experiences early in
life (19).
        Supporting evidence for these conclusions comes from numerous studies of animal
behavior, demonstrating that the early environments in which animals are reared exert powerful
influences (both positive and negative) on their temperament, social behavior and cognitive
skills, and that experiences later in life are substantially less effective in shaping many behaviors.
It is important to note that the relevance of animal research to human circumstances rests not on
the direct applicability of specific results to humans, but on the elucidation of underlying
developmental and neurobiological principles. For example, the empirical findings of the
positive effects of living in complex cages on learning capacity and brain architecture in young
rats (74, 75) should not be equated with the relative impacts of a more or less stimulating home
environment on the development of young humans. Rather, the value of such research lies in its
demonstration of basic principles of neurobiology that apply across species --- the extent to
which brain architecture is influenced by both experience and genetics, the hierarchical nature of
brain and behavioral development, and the concepts of sensitive periods and decreasing
neuroplasticity over time.
        Our understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the far-reaching effects of early
experience on the development of the brain and behavior is advancing at an accelerating pace.
The development of the brain is driven by two interacting forces: genetics and experience. In
recent years, neuroscientists have made considerable progress in elucidating how different
experiences affect the architecture, biochemistry, and gene expression exhibited by neural
circuits that mediate cognitive, emotional, and social behaviors. These shaping influences are
particularly powerful during sensitive periods of circuit maturation, when specific circuit
functions can be altered in fundamental ways that customize their information processing
capabilities according to the demands of the experience. Across species, experience is essential
to the unfolding of brain development, the more adaptable the species, the more experience plays
a role. Later in life, equivalent experiences induce far more subtle changes.
        The implications of this rapidly evolving science for human capital formation are
striking. The workplace of the 21st century will favor individuals with intellectual flexibility,
strong problem-solving skills, emotional resilience, and the capacity to work well with others in



                                                 17
a continuously changing and highly competitive economic environment. In this context, the
personal and societal burdens of diminished capacity will be formidable, and the need to
maximize human potential will be greater than ever before.
       The evidence presented in this paper indicates that the most effectual and cost-effective
strategy for strengthening the future American workforce is to invest greater human and financial
resources in the social and cognitive environments of children who are disadvantaged, beginning
in the earliest years. The greatest return derives from investing in disadvantaged children
because their home environments are impoverished. Therefore, for them, the difference between
the stimulating intervention environment and the environment they would otherwise experience
is extremely large. In contrast, for typical children, the difference between the intervention
environment and the home environment is small or nothing. Among disadvantaged children, the
greatest return derives from investing in the earliest years because early experiences exert
particularly powerful influences at a time when foundational skills and behavioral patterns are
being established and when underlying neural circuits are most plastic and optimally receptive to
alteration at fundamental levels of architecture, chemistry and gene expression. As the brain
matures, experience continues to shape the neurobiology and behavioral manifestations of
cognitive, emotional, and social capacities that, in turn, facilitate the subsequent development of
a wide range of adult capabilities, including those that affect performance in the workplace.
       The cognitively stimulating experiences in early childhood that are most important for the
promotion of healthy development are provided through attentive, nurturing, and stable
relationships with invested adults. When development is jeopardized by impaired relationships or
other sources of environmental disadvantage, the biological and financial costs increase with age.
Thus, although adaptation generally remains possible well into adult life, the decreasing
plasticity of the maturing brain indicates that early intervention to mitigate the effects of
disadvantaged environments is more efficient (in both energy costs to the nervous system and
program costs to society) than later remediation for individuals with limited skills and
problematic behavior. Stated simply, skills beget skills, success breeds success, and the provision
of positive experiences early in life is considerably less expensive and more effective than the
cost and effectiveness of corrective intervention at a later age. The issue of what the optimal
strategies might be for maximizing the productivity of the future U.S. workforce is beyond the
scope of the current discussion. However, as we confront the human capital needs of the future,



                                                  18
the findings of neuroscience, behavioral research, and economics all agree on the following
conclusion --- prevention is more effective and less costly than remediation, and earlier is far
better than later.




Acknowledgements: This paper was conceived and written under the auspices of the National
Scientific Council on the Developing Child, with support from the John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation, the Susan A. Buffett Foundation, the Buffett Early Childhood Fund, and
the Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute.The authors acknowledge support by grants from the
MacArthur Research Network on Early Experience and Brain Development, the National
Institutes of Deafness and Other Communication Disorders to E.I.K., and the PEW Foundation
through the Committee on Economic Development and from NICHD to J.J.H. We thank P.
Knudsen for design of the figures.




                                                 19
References


1.    Ellwood, D. (2001) The sputtering labor force of the 21st century: can social policy
      help? (Russell Sage Foundation, New York).
2.    DeLong, J., B., Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (2003) Sustaining U.S. economic growth (The
      Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.).
3.    Shonkoff, J. & Phillips, D. (2000) From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
      Early Childhood Development (National Academy Press, Washington D.C.).
4.    Rutter, M. L., Kreppner, J. M. & O'Connor, T. G. (2001) Br J Psychiatry 179, 97-103.
5.    Tennant, C. (1988) Arch Gen Psychiatry 45, 1045-50.
6.    Goodman, S. H. & Gotlib, I. H. (1999) Psychol. Rev. 106, 458-490.
7.    Cicchetti, D. & Toth, S. L. (1995) J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 34, 541-565.
8.    Heim, C. & Nemeroff, C. B. (2001) Biol. Psychiatry 49, 1023-1039.
9.    Carneiro, P. & Heckman, J. J. (2003) Inequality in America: What Role for Human
      Capital Policy? (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
10.   Currie, J. & Blau, D. (2005) Preschool, day care, and afterschool care: who's minding
      the kids? (North Holland, Amsterdam).
11.   Katz, L. C. & Shatz, C. J. (1996) Science 274, 1133-1138.
12.   Knudsen, E. I. (2004) J Cogn Neurosci 16, 1412-25.
13.   Campbell, F. & Ramey, C. (1994) Child Development 65, 684-698.
14.   Schweinhart, L. J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W. S., Belfield, C. R. & Nores, M.
      (2005) Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40
      (High/Scope Press, Ypsilanti).
15.   Barnett, W. S. (1995) The Furture of Children 5, 25-50.
16.   Yoshikawa, H. (1995) The Future of Children 5, 51-75.
17.   Olds, D. L., Kitzman, H., Cole, R., Robinson, J., Sidora, K., Luckey, D. W., Henderson,
      C. R., Jr., Hanks, C., Bondy, J. & Holmberg, J. (2004) Pediatrics 114, 1550-9.
18.   Love, J. M., Kisker, E. E., Ross, C., Raikes, H., Constantine, J., Boller, K., Brooks-Gunn,
      J., Chazan-Cohen, R., Tarullo, L. B., Brady-Smith, C., Fuligni, A. S., Schochet, P. Z.,
      Paulsell, D. & Vogel, C. (2005) Dev Psychol 41, 885-901.
19.   Cunha, F., Heckman, J., Lochner, L. & Masterov, D. (2005) Interpreting the evidence on
      life cycle skill formation (North Holland, Amsterdam).
20.   Meaney, M. J. (2001) Annu Rev Neurosci 24, 1161-92.
21.   Suomi, S. J. (1981) Genetic, maternal, and environmental influences on social
      development in rhesus monkeys.
22.   Liu, D., Diorio, J., Day, D. C., Francis, D. D. & Meaney, M. J. (2000) Nat. Neurosci. 3,
      799-806.
23.   Coplan, J. D., Rosenblum, L. A. & Gorman, J. M. (1995) Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 18,
      727-743.
24.   Caldji, C., Tannenbaum, B., Sharma, S., Francis, D., Plotsky, P. M. & Meaney, M. J.
      (1998) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 5335-40.
25.   Sanchez, M. M., Ladd, C. O. & Plotsky, P. M. (2001) Dev Psychopathol 13, 419-49.
26.   Nelson, C. A., Bloom, F. E., Cameron, J. L., Amaral, D., Dahl, R. E. & Pine, D. (2002)
      Dev Psychopathol 14, 499-520.


                                              20
27.   Meaney, M. J., Diorio, J., Francis, D., Widdowson, J., LaPlante, P., Caldji, C., Sharma,
      S., Seckl, J. R. & Plotsky, P. M. (1996) Dev Neurosci 18, 49-72.
28.   Suomi, S. J., Collins, M. L., Harlow, H. F. & Ruppenthal, G. C. (1976) J Child Psychol
      Psychiatry 17, 101-12.
29.   Kraemer, G., Ebert, M., Schmidt, D. & McKinney, W. (1991) Child Development 62,
      548-566.
30.   Harlow, H. F. & Marlow, M. K. (1962) Sci. American 207, 136-146.
31.   Horn, G. (2004) Nat Rev Neurosci 5, 108-20.
32.   Luby, J. (2000) in Handbook of Infant Mental Health, ed. Zeanah, C. (The Guilford
      Press, New York).
33.   Shonkoff, J. & Meisels, S. (2000) Handbook of Early Childhood Intervention
      (Cambridge University Press, New York).
34.   Mifsud, C. & Rapee, R. M. (2005) J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 44, 996-1004.
35.   Ramey, S. L. & Ramey, C. T. (1999) Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities
      Research Reveiws 5, 1-10.
36.   Belsky, J. (2006) Dev. Psychol. 42, 38-58.
37.   Shaw, P., Greenstein, D., Lerch, J., Clasen, L., Lenroot, R., Gogtay, N., Evans, A.,
      Rapoport, J. & Giedd, J. (2006) Nature 440, 676-9.
38.   Pascalis, O., Scott, L. S., Kelly, D. J., Shannon, R. W., Nicholson, E., Coleman, M. &
      Nelson, C. A. (2005) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 5297-300.
39.   Brunson, K. L., Kramar, E., Lin, B., Chen, Y., Colgin, L. L., Yanagihara, T. K., Lynch,
      G. & Baram, T. Z. (2005) J Neurosci 25, 9328-38.
40.   Schorr, E. A., Fox, N. A., van Wassenhove, V. & Knudsen, E. I. (2005) Proc Natl Acad
      Sci U S A 102, 18748-50.
41.   Kuhl, P. K. (2004) Nat Rev Neurosci 5, 831-43.
42.   Newport, E. L., Bavelier, D. & Neville, H. J. (2001) in Language, brain and cognitive
      development: Essays in honor of Jacques Mehler, ed. Doupoux, E. (MIT Press,
      Cambridge, MA), pp. 481-502.
43.   Morgan, J. L. & Demuth, K. (1996) Signal to Syntax: Bootstrapping from Speech to
      Grammar in Early Acquisition (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey).
44.   Hubel, D. H., Wiesel, T. & LeVay, S. (1977) Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 278, 377-409.
45.   Hensch, T. K. (2005) Curr Top Dev Biol 69, 215-37.
46.   Antonini, A. & Stryker, M. P. (1996) J Comp Neurol 369, 64-82.
47.   Antonini, A., Fagiolini, M. & Stryker, M. P. (1999) J Neurosci 19, 4388-406.
48.   Wiesel, T. N. & Hubel, D. H. (1965) J. Neurophysiol. 28, 1060-1072.
49.   Jampolsky, A. (1978) in Symposium on strabismus, Trans New Orleans Acad Ophthal,
      pp. Chapter 26, pp. 358-492.
50.   DeBello, W. M., Feldman, D. E. & Knudsen, E. I. (2001) J. Neurosci. 21, 3161-74.
51.   Jones, K. R., Spear, P. D. & Tong, L. (1984) J. Neurosci. 4, 2543-2552.
52.   DeBello, W. M. & Knudsen, E. I. (2004) J Neurosci 24, 6853-61.
53.   Daw, N. W. (1997) Optometry and Vision Science 74, 690-694.
54.   Tagawa, Y., Kanold, P. O., Majdan, M. & Shatz, C. J. (2005) Nat Neurosci 8, 380-8.
55.   Corriveau, R. A., Huh, G. S. & Shatz, C. J. (1998) Neuron 21, 505-20.
56.   Kaczmarek, L. & Chaudhuri, A. (1997) Brain Res Brain Res Rev 23, 237-56.
57.   Kelly, M. P. & Deadwyler, S. A. (2003) J Neurosci 23, 6443-51.




                                             21
58.   Weaver, I. C., Champagne, F. A., Brown, S. E., Dymov, S., Sharma, S., Meaney, M. J. &
      Szyf, M. (2005) J Neurosci 25, 11045-54.
59.   Wang, H. G., Lu, F. M., Jin, I., Udo, H., Kandel, E. R., de Vente, J., Walter, U.,
      Lohmann, S. M., Hawkins, R. D. & Antonova, I. (2005) Neuron 45, 389-403.
60.   Kandel, E. R. (2001) Science 294, 1030-8.
61.   Cabelli, R. J., Shelton, D. L., Segal, R. A. & Shatz, C. J. (1997) Neuron 19, 63-76.
62.   Huh, G. S., Boulanger, L. M., Du, H., Riquelme, P. A., Brotz, T. M. & Shatz, C. J. (2000)
      Science 290, 2155-9.
63.   Weaver, I. C., Diorio, J., Seckl, J. R., Szyf, M. & Meaney, M. J. (2004) Ann N Y Acad Sci
      1024, 182-212.
64.   Philpot, B. D., Sekhar, A. K., Shouval, H. Z. & Bear, M. F. (2001) Neuron 29, 157-69.
65.   Huang, Z. J., Kirkwood, A., Pizzorusso, T., Porciatti, V., Morales, B., Bear, M. F.,
      Maffei, L. & Tonegawa, S. (1999) Cell 98, 739-55.
66.   Corriveau, R. A., Shatz, C. J. & Nedivi, E. (1999) J Neurosci 19, 7999-8008.
67.   Weaver, I. C., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D'Alessio, A. C., Sharma, S., Seckl, J. R.,
      Dymov, S., Szyf, M. & Meaney, M. J. (2004) Nat Neurosci 7, 847-54.
68.   Berardi, N., Pizzorusso, T. & Maffei, L. (2000) Curr Opin Neurobiol 10, 138-45.
69.   Daw, N. W. (1994) Invest Ophthal and Vis. Sci. 35, 4168-4179.
70.   Engert, F., Tao, H. W., Zhang, L. I. & Poo, M. M. (2002) Nature 419, 470-5.
71.   Lu, W. & Constantine-Paton, M. (2004) Neuron 43, 237-49.
72.   Hensch, T. K. (2005) Nat Rev Neurosci 6, 877-88.
73.   Zheng, W. & Knudsen, E. I. (2001) J. Neurosci. 21, 4356-4365.
74.   Grossman, A. W., Churchill, J. D., McKinney, B. C., Kodish, I. M., Otte, S. L. &
      Greenough, W. T. (2003) J Child Psychol Psychiatry 44, 33-63.
75.   Cancedda, L., Putignano, E., Sale, A., Viegi, A., Berardi, N. & Maffei, L. (2004) J
      Neurosci 24, 4840-8.
76.   Barnett, S. & Masse, L. N. (2002) (National Institute for Early Education Research
      (NIEER), New Brunswick, New Jersey.
77.   McCormick, K., Kerr, D., Rockcastle, N., Bytheway, J., Colosimo, D., Singer, L. &
      Cameron, J. L. (2004) Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 426, 20.
78.   Liu, D., Diorio, J., Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., Freedman, A., Sharma, S.,
      Pearson, D., Plotsky, P. M. & Meaney, M. J. (1997) Science 277, 1659-62.
79.   Francis, D., Diorio, J., Liu, D. & Meaney, M. J. (1999) Science 286, 1155-8.
80.   Doupe, A. J. & Kuhl, P. K. (1999) Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 22, 567-631.
81.   Neville, H. J., Mills, D. L. & Lawson, D. S. (1992) Cereb Cortex 2, 244-58.
82.   Tsao, F. M., Liu, H. M. & Kuhl, P. K. (2004) Child Dev 75, 1067-84.
83.   Knudsen, E. I. (1999) J. Comp. Physiol. 185, 305-321.
84.   Knudsen, E. I. (2002) Nature 417, 322-8.
85.   Brainard, M. S. & Knudsen, E. I. (1993) J. Neurosci. 13, 4589-4608.
86.   Gold, J. I. & Knudsen, E. I. (2000) J. Neurosci. 20, 862-77.
87.   Linkenhoker, B. A., von der Ohe, C. G. & Knudsen, E. I. (2005) Nat Neurosci 8, 93-8.
88.   Johnson, J. S. & Newport, E. L. (1989) Cognit Psychol 21, 60-99.
89.   Brainard, M. S. & Knudsen, E. I. (1998) J. Neurosci. 18, 3929-3942.
90.   Knudsen, E. I. (1998) Science 279, 1531-1533.




                                             22
Supplemental Material

Early Intervention Programs for Disadvantaged Children

        The Perry Preschool Program and the Abecedarian Program used randomized child
assignment and long-term follow-up to study the effects of early interventions on social
behaviors of severely disadvantaged children (1-3). The Perry Program was an intensive
preschool program that was administered to 64 disadvantaged, black children in Ypsilanti,
Michigan between 1962 and 1967. Experimental and control group assignments were performed
randomly in the following way. Candidate children were selected from students attending the
Perry School, from neighborhood group referrals, and from door to door canvassing. Poor
children who scored between 75 and 85 on the Stanford-Binet IQ test were randomly divided
into two undesignated groups. The children were then transferred across groups to equalize
socioeconomic status, cognitive abilities (as measured by IQ), and gender composition. Finally, a
coin toss determined which group would receive the treatment and which would not. Initially, the
treatment and control groups each comprised 64 children, but the final treatment and control
groups comprised 58 and 65 children, respectively.
        Children entered the Perry Program in five cohorts, starting with cohort zero (four-year-
olds) and cohort one (three-year-olds) in 1962. Then, cohorts two, three and four (three-year-
olds) entered in each subsequent year through 1965. The average age at entry was 42.3 months.
With the exception of cohort zero, treatment children spent two years attending the program. In
the final year of the program, 11 three-year-olds, who were not included in the data, attended the
program with the 12 four-year-olds, who were included in the data. About half of the children
were living with two parents. The average mother was 29 years old and had completed 9.4 years
of school.
        The treatment consisted of a daily 2.5 hour classroom session on weekday mornings and
a weekly 90 minute home visit by the teacher on weekday afternoons to involve the mother in
the educational process. The length of each preschool year was 30 weeks, beginning in mid-
October and ending in May. Ten female teachers participated, resulting in an average
child:teacher ratio of 6:1 for the duration of the program. All teachers were certified to teach in
elementary, early childhood or special education. If it were administered today, the Perry
Preschool Program would cost approximately $9,785 per participant per year in 2004 dollars (1).
The control and treatment groups have been followed through age 40.
        The Abecedarian Program recruited 111 children, born between 1972 and 1977, whose
families scored high on a risk index, which consisted of weighted measures of maternal and
paternal education levels, family income, absence of the father from the home, poor social or
family support for the mother, indications that older siblings had academic problems, the use of
welfare, unskilled employment, low parent IQ, and family members who sought counseling or
support from various community agencies. Parental income and education were considered most
important in calculating the index. The Program enrolled children beginning a few months after
birth. Enrollment was based on the characteristics of the families more than on the characteristics
of the children, as in the Perry Program. Virtually all of the children were black, and their parents
had low levels of education, income, and cognitive ability and high levels of pathological
behavior. The children were screened for mental retardation. Most of the children (76%) lived in
single parent or multigenerational households. The average mother was just under 20 years old
and had 10 years of schooling and an IQ of 85.



                                                 23
         The Abecedarian Program involved 4 cohorts of approximately 28 children each. By the
time they were 6 weeks old, the children were assigned randomly to either a preschool
intervention or a control group. The mean age at entry was 4.4 months. At age 5 (just as they
were about to enter kindergarten), all of the children were reassigned to either a school age
intervention group through age 8 or to a control group. This yielded 4 groups: children who
experienced no intervention, those who experienced an intervention when they were young,
those who experienced an intervention when they were older, and those who experienced an
intervention throughout their whole childhood. The children were followed up until age 21.
         The Abecedarian Program was more intensive than the Perry Program. The Abecedarian
Program was a year-round, full-day intervention. The initial infant:teacher ratio was 3:1, though
it increased to a child:teacher ratio of 6:1 as the children progressed through the program. During
the first 3 primary school years, an additional home-school teacher met with the parents and
helped them in providing supplemental educational activities at home. The teacher provided an
individually-tailored curriculum for each child. The target set for the parents was at least 15
minutes per day of supplementary activities. This home-school teacher also served as a liaison
between the ordinary teachers and the family, and she interacted with the parents and the
teachers every two weeks. She also helped the parents deal with other issues to improve their
ability to care for the child, such as finding employment, navigating the bureaucracy of social
services agencies, and transporting children to appointments. Data were collected regularly up to
age 21, and the project is on going.


A Sensitive Period for Shaping the Temperament of Rodents

        Extensive grooming during early life causes rats to express low resting levels of stress
hormones, called glucocorticoids. Low levels of glucocorticoids give rise to feelings of
calmness, whereas high levels give rise to feelings of anxiety and fear. Glucocorticoid hormones
are released by the adrenal glands in response to environmental stressors. A structure in the brain
called the hippocampus contains glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) and exerts negative feedback
control on the amount of glucocorticoids that are released by the adrenal glands.
        The mechanisms work in the following way (4, 5). A rat pup’s experience with a high-
gooming mother increases the levels of the neuromodulator serotonin in the pup’s hippocampus,
leading, in turn, to an increase in the transcription (turning on) of the GR gene. The resulting
high level of GRs in the hippocampus establishes strict control of glucocorticoid hormone
release by the adrenal glands and, consequently, low basal levels of stress hormones and low
reactivity of the individual to stressors. As a result, these rats are calm and not easily frightened.
Rat pups that are raised by low-grooming mothers exhibit the opposite effects: decreased
serotonin levels in the hippocampus, a consequent down-regulation (turning off) of the GR gene
and GRs, leading to high basal levels of stress hormones and high reactivity to stressors. These
pups are more anxious individuals and, as adults, become low-grooming mothers. Because the
gene for GRs is altered naturally by this kind of experience only during the first week after birth
(6), there is only this limited period in life when experience can change a rat’s emotional
temperament by this mechanism, and the consequences are long lasting.




                                                 24
1.   Cunha, F., Heckman, J., Lochner, L. & Masterov, D. (2005) Interpreting the evidence on
     life cycle skill formation (North Holland, Amsterdam).
2.   Barnett, S. & Masse, L. N. (2002) National Institute for Early Education Research
     (NIEER), New Brunswick, New Jersey.
3.   Schweinhart, L. J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W. S., Belfield, C. R. & Nores, M.
     (2005) Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40
     (High/Scope Press, Ypsilanti).
4.   Meaney, M. J. (2001) Annu Rev Neurosci 24, 1161-92.
5.   Weaver, I. C., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D'Alessio, A. C., Sharma, S., Seckl, J. R.,
     Dymov, S., Szyf, M. & Meaney, M. J. (2004) Nat Neurosci 7, 847-54.
6.   Weaver, I. C., Champagne, F. A., Brown, S. E., Dymov, S., Sharma, S., Meaney, M. J. &
     Szyf, M. (2005) J Neurosci 25, 11045-54.




                                            25
