NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SOCIAL COST OF LABOR, AND
PROJECT EVALUATION: A GENERAL APPROACH

Raaj Kun'jar Sah

Joseph E. Stiglitz

Working Paper No. 1229

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 MassachusettS Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1983

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
of the authors and
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those
Research.
not those of the National Bureau of Economic

NBER Working Paper 111229
November 1983

The Social Cost of Labor, and
Project Evaluation: A General Approach

ABS TRACT

This paper develops a general methodology for analyzing shadow wage (and

other shadow prices). Our approach is to identify those reduced form
relationships describing the economy which are central to the determination of
the shadow wage, and use these to obtain simple formulae for the shadow wage.

Among the aspects of the economy on which we focus are: (i) the difference
between the domestic and international prices, (ii) the equilibrating mechanisms in the economy, (iii) the mechanisms which determine earnings of
industrial and agricultural workers, (iv) the nature of migration, and (vi)
the intertemporal trade—offs and the attitudes towards inequality.
These aspects are modelled in a general manner, which can be specialized
to a number of alternative hypotheses concerning technology, behavioral

postulates, and institutional settings. Most earlier results on the shadow
wages are derived as special cases of our formulae. In addition, we identify
a number of new qualitative results concerning the relationship between the
shadow wage and the market wage.

Raaj Kumar Sah
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

1. INTRODUCTION

The methodology to evaluate public activities and investments based on
shadow prices probably stands Out as the most important contribution of
economic theory to the practice of economic development in recent decades-. A
key aspect of this methodology is the determination of the shadow wage,

because it influences the most visible, and often controversial, aspects of
public activities, namely, the employment created by a public project, and the

labor—capital mix of a public investment. This paper examines a number of
issues concerning the determination of shadow wage. This analysis, with some
modifications, can also be applied to the determination of other shadow
prices.

There is a widespread agreement concerning the basic principles of cost—
benefit analysis, but there remain considerable disagreements about the
appropriate value of shadow wage, and its relation to the market wage.
Disagreements among economists arise from two sources: from different

assumptions concerning what are the salient features of the structure of the
economy (behavioral postulates, technological relationships, etc.), and from

different assumptions concerning value judgements. Some of the well known
debates on the shadow wage have taken place because of the differences in the
assumed intertemporal trade—off of the government (i.e., the valuation of
investment versus consumption), and in the assumed migration pattern between

the agricultural and industrial sectors. But, as we shall see, there are
several other aspects of the economy which critically influence the magnitude
of the shadow wage.

Given this sensitivity of the shadow wage, it is desirable to examine
this issue within a general framework which is consistent with a number of

—2—

alternative hypotheses. We develop such a framework in this paper. While the
model presented here is not the most general which might be constructed, it is
sufficiently rich so that we have been able to derive almost all important

contributions made to date in the literature as special cases. This allows us
to identify the precise assumptions which different researchers have made, and

to point Out the exact sources of disagreements among their results.

In addition, we are able to make some important qualitative statements —

which have not been previously noted — concerning the relationship between the
shadow wage and the market wage. Many of these statements are robust, i.e.,
they are valid for a wide range of parameter values. The importance of these
qualitative results lies in the fact that obtaining the precise numerical
estimates of some of the critical parameters is often inherently difficult.
In our analysis we have emphasized the following aspects of the economy:
(i) The agricultural sector: The shadow wage depends on whether
agricultural workers receive the marginal product, the average product, or

some other endogenously determined wage. Also, it depends on the technology
of agricultural production and on the labor supply behavior of agricultural

workers. We present a general model of this sector, which can be specialized
to different technological relationships and a variety of hypotheses
concerning the determination of agricultural earnings.
(ii) The industrial sector: Many models of the industrial sector have
been proposed recently which suggest an important relationship between the

wages paid to workers and their output; for example, the wage—productivity

model, the wage—quality model, and the labor—turnover model. Here we
represent the industrial sector in a general manner that can be specialized to
the various specific approaches.

(iii) The migration of labor between sectors: The literature thus far has

—3—

focussed on two cases; where there is no endogenous migration or where the

migration is governed by a Harris—Todaro type model. We present a general
model of migration which subsumes the above two cases. Also, our
determination of the shadow wage takes into account a number of general
equilibrium effects of endogenous migration which have been ignored in earlier
studies.

(iv) Foreign trade environment: Most of the studies on the shadow wage
are based on a model of an open economy in which there is no distortion

between the domestic and the international prices. mpirical evidence on
LDCs, on the other hand, points out that there exist substantial price

distortions. We therefore take into account such distortions; it turns out
that these distortions may exert a first order effect on the magnitude of the

shadow wage. In addition, we examine the case in which the distortions are
being set at the socially optimal level, and analyze its implications for the

shadow wage. We also consider the case in which the economy is closed to
foreign trade.'

(v) Government policies and constraints on government behavior: In

addition to the intertemporal trade—off mentioned earlier, the evaluation of
public projects depends on the interpersonal trade—off (i.e., the social
valuation of the income of workers in different sectors relative to that of

investment). These value judgements are represented in our formulae through
clearly indentifiable parameters.

Another important aspect of government policy is its impact on the

equilibrating mechanisms in the economy. More specifically, creation of new
employment entails a perturbation in the economy, and the consequences of new

employment creation, therefore, depend on how the economy arrives at the new

equilibrium.2 The shadow wage thus depends on the equilibrating mechanisms

—4—

which operate in the economy.
How the economy ecjuilibrates, in turn, depends on: what is the set of

instruments which the government can potentially control,which of these

instruments are left unchanged when the new employment is created, and how the

government changes the remaining instruments. There are two circumstances in
which the issue of how the economy equilibrates can be ignored; first, if the
government does not possess any instrument of control at all, and second, if
the government sets every available instrument at its socially optimal

level. Given the observed behavior of governments, both of these extremes
appear rather suspect. We therefore present a brief assessment of the impact
of alternative equilibrating mechanisms.3

2. THE BASIC MODEL

We consider here a stylized model of an open economy, in which the
government exercises its control on the agricultural sector only indirectly,

through (at most) the imposition of output taxes and subsidies. The government proposes to undertake a project in the industrial sector which will

create new employment. Our objective is to trace the consequences of this
employment creation. In the basic model, described below, we assume there is
no endogenous migration, the agricultural sector consists of family farms, and
the industrial wage is rigid.

More general approaches are considered later.

Agricultural Sector: Agricultural sector's population is N1, and A is
total agricultural land which is owned equally within the agricultural

sector.5 a = A/N' is land per worker, and L' is the number of hours worked by
each worker. The production technology exhibits constant returns to scale.

We can therefore write: X

X(A/N1, L1)

X(a, L') as the output of an

—5—

agricultural worker. An agricultural worker's consumption of agricultural and
industrial goods is denoted by Cx', y1). Surplus of agricultural good per

x'.

agricultural worker is 0 = X —

Relative price of agricultural good in

terms of industrial good is denoted by p. An agricultural worker's budget
constraint is

y1 = p0

(1)

pEX(a, L1) —

x1]

An agricultural worker chooses x', y', and L, subject to the above
budget constraint, to maximize his utility. The resulting level of utility
will depend on p and N', and it is represented by the indirect utility

function: V1

(2)

ft—
p

where

V(p, N1). Then

=

> 0, and --j-

= XPXEX/N'

< 0

is the elasticity of agricultural output per worker with

respect to land per worker, and

is (positive) marginal utility of income

in sector i.

For later use, we define c

=

Op np '

and c

Oa

=

Zna as

elasticities of

surplus per agricultural worker with respect to its price, and with respect to

land per agricultural worker. The sign of

c0 is not predictable

theoretically from the usual restrictions on the utility and the production
functions, but the available empirical evidence indicates that

> 0, which

we maintain throughout the paper.6 c0 depends on the scarcity of
agricultural land.

If land is not scarce, then c
Qa

=

0,

and E

Xa

= 0.

brevity In interpreting our results, we assume throughout that 1 )

For

c0,

i.e.,

land is moderately scarce. Parallel interpretations can be worked out if this

—6—

is not the case.

Industrial Sector: Industrial population is N2, and an industrial worker
supplies L2 hours of work which are fixed due to technological and other

considerations. An industrial worker's consumption of agricultural and
industrial goods is denoted by (x2, y2), and w is the wage income in ternis of

industrial good. The budget constraint of an industrial worker is given by

2

(3)

2

px +y =w
to maximize his utility. The

An industrial worker chooses x2 and

resulting utility level depends on p, w, and L2. In the ensuing discussion we
suppress the dependence on L2, and write the indirect utility as:

v2 E V2(p, w). Then
2

2
=

(4)

2

We define c
xp

= — X2x2 < 0

> 0, and

— 2.nx

a9np

2

2
2

2,nx

, and exw 9nw

as the elasticities of an

industrial worker's consumption of agricultural good with respect to its

price, and with respect to income. These elasticities are positive because
consumption goods are normal.

The output of an industrial worker is denoted by Y

Y(k, L2), where k =

K/N2 is capital stock per industrial worker, and K is the total industrial
capital stock. There are both private and public firms in the industrial
sectors. All firms pay the same wage to their workers and the profits of
private firms are entirely taxed away.

—7.-

Market Equilibrium: N is the total population, and

(5)

N=N'+N2

The supply of industrial good is used either for consumption or for

investment, I. Hence

(6)

IN2Y+M—N2y2-N1y1

whereM is the net import of industrial good. Similarly, the balance between
the supply and demand of agricultural good requires

(7)

N'O + M = N2x2

where M is the net import of agricultural good. Finally, the foreign trade
balance is given by

(8)

PMx+My=O

where P denotes the international relative price of the agricultural good. P
is fixed under the small country assumption, but this can be easily relaxed.
For later use, we obtain an alternative expression for investment.
Substitution of (1), (3), (7), and (8) in (6) yields

(9)

I = N2(Y — w) + (P — p)N'O + (p — P)N2x2

That is, investment equals the retained part of the industrial output (after

—8-

deducting industrial wage payment) and the net revenue from tariff on foreign
trade.

Tquilibrating Mechanism: Creation of industrial employment changes the
sectoral populations which, in turn, alters the demand and supply of

agricultural good. An equilibrating change must therefore occur to bring hack
the balance between supply and demand, (7). The social impact of employment
creation thus depends on the particular equilibrating change which occurs. In

much of the paper, we assume that the (foreign) trade quantities, M and M,
change to maintain the equilibrium, i.e., the government does not change its

tariff policy. An alternative equilibrating policy is examined in a later
section.

3. DETERMINATION OF THE SHADOW WAGE

3A. Shadow Wage in the Basic Model

We begin by defining an additive Bergson—Samuelson welfare function

(10)

= N1W(V1) + N2W(V2)

where W is concave and increasing in V. If

5 is the social value of the

marginal investment, then the current value of the aggregate social welfare is
given by the Hamiltonian

(11)

H = + 51

in which I is given by (9).

—9—

If the shadow wage is denoted by s, then

1 H
(12) S=2
N

NY
2

In the above, the industrial good is taken as the riumeraire. Industrial

output is kept unchanged because the fruits of industrial employment creation
should not he counted while calculating its cost.8
An explicit expression for (12) is derived from (11).

(13)

s = w —

(14)

z = 0(1 —

rn

obtaining
and

[W2 —

c0)

+

— + PXEx

— (p —
P)Z, where

> 0

the above, we have used (2), (4), and (5), and defined

=

iL )i

=

is social value (weight) of a marginal increase

in the income of a worker in sector i.

Each of the four terms above represents a distinct social effect of

moving an agricultural worker to the industrial sector. The first term is the
direct cost of the wage payment to the worker. Naturally, a larger wage
implies a larger shadow wage. The second term captures the change in the
welfare of the worker who has moved. The third term represents the effect of
reduced congestion on agricultural land. Specifically, a migrant worker
releases land area a, which adds PXEXa to the income of those remaining in

the agricultural sector. A higher congestion on agricultural land, therefore,
corresponds to a lower shadow wage.
The last term captures the general equilibrium effect of employment

creation on the demand and supply of agricultural good. This can be seen as

—10—

follows. The agricultural surplus decreases directly by 0 because now there
is one less agricultural worker. The agricultural surplus increases

indirectly, on the other hand, by an amount °0a because of the extra land
which has now become available to those in the agricultural sector. Also, the
newly arrived industrial worker consumes

x2 of the agricultural good.

The net shortfall in the supply of the agricultural good is therefore Z,

as in (14), which is met through increased imports. Employment creation thus
leads to increased net agricultural imports. The loss (or gain) in the
government revenue then is (p — P)Z, which is the last term in (13).

Much of the existing literature on shadow wage has ignored this general
equilibrium effect by making the assumption that there is no price distortion
i.e., p = P.

Empirical studies indicate, however, that not only is this

assumption incorrect but, in fact, there are extremely large differences

between domestic and international prices in most developing economies.9
Further, if one were to assume that the government is setting the prices at

the socially optimal levels, then the optimal prices, in general, will entail
a price distortion.'°

A simple example might help in establishing the practical importance of

price distortions. Suppose the domestic price of food is twice its
international price, and the workers spend roughly half of their income on

food. Then, assuming that investment is highly scarce, i.e, 6 +

, and

that the workers' earnings in the two sectors are roughly equal, we find from

(13) that the shadow wage is half of the market wage. In contrast, the shadow
wage equals the market wage if the general equilibrium effect is ignored.
Quite plausible parameters therefore show that the magnitude of shadow wage
will be substantially erroneous if the general equilibrium effects are not
taken into account.

—11—

3B. Special Cases
Many of the results which have been prominent fri the literature — and
some simple results which have not previously been not€d — can be obtained as
special cases of the formula derived above, (13).

The specializations entail

various specific assumptions concerning technology and the nature of
government policy.

(i) Extreme scarcity of capital: In this case,

(15)

s

6

is very large, and

w — (p — P)Z

If investment is highly scarce, then the shadow wage is higher (lower)

than the market wage if the domestic price of the agricultural good is lower
(higher) than its international price.
(ii) No price distortions: A direct implication of (13) is as follows.
In the absence of price distortions, the shadow wage is less than the market

wage, so long as industrial workers are better—off than agricultural workers.

(iii) No price distortion and utilitarianism: Utilitarianism implies
W1= V1, and

= ).

Denote the value of the marginal product of an

agricultural worker by g. That is, g = PXLL. Constant returns to scale in
agricultural production implies PXCa = pX —

(16)

1
2
s =w—-ç[v
—v

g.

Then (13) can be written as

A1

1

]

The above corresponds to a result of Stern (1972), and it was also obtained
by
Newbery (1972).

Note that the remaining special cases also employ the assumption of no
price distortions, in addition to the specific assumptions mentioned below.

—12—

(iv) Output maximizing society: If a society maximizes the level of its
aggregate output without distinguishing between investment and consumption, or
between consumption of workers in different sectors, then this is a special
case of our formulation in which
sector, and

equals one.

equals the income of a worker in the ith

That is, W1 = pX,

= w, and

=

= 1.

Therefore, from (13)

(17)

s = g

That is, the shadow wage equals the value of the marginal product of an

agricultural worker. This was one of the earliest views on shadow wage
determination. Further, this view implies a zero shadow wage, if the marginal
product of agricultural labor is zero.'2

(v) Society does not care about the agricultural sector: The terms with
the superscript 1 drop out of (13), and as a result

(18)

s w—+W2

Sen (1968) employed the above assumption to derive two of the earlier results

on the shadow wage. His results can be obtained as special cases of (18).
First, assume that the society is maximizing output (as in the special case
2

(iv) above]. That is, W = w, and

= 1.

Then the shadow wage is zero.

Second, assume that the investment is highly scarce. Then the shadow wage
equals the market wage. As is well known, the latter result will hold even if
the society cared about the agricultural sector (see expression (13)1.13

—13—

4. LABOR MOBILITY, INDUSTRIAL WAGE, AND INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTIVITY

4A. A General Model

Unemployment and endogenous mobility of labor across sectors are common

features of many developing economies. We propose here a general model of
labor mobility across different groups of workers. This model, as we shall
see, subsumes the existlng models of labor mobility. The utility level of an
unemployed worker is denoted by Vu, and the number of unemployed is denoted by

N". For simplicity, transfer arrangements from the employed to the unemployed
workers are ignored here, and it is assumed that the unemployed workers have a
fixed level of utility.

The agricultural population is expressed as a (reduced form) function of
the relative price and industrial employment.

(19)

N' =

N'(p,

N2)

Obviously then, the level of unemployment is obtained also as a function of

p and N2, since

(20)

N=N'+N2+N'
Next, consider the determination of industrial wage. As we shall see

later, there are a number of alternative hypotheses concerning how the

industrial wage is determined. To obtain an integrated view of the
implications of these hypotheses on the shadow wage, we represent the
industrial wage schedule through a reduced form function. 14

—14—

(21)

w =

w(p,

N2)

It is worth noting that the above representation of labor mobility and
industrial wage schedule is far more general than it appears, and it can
handle a wide variety of interdependence among economic variables. 15,16
Also, note that by postulating (21), we are implicitly assuming that the

government cannot perfectly control the level of industrial wage, or, that if
it is choosing an optimal wage, then the optimal wage depends on other
variables in the economy.

Finally, many recent theories have suggested that the productivity of
industrial workers might depend on other variables in the economy such as the

industrial wage, the rate of unemploynent, etc. Such a dependence can, in
general, be represented as

=

(22)

Y(k,

L1, p, N2)

where the first argument of the function Y continues to represent the direct
effect of the size of industrial work force on industrial output (which is not
counted while calculating the shadow wage) while the last two arguments
reflect all of the indirect effects.17
An advantage of using general functions like (19), (21), and (22) is that
the resulting shadow wage formulae are quite free of the precise nature of

institutions in the economy. As we shall see below, these functions are
easily specialized to represent specific hypotheses concerning labor mobility,
productivity effects, and industrial wage determination.

For later use, we define the following elasticities. From (22),
dinY
e

dlnN

is the elasticity of per worker industrial output with respect

—15—

to the fourth argument in the function (22). Given that the price is fixed in
the present model, this elasticity captures all of the indirect effects of the
1

perturbation in the economy on the industrial output. From (19), n =

—

dN
is the number of workers who leave the agricultural sector if one industrial
dZnw

job is created. Finally, from (21),

Cwe =
d 2nN

2

is the elasticity of

industrial wage with respect to industrial employment.

The relevant Lagrangian is given by (9) and (11) in which

=

(23)

N1W(V1) + N2w(v2) + (N —

N' — N2)w(v1)

The shadow wage is obtained as

s = w —

(24)

W2 —

u1 ÷ n —

(p — P)Z + (1 —

f) w

—

Ye

where

(25)

(26)

=

—

— 1PXC,

and

Z = 0(1 — c )n + x2(1 +
Oa

2

xw we

The expression (24) reduces to (13) if n

1,

Ye

0,

and

=
we

0.

That is: If the level of unemployment is left unchanged by the creation of
industrial employment, if the industrial wage is fixed, and if there are no
indirect effects on the industrial output, then the shadow wage is the same as
that derived in the basic model.

The effect of employment creation on labor mobility and the effect of
this on shadow wage can be decomposed into three parts. First, n migrants

—16—

from agricultural sector join the pool of unemployed and

Is the loss in the

welfare for each such worker [see (25)1. The welfare loss is thus

in

(24). Second, one of the unemployed workers receives the newly created
industrial employment, and the welfare gain due to this is -- [W2 — We].
Third, labor mobility influences the shortfall Z in the supply of agricultural

good. This can be seen in (26), in which 0(1 —

is the decrease in

agricultural supply.

The effect of employment creation on the industrial wage is felt through

If, for examnle the industrial wage increases with industrial
we
employment, then employment creation leads to an increase in the wage payment
c

to intramarginal industrial workers. This, in turn, leads to a gain in the
welfare of these workers, but at the expense of resources available for

investment. The net of these two effects is represented in the fifth term in
(24). The induced change in industrial wage also increases the net shortfall
in the supply of agricultural good, as can be seen in the expression (26).
Finally, the loss or gain due to the indirect effects on industrial
output is represented by the last term in the right hand side of (24).

4B. Harris—Todaro Migration Model

A special case of our general model of labor mobility is the Harris—

Todaro hypothesis [Harris and Todaro (1970)]. Under this hypothesis, a
migrant from the agricultural sector may
probability N2/(N —

find

an industrial job, with

N1), or could become unemployed. Migration continues

until the expected utility level of a potential migrant equals the utility

level of an agricultural worker. This hypothesis is therefore a special case
of (19) in which

—17—

= N1V1 + N2V2 + (N —

(27)

N' — N2)VU

where, it will be recalled, V1 is a function of p and N, and V2 is a
function of p and w. For simplicity, we assume that the industrial wage is
fixed. Also that the social welfare function is utilitarian, i.e,
W(V) = V and

i =
i
X

•

While a more general approach is easily possible, the

latter assumption enables us to ignore the issue of defining the social

welfare over ex ante versus ex post utilities. Finally, to keep N" positive,
we assume that V2 > V' > VU. The above model is not meaningful otherwise.
Perturbing (27), we obtain

12

u

— VU) + (N —
N')X'pXcxa
Substitution of the above in (24) yields

(29)

s = w — N

n — (p — P)Z

—j- — pXc.a

where Z is given by (26), in which

Ce = 0.

On comparing (29) with earlier expressions, (13) and (24), it is clear
that the shadow wage now does not depend on the differences in the utilities

of different workers. This should not be surprising since all workers have
the same expected utility under the present model. Also, note that the
dependence of shadow wage on the difference between domestic and international
prices, p —

P, is quite similar to what we had encountered earlier.18

Special Cases: (i) Consider the special case in which there is no
congestion on agricultural land, and the domestic price equals the

—18—

international price. Then, from (29), the shadow wage equals the market wage,
regardless of the society's valuation of investment versus consumption. This
well known result

19

reversed the presumption of the earlier literature that

the shadow wage was much less than the market wage and that it approached the

market wage only when the social value of investment (relative to consumption)
was very high.

The basic reason for this result is that the migration in the present
model does not change the aggregate level of utility in the economy arid,

hence, the only effect of employment creatIon is on investment. This can he
seen as follows. The utility level of an agricultural worker is fixed, since

Xa 0.

Similarly, the utility level of an industrial worker is fixed

because his wage is fixed. Further, in this model, the workers allocate
themselves between sectors to maximize their expected utility. It follows
then that the effect of migration on the aggregate expected utility is zero.

Formally, recall that the creation of one industrial job leads to the

migration of n workers from agricultural sector. Out of these, (n — 1) join
the pool of unemployed, and one worker gets the industrial job. Now, from
(28), n = (V2 —

V")/(V1

— VU).

Using this, it follows that the net social

gain in utility, V2 + (n — 1) VU —

nV',

is zero. Since the only effect of

creating an industrial job is on investment (which, from (9), is reduced by
the market wage), it follows that the shadow wage equals the market wage.2°
(ii) Stiglitz (1982a) considered a case in which the congestion effect is
not ignored, but it is assumed that the society is maximizing the total

output. Recalling this special case discussed earlier, one can write
=

1, V2 = w, and V" = 0.

result is obtained

Substituting these in (28) and (29), his

—19—

s =

(30)

where a =

—

1

1N

wct/[-j
N

— (N — N1)
1

N

CXa is the elasticity of total agricultural output with respect

to agricultural population.

4C. Alternative Models of Industrial Sector
Many recent models have postulated that the net output (e.g., net of
hiring and training costs) in an industrial firm may be a function of, among
others, the wage thIs fIrm pays, the wages paid by other firms in the

industrial sector, and the level of industrial unemployment.2' In this
section, we show how the resulting wage determination mechanisms can be
treated as special cases of the general formulation presented earlier.

Also,

we show how these models can be employed to study the Industrial wage
determination in many more institutional settings than those considered in the
earlier literature.

The general points can be established by examining the wage—efficiency

model. This model postulates that the efficiency per work hour,
on the industrial wage, i.e.,
2

range, and Y

Y(k, AL ).

A =

A(w),

A ,

depends

where A > 0 in the relevant

The particular institutional setting which has

been studied in the literature is the one in which private firms maximize
their profit per worker, and hire workers up to the point where their marginal

product equals the wage. This implies that the labor cost per efficiency

unit, A(w)

,

is

minimized, which leads to

(31) A=—2—-

Thus: The level of the efficiency wage is a fixed technological

—20—

parameter. The substitution of r= 0 and rYe 0 in (24) yields the

corresponding shadow wage.

An example of a different institutional setting is the one in which the
industrial firms are publicly owned (i.e., the level of industrial employment
is publicly determined) and the government directs its public sector managers
to maximize their profits (this directive may not always be socially optimal,

as we shall soon see). Then the industrial wage is determined through

(32) xw =—-—

=

where

2
(xL

Clearly

•

l

in this case the industrial wage depends on the

)

level of industrial employment. Further, LYe LYLLXwLwe where LYL =
and c

=

2

ln(XL )

n

Xw lnw

Y

•

substitution

of these in (24) yields the required shadow

wage.

A particularly important institutional setting is one in which the

government sets the wage optimally after taking into account the technological

dependence due to the wage—efficiency effects. The optimum wage will thus be
chosen to maximize the relevant Hamiltonian. It can be verified that, in
general, the optimum wage will depend on the variables in the two sectors.
Specifically, the resulting optimal wage schedule will not entail an
equalization of the social valuation of investment and the social valuation of

the income of an industrial worker, i.e., 2 ,

unlike

the standard case in

public economics.22
Other models of industrial sector need to be discussed only briefly,

since the relevant Issues in these models are quite similar to those already

discussed above. In the wage—quality model, the wage paid by a firm

(relative

—21—

to other firms) induces a sorting of workers according to their quality.23 If
private firms minimize their unit cost of labor in efficiency units then, in
symmetric equilibrium, the wage is given by (31), where A = A(w, NU).

Similarly, in the labor—turnover model, the training cost to a firm

depends on the quit rate of workers. If private firms minimize their total
labor cost then, in a symmetric equilibrium, It turns out that the wage

depends on the rate of unemployment and on the number of workers in the

agricultural sector. With slight modifications, therefore, the above cases,
as well as those arising in alternative institutional settings, can be
accommodated within the general model presented earlier.

In this section, therefore, we have identified the properties of the
industrial sector which are critical for the determination of the shadow

wage. We have shown how the relevant reduced form equations depicting the
industrial wage schedule can he derived from more primitive technological and

behavioral postulates. The same reduced form equations and therefore the same
formulae for the shadow wage are consistent with quite different technological
and behavioral assumptions; while the same technological assumptions, in
conjunction with different behavioral postulates, yield markedly different
shadow wages.

5. SHADOW WAGE WITH OPTIMAL PRICING

Throughout our analysis, we have stressed the importance of the deviation

between domestic and international prices for the determination of the shadow

wage. Our results are valid regardless of how the domestic prices are
determined, so long as prices do not change as industrial employment

changes. It is worthwhile examining how domestic prices would be set if they

—22—

were being determined optimally, and to see what this, in turn, implies for
shadow wages in an economy in which prices are optimally set.24

For brevity, we examine this issue in tie context of the Harris—Todaro
migration hypothesis, and assume that there are no indirect effects of

employment creation on the industrial output. A more general analysis based
on (19) and (22) is easily possible. The schedule of industrial wage is given
by the general function (21). We obtain the first order condition of the
relevant Hamiltonian, given by (9), (11) and (23), with respect to p. This
yields

___ —
p

2
1
Nw
—A N(Q—Xc m)——c
+Mx
p
wp
Xap

N1O C

+ N2x2 2

xp

Op

In the above expression, we have defined the following elasticities. From

=

(19),

dnN

is the elasticity of agricultural population with respect to

= dl nw
the relative price and, from (21), c
dlnp
wp

industrial wage with respect to price.

=

Is

the elasticity of

dlnN1O)

=
C0p

+ (1 —

coa)mp

is

the elasticity of total agricultural surplus with respect to its price,
2
=
and c
xp

2

—

dlnx
dlnp

= c2 —
xp

2

c

c

xw wp

is the own price elasticity of the

consumption of agricultural good by an industrial worker, taking into account

the induced effect of price on wage. Also, it can be verified from (27) that
> 0.

The expression (33) yields quite strong results if the induced wage

and land congestion effects are negligible. In this case, note from (33) that
p > P, if

> 0. Also, p < P if

< 0, and if

'S is very large.

Therefore: The optimal domestic price of agricultural good is higher

—23—

than its international price if the country imports this good. The reverse is
true if the country exports agricultural good, and if investment is highly
scarce.

Putting the above results together with (29), we find that the following
holds in an open economy in which the domestic price is being set optimally.
The shadow wage is smaller than the market wage if the country imports

agricultural good. The reverse is true if the country exports agricultural
good and if investment is highly scarce.

Special Cases: (i) Among the very few studIes on the shadow wage which
do not assume free trade are those by Dixit, Newbery, and Stern. Newbery
(1974) considers a model in which the society maximizes investment, and in

which there is no endogenous migration. That is: n = 1,

Substitution

m = 0,

and S +

.

of these in (33) yields25

22+ Nw
P—p_ NO Nx
1

+N

p

(ii) Dixit (1971) and Dixit and Stern (1974) examine a model which

entails two additional assumptions over those stated above. First, the
industrial wage equals agricultural income, i.e., w

pX. Second, the

agricultural output does not depend on its price, i.e., X =

= 1,
assumptions imply: c
wp

and 2 = (x
xp

—

x2) op /x2.

X(N1).

These two

Substitution of these in

(34) yields the result26

(35)

P—p

1

p

Expressions (34) and (35), along with the corresponding assumptions, can he
inserted into (24) to obtain the resulting shadow wages.

—24—

6. ALTERNATIVE EQUILIBRATING MECHANISMS

Earlier in the paper, we had argued the importance of equilibrating

mechanism in the determination of the shadow wage.27 We now examine this
issue in some detail. Specifically, we have assumed so far that the traded
quantities change in response to the creation of industrial employment, while

the domestic prices remain unchanged. We now explore the case in which a
change in domestic prices equilibrates the economy, while the traded

quantities remain unchanged.28 For simplc1ty, we assume that there is no
effect of the price change on the industrial wage and output and there is no

endogenous migration. But, as we have seen earlier, the model can be easily
extended to include these effects.
We can rewrite the expression for investment, (9), as

(36)

I = N2(Y — w) + (p — P)M

which, along with (10), defines the Hamiltonian (11). Denoting the shadow

wage by s, we have

(37)

=

+

—

N N2y

p

The second term above is the indirect loss in social welfare, because

dp
dN

the change in price which will keep (7) in balance.

A perturbation of (7) yields

pZ
222
(38) dN2 1
NQc +Nxc
Op

xp

is

—25—

Where Z is given by (14), and it is positive. Therefore: An increase in the
pice of agricultural good will accompany industrial employment creation if a
change in the domestic prices is the equilibrating mechanism.

Next, from the definition of aggregate social welfare, we obtain

(39)

2

= — 5w + [W2 —

N N y
(40)

=

op

N'Q'

N2x282 +

—

WI +

SM

8CXa

and

x

Finally, by substituting (38), (39), and (40) in (37), we obtain a direct
expression for shadow wage.

(41)

s = w —

1

2

- [W

—

W

1

I — 31

-—-pX

+ M( — 82)/N'O]pZ
c — 1
2
1
Ecop +cxp2 +Mxxp
INn]
[81 — 82

As one would expect, the only difference between the two comparable shadow
wages, (41) and (13), is due to the equilibrating mechanism.

Expression (41) yields strong results if the land congestion effect is
negligible, and if the quantity of agricultural good exported (or imported) is

small in comparison to the agricultural surplus. That is, if
c

Xa

0, and M /N1Q
x

0. To obtain the result, first note that --- < 0 ,

if

we make a reasonable assumption that the private marginal utility of income is

lower at a higher level of utility. This implies

(42)

W2

W', and 82

81, if V2 V'

It follows from (41) that: if a change in domestic prices is the

—26—

equilibrating mechanism

,

then the shadow wage is larger (smaller) than

the market wage, so long as agricultural workers are better off (worse off)

than industrial workers. Further, the result within the bracket holds even if
land congestion effect is not negligible.

The intuition behind these results is quite clear. If agricultural
workers are worse off, then industrial employment creation yields a direct
welfare gain to those who receive the newly created jobs, and it yields an
indirect welfare gain due to an increase in the price of agricultural good.
These two effects lead to a reduction in the shadow wage.

Finally, in the polar case of highly scarce investment, (41) yields

M

sw—(1
NQc

(43)

op

22)pZ
+Nxc
xp

In this case, whether the shadow wage is higher or lower than the actual wage
depends simply on whether the country exports or imports agricultural good.
It is easily seen from (41) and (13) that these two shadow wages will

differ in general. This point has general validity regardless of the specific
model which one uses, and the reason for this is easy to understand.
Alternative equilibrating mechanisms affect various agents in the economy

differently.29 The net social impact therefore is different for different
equilibrating mechanisms which, in turn, leads to different shadow wages.

Special Case: Note that the above analysis can be easily adapted to a
closed economy. The only relevant difference for a closed economy is that

M = 0
=

0.

in (36). Naturally, therefore, the shadow wage is given by (41) when
It is obvious then that all of the results noted above hold for a

closed economy as well.

—27—

7. FURTHER EXTENSIONS

(i) Our

assumption

that the agricultural sector consists of family farms

might appear to be restrictive. We briefly discuss here a more general model
of agricultural income determination. Denote the schedule of rural wage per
hour as w' = w1(p, a). The income of an agricultural worker is thus w'L'. If
the agricultural rent is entirely appropriated by the government, then the
investment equation (9) is replaced by

(44) I = N2(Y — w) + (P — p)N10 + (p — P)N2x2 + N1(pX —

w'L')

where the last term represents the rent from agricultural sector. 30
If agricultural workers are price takers in the labor market 31, then the
shadow wage in the basic model will be

(45) s =

w

—

- [w2— w1) — (p — P)z

+

where c 1

= dlnw

dlna

(1 —

CLC)

1
,

and

EL

= alnL

+ (1 -

(pxL —

1

mw 1

are, respectively, the elasticity of

the wage rate with respect to the land per worker, and the elasticity of labor
supply with respect to the wage rate.

The first three terms in (45) are already familiar. The fourth term
represents the net social cost (i.e., cost minus benefit) of the induced
effect on wage rate due to the extra land area, a, released by the migrant

—28—

worker. The final term represents the net change in agricultural rent from
having one less agricultural worker. Clearly, the expression (45) can be
specialized to different institutional settings. Further, if there are wage—
productivity type effects of workers' earnings on the agricultural output,
then these effects will have to be taken into account.

Special Case: An important institutional setting is the one in which
agricultural workers are paid their marginal product, i.e., w1 = pXL.
the last term in (45) drops out, and

where

= — LLL

=

n/(1

Then

+

/XL > 0. Now consider an economy in which investment is

highly scarce and there is no price distortion. Then (45) yields

(46)

s = w + W1L1C1

The conventional result that the shadow wage equals the market wage when
investment is highly scarce, therefore, does not hold in this case.
In fact: if agricultural workers are paid their marginal product, if
there is no price distortion, and if investment is highly scarce, then the
shadow wage is higher than the market wage so long as the labor hours supplied

y agricultural workers are fixed, or they are positively related to the wage
rate.

(ii) We have emphasized above that the shadow wage depends on the
equilibrating mechanisms within the economy. There are two other
possibilities which might be mentioned in this context.
First, it is possible in some cases that a government manages its
instruments of control in a conflicting manner such that some of the markets

do not clear. As an extreme example, if a government creates industrial

—29—

employment without allowing any other variable to change, then a shortage of

food might emerge in cities. The government may then attempt to remove this
shortage through non—price methods such as rationing. The derivation of the
shadow wage in such cases will have to take into account the non—price methods
which will be employed to arrive at the final quantity balances.

Second, it is possible that the economy is in a temporary equilibrium
such that some of the prices are rigid and some of the markets, other than

that for labor, are characterized by excess supply or demand. In such cases,
it is necessary to base the shadow wage derivation on an explicit model of the
short term equilibrium.32

(iii) The models we have analyzed can be easily enlarged to include
additional instruments of policy. For example, if the government can maintain
different relative prices in the agricultural and the industrial sectors,

denoted by p and q respectively, then it can be shown that the shadow wage in
the basic model is given by (13), provided we replace the last term in (13) by

— (p — P) Q(1 —

(40)

1

r0)

— (q — P)x 2

The intuition is obvious. The government's gain or loss due to the general
equilibrium effect on the demand and supply of agricultural good is valued

differently in the two sectors. Further, it can be verified that if the
government is setting the price optimally, then neither of these two prices

would, in general, correspond to the international price [see Sah and Stiglitz
(1983a)].

(iv) The present analysis can be easily adapted to study the optimal
location of population. The condition for optimality is given by
which yields

=

0,

—30—

YLL2 = s

(48)

That is, the marginal product of an industrial worker should equal the shadow

wage. It is worthwhile pointing out here that the expression (48) has
sometimes been taken as the definition of shadow wage in the literature. This
presumes that the population is already located in an optimal manner, which is
a rather strong assumption to make.

8. CONCLUSIONS

While the importance of using shadow prices and wages in the evaluation
of public projects has been widely recognized in LDCs, the correct magnitude
of shadow wage — and its relationship to the market wage — have remained

controversial. In particular, the earliest studies on the shadow wage
focussed on the widespread unemployment (open or disguised) in LDCs, and
inferred from this that the opportunity cost of hiring new industrial workers

was low. Sen and Marglin (among others) though agreeing that the opportunity
cost —

in

the sense of forgone output —

might be low, contended that the

shadow wage might nonetheless be high; to pay an additional worker required
diverting resources from (relatively more valuable) investment to

consumption. If the investment was highly scarce, then the shadow wage
equaled the market wage.

This view, in turn, was criticized by arherger and Stiglitz for ignoring
the induced migration from the agricultural sector to the industrial sector.
If the workers earned fixed wages in the two sector, then under the Harris—

Todaro hypothesis that the expected wage in the industrial sector equals the

—31—

agricultural wage, they showed that the shadow wage was equal to the market

wage, regardless of the relative social valuation of investment. These
earlier studies thus identified two of the important determinants of the
shadow wage — the nature of intertemporal trade—off and endogenous migration.
tn this paper, we present a general framework for shadow wage

determination which, while incorporating these issues, deals explicitly with a

number of aspects which have not received the attention they deserve. These
include: (i) the differences between domestic and international prices, (ii)
the equilibrating mechanisms in the economy which determine, for example,

whether the general equilibrium impact of industrial employment creation is to
increase the relative price of the agricultural good or to increase its net

import, (iii) the mechanisms which determine the earnings of agricultural and
industrial workers, and (iv) the consequences of industrial employment

creation on those who remain in the agricultural sector, e.g., through what we

identify as congestion effects and price effects. Many of these aspects have
first order effects on the magnitude of shadow wage; to ignore them would lead
to misleading results.

Our approach has been to identify those reduced form relationships for
describing the economy which are central to the determination of the shadow

wage. As we have shown, it is easy to specialize our general model to
different technological assumptions (e.g., the nature of production
relationships in the agricultural and Industrial sectors) and institutional

settings, as well as to different behavioral hypotheses. For example, our
general model of migration can be specialized to the standard Harris—Todaro
case, and our representation of industrial wage determination can be
specialized to the wage—efficiency and the labor—turnover models.

We have specifically shown how most earlier results on the shadow wage

—32—

can be obtained as special cases of our formulae for the shadow wage. Also,
our general approach enables us to identify a number of new qualitative
results concerning the relationship between the shadow wage and the market

wage. Further, our general formulae have the virtue of analytical simplicity
so that they provide an integrated view of the critical determinants of the
shadow wage.

There are several limitations of our analysis which we have pointed Out

in the paper. In particular, we have examined only a limited set of
rigidities; we have not considered, for example, the possibility that markets

other than that for labor may not clear. Also, the models of migration and
the models for the determination of workers' earnings which we have considered

are essentially static. It is possible for example that the brunt of the
effects of employment creation in one period are felt in the future. We plan
to address these questions in a sequel to this paper.

FOOTNOTES

1.

It is obvious that both an open and a closed economy are two polar

representations of a variety of regimes which exist in LDCs. Sah and
Stiglitz (1983a) have examined many such regimes in the context of inter—

sectoral pricing. The same approach is applicable here but, for brevity,
we do not pursue it.

2. It is important to observe that the term 'equilibrium' does not
necessarily imply a conventional Wairasian equilibrium. It also denotes
temporary equilibria of the kind that have been recently investigated [for
example, Solow and Stiglitz (1968), Bennasey (1975), and Malinvaud
(1977)).

3. Before beginning our analysis, it might be useful to clarify our usage of
the term shadow wage. The shadow wage here is a summary statistic which
sums up all of the changes in the economy (due to the creation of
industrial employment), multiplied by the social marginal evaluations of

each of these changes. This definition is, in general, distinct from
another summary statistic, opportunity cost of labor, often employed in
the literature, which calculates the net change in the aggregate output

due to employment creation. This distinction becomes explicit in the
later analysis.

4. The assumption of a fixed (real) industrial wage is often justified on the
basis of certain unspecified institutional constraints. But, as we shall

see, fixed industrial wage is consistent with a particular mechanism of
wage determination based on the wage—productivity effect.

5. Throughout the paper, superscripts i =

1

and 2 denote the agricultural and

the industrial sectors respectively.

6. See Sah and Stiglitz (1982) for a discussion of the evidence.

7. Of course, the government can employ a combination of equilibrating
mechanisms. The resulting shadow wage for any such combination, however,
can be studied by examining their separate effects.

S. We exclude only the direct contribution, however. Thus, if industrial
employment creation has indirect repercussions on the industrial output
(e.g., because of a change in workers' efficiency or hours worked) then

this indirect effect should not be excluded. Such situations arise later
in the paper.

9. See Peterson (1979), and Bale and Lutz (1979), for example.

10. There are some special cases, stressed by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), in

which there is no restriction on the government's ability to impose
commodity and factors taxes, which predict that free trade is the optimal

policy. This is not the optimal policy, however, in the more general
cases examined below and in Sah and Stiglitz (1983a).

11. It is this particular assumption which defines the opportunity cost of

labor. The opportunity cost of labor thus is a special case of shadow
wage when society is maximizing the aggregate output. It is obvious from
above that the opportunity cost is a well—defined concept only when
relative prices are fixed, or equivalently, there is only one good in the

economy. In more general cases, as we shall see later, the relative
prices will not be fixed.

12. The marginal product of an agricultural worker in this paper Is the number
of hours a worker works times the marginal product of one working hour.

This is to be distinguished from the notion of the marginal product of an
agricultural worker implicit in the surplus labor hypothesis [Lewis

(1954)]. This hypothesis, though influential in the literature, entails
certain institutional details which hitherto have not been carefully

examined. Sah and StIglitz (1983a) construct an explicit model of such a
labor surplus agricultural sector, but we have not explored its
implication on the shadow wage.

13. Dixit (1968) studied a model without an agricultural sector, but with a

reserve army of unemployed in the industrial sector. Members of this army
are subsidized by their working colleagues, such that everyone consumes

the same amount, wN2/N. The indirect consumption gain to the population
from a job creation is w, which corresponds to pX — g in an expression

such as (16). Further, the society is utilitarian. It follows that the
corresponding shadow wage is a special case of (16) such that:
x
s = w[1 —

-I

..

14. Khan (1980) employs a similar representation of industrial wage In the

context of a trade model.

I

15. Specifically, let N depend oi all of the variables in the economy, i.e.,

N' N'(p, w, NU, N2).

Similarly, in general, w =

w(p,

N1, NU, N2).

These two expressions and (20), then, yield (19) and (21) under the

conditions which allow the use of the implicit function theorem. If the
economy has a wider set of variables then the above representations will

have to be expanded. As an example, if there are different prices in the
two sectors, then both of these prices will appear as arguments of (19)
and (21).

16. The general model of migration proposed in this paper can be extended to
an economy in which there are several regions which differ from one
another in terms of resources (e.g., land, population, and skills of

worker), institutions (e.g., how workers' earning are determined), and tax
regimes (i.e., workers in these regions face different prices).

17. The dependence of industrial output on other variables in the economy is
implicit in (22), through an argument similar to that in footnote 15.
Also, note that (22) is a summation over firms' production functions; each
of which can he written (in the symmetric equilibrium) as:
L2, p, N2), where the superscript f denotes a firm, N2

represents the sectoral employment, and k reflects the firm's
employment. In a more general model,

will be a function of the entire

distribution of industrial wages.

18. Note that the expressions based on the Harris—Todaro model, such as (29)

and those to be derived later, are somewhat more general than they

appear. This is because the only property of the migration model which
has been actually used in deriving these expressions is that the social

welfare can be represented by NV'. The resulting expressions therefore
will hold for any migration mechanism, so long as the society focusses its
attention only on the welfare of agricultural workers.

19. See Stiglitz (1971, 1974), Harherger (1971) and Heady (1981), among others.

20. This result can be looked at in a different way in an output maximizing
society in which the earnings (consumption) of a worker in both sectors

are fixed and, therefore, a change in investment is the same as a change

in output. The impact on aggregate output of creating an industrial job
in this economy is the output of one agricultural worker times the number
of such workers who migrate. Tinder }larris—Todaro hypothesis, this product

is just equal to the industrial wage. To see this in the simplest case in
which everyone is risk—neutral, note that: V1= pX, V2 = w, and V' =
(28) then yields: n =

—s.

The loss in output is thus: npX

0.

w. For a

discussion of this simple case, see Stlglitz (1971, 1974). Our analysis
in this paper is, of course, much more general and does not depend on
these restrictive assumptions.

21. See Stiglitz (1971, 1974, 1982a, 1982b), and references therein.

22. For illustration, consider a special case in which there is no price

distortion, and there is no endogenous migration. The socially optimal

wage then is given by: 2/5 =

1

—

YLX.

Clearly, therefore, 2 will

not equal 5, in general. Next, consider two further special cases in
which the social weights are exogenously specified. First, if the society
maximizes investment, then the optimal wage is the same as in (32), i.e.,
what it would be if the public industrial firms are instructed to maximize

their profits. Second, if the society maximizes output, then X =

0,

which implies a sufficiently high industrial wage such that the effects of

wage on productivity do not exist anymore. It follows in the present
case, then, that an output maximizing society will pay a higher industrial
wage than an investment maximizing society, or an economy with private
industrial firms.

23. Wage—quality models have some additional complexity [See Stiglitz

(1982b)]. For example, if earnings vary across agricultural workers of
different abilities, then this needs to be taken into account.

24. The shadow wage with optimally set prices is the same as what it would be

if an adjustment in prices is the equilibrating mechanism. We examine
this case later.

25. Newbery however makes a mistake in defining the investment equation. He
leaves out the last term, (p — P)N2X2, in the expression (9). His
formulae for the optimal price and the shadow wage are therefore
incorrect.

26. Newbery (1974) arrives at the same result by making a second error. His
expression corresponding to (34) is (P —

p)/p

= (N10 + Nlw c)/N1Oe

because he erroneously leaves out the other terms. He then arrives at (35)

=
by substituting c
wp

0, instead of c

wp

=

1

as it should correctly be.

27. Blitzer, Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1981) raise this Issue in the context of

the shadow foreign exchange rate In an open economy in which there is a
trade imbalance in the pre—project situation, and the government considers
different policies for removing the additional imbalance created by a

project. What we show here is that the issue of equilibrating mechanisms
is much more general.

28. 1qui1ibrating mechanism is not always a matter of choice for the

government. For example, there are often restrictions on the quantities
that a country can export or import. If such is the case, then the
relevant shadow wage is the one which is derived below.

29. Specifically, in the present case, recall that the net Import of the
agricultural good increases if an adjustment in traded quantities is the

equilibrating mechanism. This in turn increases (reduces) investment if
the domestic price of agricultural good is higher (lower) than its

international price, while the welfare of workers is left unchanged. In
contrast, the price of agricultural good increases if an adjustment in the

domestic prices is the equilibrating mechanism. This in turn helps
agricultural workers, hurts industrial workers, and increases (decreases)
investment if the agricultural good is being imported (exported).

30. A further generalization will involve an explicit representation of the
entire distribution of landowners and workers, and the possibility that
the agricultural rent cannot be taxed or that it can be taxed only partly.

31. This distinction is important. For example, an agricultural sector
consisting of family farms which we discussed earlier is, in general, not

a special case of the present model. This is because the family farm
workers are not price takers. With slight modification, however, one
could examine the implications of a general earning's schedule under
alternative institutional settings.

32. See Roberts (1982), and Marchand, Mlntz and Pestieau (1983), for

example. These papers consider a single sector economy, which has limited
applicability in LDCs with features associated with dualism. For a more
complete analysis, see Sah and Stiglitz (1983b).

REFERENCES

Bale, M.D. and E. Lutz, 1979, Price Distortions in Agriculture and their

Effects: An International Comparison, World Bank Staff Working Paier No.
359, Washington D.C.

Benassy, J.P., 1975, "Neo—Keynesian Disequilibrium in a Monetary Economy,"
Review of Economic Studies 32, 503—23.

Bliss, C. and N. Stern, 1978, "Productivity, Wages and Nutrition," Journal of
Development Economics 5, 331—398.

Blitzer, C., P. Dasgupta, and J.F. Stiglitz, 1981, "Project Appraisal and
Foreign Exchange Constraints," Economic Journal 91, 58—74.

Dixit, A.K., 1968, "Optimal Development in the Labour—Surplus Economy," Review
of Economic Studies 35, 23—34.

Dixit, A.K., 1971, "Short—run Equilibrium and Shadow Prices in a Dual
Economy," Oxford Economic Papers 23, 384—400.

Dixit, A.K. and N. Stern, 1974, "Determinants of Shadow Prices in Open Dual
Economies," Oxford Economic Papers 26, 42—53.

Harberger, A., 1971, "On Measuring the Social Opportunity Cost of Labor,"
International Labor Review 103, 559—579.

Harris, J.R. and M.P. Todaro, 1970, "Migration, Unemployment and

Development: A Two Sector Analysis," American Economic Review 60, 126—
142.

Heady, C.J., 1981, Shadow Wages and Migration," Oxford Economic Papers 33,
108—12 1.

Khan, M.A., 1980, "The Harris—Todaro Hypothesis and the Heckscher—Ohlin—

Samuelson Trade Model," Journal of International Economics 10, 527—547.

Lewis, W.A., 1954, "Economic Development with Unlimited Surplus of Labor,"
Manchester School 21, 139—191.

Malirtvaud, E., 1977, The Theory of Employment Reconsidered, Basil Blackwell,
Oxford.

Marchand, 14., J. Mintz and P. Pestieau, 1983, "Public Production and Shadow

Pricing in a Model of Disequilibrium in Labor and Capital Markets," mimeo,
CORE Discussion Paper No. 8315, CORE, Louvain—la—Neuve.

Mlrrlees, J.A., 1983, Market Prices and Shadow Prices, mimeo, Nuffield
College, Oxford.

Newbery, D.M.G., 1972, "Public Policy in the Dual Economy," Economic Journal
82, 567—590.

Newbery, D.M.G., 1974, "The Robustness of Equilibrium Analysis in the Dual
Economy," Oxford Economic Papers 26, 32—41.

Peterson, W.L., 1979, "International Farm Prices and the Social Cost of Cheap
Food Policies," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 61, 12—21.

Roberts, K., 1982, "Desirable Fiscal Policies under Keynesian Unemployment,"
Oxford Economic Papers 34, 1—22.

Sah, R.K. and J.E, Stilgitz, 1982, "The Economics of Price Scissors," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1156, forthcoming in,
American Economic Review.

Sah, R.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1983a, "The Town, the Country and the Rest of

World: Economics of Public Marketing Boards in Open Developing
Economies," mimeo, Department of Economics, Princeton Ijniversity,
Princeton.

Sah, R.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1983b, "Keynesian Economics in Developing
Economies," mimeo, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Sen, A.K., 1968, Choice of Techniques, Blackwell, Oxford.

Sen, A.K., 1972, "Control Areas and Accounting Prices: An Approach to
Economic Valuation," Economic Journal 82, 486—501.

Solow, R.M. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1968, "Output, Employment and Wages in the
Short Run," Ouarterly Journal of Economics 82, 537—60.

Stern, N.H., 1972, "OptImum Development In a Dual Economy," Review of Economic
Studies 39, 171—184.

StiglItz, J.E., 1971, "Alternative Theories of the Determination of
Unemployment and Wages in L.D.C.'s," mimeo, Institute for Development
Studies, University of Nairobi.

Stiglltz, J.E., 1974, "Alternative Theories of the Determination of Wages and
Employment in L.D.C.'s—I. The Labor Turnover Model," Ouarterly Journal of
Economics 88, 194—227.

Stiglitz, J.E., 1982a, "The Structure of Labor Markets and Shadow Prices in

LDCs," in Sabot, RH., ed., Migration and the Labor Market in Developing
Countries, Westview Press, Colorado.

Stigltiz, J.E., 1982b, "Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and

Unemployment: The Efficiency Wage Model," in Mark Gersovitz, et al.,
eds., The Theory and Experience of Economic Development, George Allen and
Tinwin, London.

