                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE INDUSTRY LIFE CYCLE, ACQUISITIONS AND
                   INVESTMENT: DOES FIRM ORGANIZATION MATTER?

                                          Vojislav Maksimovic
                                            Gordon Phillips

                                         Working Paper 12297
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12297


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




University of Maryland and University of Maryland and NBER respectively. Maksimovic can be reached
at vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu and Phillips can be reached at gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu. This research was
supported by the NSF. We would like to thank Mike Lemmon, Harold Mulherin, Sheri Tice, Bernie Yeung,
CES staff and seminar participants at the American Finance Association meetings, Duke-UNC corporate
finance conference, Financial Economics and Accounting conference at USC, 2005 Frontiers in Finance
Conference, George Washington, HKUST, Minnesota, NYU, Pittsburg, Tanaka School, Texas, UBC, UCLA
and Wharton. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau. This paper
has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Industry Life Cycle and Acquisitions and Investment: Does Firm Organization Matter?
Vojislav Maksimovic and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 12297
June 2006
JEL No. G0, G2, G3

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of financial dependence on acquisition and investment within existing
industries by single-segment and conglomerate firms for industries undergoing different long run
changes in industry conditions. Conglomerates and single-segment firms differ more in rates of
within-industry acquisitions than in capital expenditure rates, which are similar across organizational
type. In particular, 36 percent of within-industry growth by conglomerate firms in growth industries
is from intra-industry acquisitions, compared to nine percent for single segment firms. Financial
dependence, a deficit in a segment’s internal financing, decreases the likelihood of within-industry
acquisitions and opening new plants, especially for single-segment firms. These effects are mitigated
for conglomerates in growth industries. The findings persist after controlling for firm size and
segment productivity. Acquisitions lead to increased efficiency as plants acquired by conglomerate
firms in growth industries increase in productivity post acquisition. The results are consistent with
the comparative advantages of different firm organizations differing across long-run industry
conditions.

Vojislav Maksimovic
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu

Gordon M. Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Management
Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu
 The Industry Life Cycle, Acquisitions and Investment: Does Firm Organization
                                    Matter?

1    Introduction

An influential body of research has argued that industries go through life-cycle stages and that these stages
are characterized by marked diﬀerences in investment and restructuring activity (Gort and Klepper (1982),
Jovanovic (1982), Klepper and Grady (1990), Klepper (1996)). The evidence suggests that changes in the
number of firms in an industry occur at times of transition in an industry’s life cycle when the competitive
advantage among producers is changing. However it is not known whether and how firm organization is
associated with firm performance for industries that experience diﬀerent changes in long-run conditions.
    In this paper we examine whether long-term changes in industry conditions aﬀect investment by single-
industry firms and divisions of conglomerate (multi-segment) firms diﬀerently. We focus on two factors
that have been identified in the literature as giving multi-division firms an advantage in some competitive
environments: access to internal capital markets and the ability to restructure stemming from a greater
propensity to participate in the market for mergers and acquisitions. Specifically we ask:

    • Does firm organization aﬀect capital intra-industry acquisitions, plant births and deaths?

    • Does the eﬀect of organizational structure on firms’ investment decisions depend on long-run industry
      conditions?

    • Do diﬀerences in firm organization and industry conditions aﬀect whether firms’ investment decisions
      depend on shortfalls in cash flows from operations?

    In studying firm organization, we distinguish between single-segment firms and conglomerate firms
operating in multiple industries. These two types of firms are likely to have diﬀerent access to financial
resources (public markets and internal capital markets) and diﬀerent types of monitoring (within firm
hierarchies versus monitoring by external providers of capital). Moreover, the categorization builds on pre-
vious research that has established the importance of a division’s position within its firm on its investment
policy, eﬃciency, extent of internal monitoring, and access to internal capital markets.1
   1
     Early authors include Lang and Stulz (1994) and Berger and Ofek (1995). We discuss the other papers in this literature
that are related to this paper in Section 2.



                                                            1
       We classify industries into four diﬀerent long-run categories:          (1.) Growth industries in which the
long-run industry shipments and the long-run number of firms are increasing and with changes for each of
these factors both above the median industry change, (2.) Consolidating industries in which the change
in the long-run shipments is above the median industry change but the change in the number of firms is
below the median. (3.) Technological change industries in which the change in long-run demand is below
the median industry change but the change in the number of firms is above, (4.) Declining industries
in which the change in long-run demand and the long-run number of firms are both below the median
industry change. The industry categories diﬀer in the amount of restructuring (closings and acquisitions
of business segments) and growth opportunities.
       We find the within-industry acquisition behavior of conglomerate segments diﬀers sharply from that
of single-segment firms, even controlling for the productivity, public firm status, and the size of the pur-
chaser. Segments of conglomerate firms are two to three times more likely to acquire plants within their
existing industries than are single-segment firms. In particular, 36 percent of within-industry growth
by conglomerate firms in growth industries is from intra-industry acquisitions compared to nine percent
for single-segment firms.       Acquisition rates also significantly diﬀer across long-run industry conditions.
Within-industry acquisitions by conglomerate segments in Growth industries represent a much higher per-
centage (ten percentage points higher) of total firm growth than acquisitions in Declining industries. In
contrast to these findings, capital expenditures, which are typically the focus the prior research, vary less
across organizational types and industry conditions.
       We examine whether the diﬀerences in within-industry acquisition rates and investment by diﬀerent
types of firm organizations are related to financial dependence. We define as financially dependent those
business segments (single-segment firms or segments of conglomerates) that spend more than their cash
flow from operations on capital expenditures.2 We test whether the eﬀect of financial dependence on acqui-
sitions and investment diﬀers for conglomerates and single-segment firms. We control for the endogeneity
of organizational form and financial dependence.             To control for potential endogeneity between capital
expenditures and realized the cash flow from operations, in our empirical tests we examine how segments
respond to predicted financial dependence rather than observed financial dependence.
       We find financially dependent segments tend to fall into two categories: segments that are less pro-
ductive compared to other segments in their industries and very productive segments in high growth
industries.3 We have three major findings that show how financial dependence and organizational form
   2
     Thus, a segment that has an internal financial deficit in a year must rely on cash flows from outside the segment or on
the liquidation of its assets to fund capital expenditures at the plants it owns.
   3
     The term productive is defined below and refers to firms ability to produce revenue from inputs at the segment level.


                                                             2
aﬀect firm acquisition and investment over diﬀerent long-run industry conditions:
    First, we find that predicted financial dependence aﬀects plant acquisitions and investment by conglom-
erate segments and single-segment firms diﬀerently. Financial dependence has a negative eﬀect on capital
expenditures and the probability of acquisitions. In Growth and Consolidation industries, conglomerate
firms have a positive oﬀsetting eﬀect on within-industry acquisitions.4
    Second, we show that the eﬀects of firm organization on reducing financial dependence in Growth
industries are concentrated in conglomerate firms’ most productive segments.                     For conglomerate firms’
most productive segments, financial dependence has only a limited eﬀect on within-industry acquisitions.
Moreover, in Growth industries, business segments of conglomerates have a significantly higher probability
of acquiring plants within existing industries if the conglomerate also has a less productive main division
in a declining industry. We also find that plants acquired by conglomerate firms - in particular in Growth
industries - significantly increase in productivity post-acquisition. These results are consistent with models
that stress the benefits of conglomerate form for the firms that adopt it, such Stein’s (1997) model of the
benefits of internal capital markets and the predictions about the eﬃcient reallocations of assets within
conglomerate firms in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002). These results are not consistent with models that
predict subsidization of poorly performing divisions or divisions with poor growth prospects. The results
are also not consistent with agency or empire building models that predict ineﬃcient expansion.
    Third, we also find large diﬀerences in the eﬀect of organizational form on plant birth and exit across
industry categories. In Growth industries, a segment’s predicted financial deficit reduces the probability
that a single-segment firm will open a new plant, while this eﬀect is mitigated for conglomerate firms.
However, we do not find similar eﬀects on plant births in declining industries.
    We find that plant exit diﬀers across industry categories. Conglomerate firms are the least likely to close
plants when their current segment is predicted to have a financial deficit in Declining industries. In Growth
industries the relation between predicted financial dependence and plant exit is similar for conglomerate
and single-segment firms - in contrast to the positive eﬀect of conglomerate firms on acquisitions and plant
birth.
    These findings of decreased financial dependence for conglomerate firm acquisitions and plant births
are consistent with conglomerates having experience in allocating resources and integrating operations.
It does not necessarily mean that conglomerate firms sell at a premium or discount in the market relative to single-segment
firms.
   4
     Results in an earlier working paper version of this paper also show that the eﬀect of conglomerate firm status was robust
to whether the firm was publicly traded. Public firm status did have an additional positive eﬀect on mitigating the eﬀect of
financial dependence on acquisitions by public firms in Growth industries. However, this eﬀect was much smaller in magnitude
than the eﬀect of conglomerate firm status.



                                                              3
This positive benefit of internal capital markets is the highest for conglomerate firms in Growth industries
- where the value of reallocating assets is likely to be the highest.
      There are several key diﬀerences between our approach and the existing literature on investment and
internal capital markets. First, we relate the firm’s investment and financing needs to long-run changes in
industry conditions. We show that long-run industry conditions are of primary importance to understand-
ing the impact of organizational form on acquisitions and plant opening decisions. Second, the existing
literature, with the exception of Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) and Schoar (2002), has examined the
relation between capital expenditures and firm organization. We define investment more generally than
the existing literature to encompass acquisitions of plants and assets. Thus, we can examine whether firm
organization aﬀects investment through acquisition and plant openings diﬀerently than regular investment.
Since acquisitions require extensive organizational skill in integrating operations while capital expenditures
represent decisions to existing operations, we examine whether the eﬀects of organizational form are greater
for acquisitions than capital expenditures at existing plants.5               Third, we are also able to obtain direct
estimates of the productivity of each business unit, whether it is independent or part of a larger firm.
Thus, we can determine whether the relation between firms’ investment and their organizational structure
depends on their productivity and we can examine ex post changes in underlying productivity of transacted
assets.
      We use data from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD), maintained by the Center for Economic
Studies at the Bureau of the Census. The LRD database contains detailed plant-level data for manufactur-
ing plants. There are several advantages to this database: First, it covers both public and private firms in
manufacturing industries. Second, coverage is at the plant level, and output is assigned by plants at the
four-digit SIC code level. Thus, firms that produce under multiple SIC codes are not assigned to just one
industry. Third, plant-level coverage means that we can track plants even as they change owners. The
database contains a plant-level code that identifies when plants change ownership. These features are key
to our study as they allow us to identify plants that have changed hands from year-to-year.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section two describes the prior literature and why firm
organization may have a diﬀerential impact over the industry life cycle. Section three introduces our
methodology and Section four describes the data. The results are discussed in Section five. Section six
concludes.
  5
      GE, for example, has an extensive staﬀ whose job function is to evaluate acquisitions.




                                                               4
2        Industry Conditions and Firm Organization

Studies of industry evolution, by Gort and Klepper (1982) and Klepper and Grady (1990) among others,
show that many industries go through life-cycle stages. These stages are characterized by diﬀerences in
the growth rates of the industry and by dramatic changes in the numbers of producers in the industry.
As the nature of competition and the comparative advantage of firms may shift across stages, many
industries undergo periods of intensified competition and consolidation when many, perhaps the majority,
of the producers are weeded out. Firm strategies that work in times of expansion, such as preemptively
acquiring large capital intensive plants, may lead to a competitive disadvantage in decline (Ghemawat
(1984), Ghemawat and Nalebuﬀ (1985)).                                                     Thus these articles emphasize the importance of industry
conditions on firms survival, and by extension on their capital budgeting decisions.
        To examine the relation between the number of producers and industry growth, we first present some
exploratory evidence on long-run industry conditions using Census Bureau data.                                                                                  We classify industries
using Census Bureau data for the years 1972 and 1997. These years are used because they span 25 years of
industry experience and are census years covering all firms.                                                          In Figure 1, we classify industries according
to the growth in the real value of shipments.6                                              We examine changes in the number of firms for diﬀerent
long-run changes in demand, using the change in the real value (1982 dollars) of shipments by three-digit
SIC code. We split industries by the highest and lowest quartiles of real value of firm shipment growth
and graph the long-run changes in the number of firms. In our subsequent tests, we further split these
industries by the long-run change in the number of producers into “Declining” and “Technological Change”
industries for contracting industries and “Growth” and “Consolidation” industries for growing industries.

                                Contracting Industries (“Declining” and “Technological Change”)                            Growing Industries (“Growth” and “Consolidation”)
          .115385                                                                                      .106061
            Fraction




                                                                                                       Fraction




                       0                                                                                          0
                           -1                -.5                0                    .5        1                      -1              -.5                0                    .5     1
                                         Long-Run Change in Number of Firms by Industry                                         Long-Run Log Change in Number of Firms by Industry




                                                                                            Figure 1
    6
        We later discuss results using classifications based on 10-year intervals.


                                                                                                   5
   The histograms show that in growing industries it is not uncommon to see a net increase of 30% in the
number of producers and also for some industries a decline in the number of producers over the sample
period. Whereas in contracting industries a 30% decrease is common.
   The fact that the number of firms can decrease even in a growing industry, suggest that some firms may
not possess the resources and / or skills necessary to survive. The resources and skills a firm requires to
prosper in these diﬀerent types of industries are likely to diﬀer. In a growing industry, new producers are
entering at high rates. Given that entrants are often high cost producers (Jovanovic (1982)), established
firms in this industry type are less likely to face hard competition. Success in this type of industry is likely
to depend on the ability to marshal resources to take advantage of growth opportunities. In a consolidating
industry, the shipments are also growing rapidly but the competitive pressure is likely to be stronger. In
these industries new producers are less likely to be entering and some existing producers might be forced
out. We would expect that competitive advantages from belonging to a larger organization is likely to be
most valuable in a fast growing consolidating industry.
   Numerous studies suggest that the firm’s organizational structure aﬀects the way it invests, grows, and
sells assets. Conglomerates have internal capital markets that can transfer capital across industries and
may have better access to external capital markets than would be available to their constituent divisions if
they had remained independent (Bolton and Scharfstein (1991), Khanna and Tice (2001), Stein (1997)). In
particular, Stein (1997) models how conglomerate firms can eﬃciently transfer resources from unprofitable
to profitable projects. Moreover, as Peyer (2001) shows empirically, conglomerates have superior ability
to obtain external financing, giving divisions of conglomerates a competitive advantage when internally
generated funds are not suﬃcient to finance desired investment. Thus, we would expect the investment
by segments of conglomerates to be less aﬀected by the level of internal financing than equivalent single
segment firms.
   The eﬀect of conglomerate structure on investment need not be benign. One strand of the literature
posits that the firm’s investment policy is driven by opportunistic agents (usually the managers or the
owners of a subset of the firm’s securities), who attempt to distort the policy for their private benefit (see,
Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Jensen (1986)). Thus, for example, managers may have a private benefit
from investment in capacity (Jensen (1986) and Matsusaka and Nanda (2001)). Opportunistic behavior
by agents may cause the firms to misallocate resources across industry segments. These possibilities are
suggested by Lamont (1997), Shin and Stulz (1998), Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), and Scharfstein
and Stein (2000).
   More generally, organizational form may be endogenously determined by a firm’s expertise and its


                                                       6
ability to exploit opportunities as argued by Campa and Kedia (2003), Maksimovic and Phillips (2002)
and Villalonga (2004). Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) argue that conglomerates diﬀer from single-segment
firms because their organizational skills are not industry specific and that because of this they find it optimal
to operate in several industries. In their model firm size and scope of operations adjust to economize on
the firms’ organizational talent. In this view as industries experience demand and technology shocks, firms’
comparative advantage shifts. Conglomerates and single-industry firms shifts and firms adjust by building,
acquiring or closing plants to maximize value.7 . Because their model predicts a positive correlation between
conglomerates’ divisions size and productivity, the adjustments to shocks may depend on the relative size
of a division within the conglomerate.
    The tasks performed by a head oﬃce of a conglomerate are likely to diﬀer across industry types. In
Growth industries the head oﬃce of a multi-segment firm is faced with managing and providing resources
for increases in capacity. In Declining industries the focus is likely to be on optimally shrinking operations
and reallocating resources to other segments. In Technological Change industries firms have to adapt to
increasing competition from new entrants in industries with slowly growing or declining shipments, while
in Consolidation industries the decision is whether to remain in the industry. Since the nature of these
tasks involves a diﬀerent mixture of monitoring, winner picking, and financing, the comparative advantage
of internal capital markets relative to public markets may diﬀer across these long-run industry conditions.
    In our tests we first examine the extent of diﬀerences the extent to which conglomerates mitigate the
eﬀects of resource constraints across these types of industries. The above discussion suggests that the eﬀects
of conglomerate status should be stronger in growing industries. Consider a growth industry in which firms
encounter repeated expansion opportunities. Much of the value of such firms consists of unexploited, and
therefore intangible growth opportunities. Corporate finance theory suggests that such firms are most likely
to incur agency and asymmetric information costs when obtaining external finance (e.g., Myers (1977),
Myers and Majluf (1984)). Internal capital markets are thus most likely to be of value in segments in
growing industries.8 Thus, the first hypothesis that we investigate is the following:

    H1: The eﬀects of conglomerate status on mitigating the eﬀects of financial dependence are greater in
growing industries.

    Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) show that conglomerate segments reallocate resources from less pro-
ductive divisions to more productivity divisions when positive demand shocks are realized.                        Investment
   7
     While not focusing on the industry life cycle, Bernardo and Chowdhry (2002) model how diﬀerential skills and opportunities
over the firm’s life endogenously causes a conglomerate discount given that as the firm matures it exercises its growth options.
   8
     See, for example, Fluck and Lynch (1999).


                                                               7
decisions by conglomerate firms in one industry may creates opportunity costs for investments in other
industries in which they operate. Thus segments’ investment decisions depend on the relative demand
growth across industries.    In our context, we hypothesize that conglomerate segments are more likely to
exploit investment opportunities in growth industries if their other segments are in declining industries.
This prediction is summarized in the following hypothesis:

   H2:    The eﬀects of conglomerate status on mitigating the eﬀects of financial dependence are greater
in growing industries when conglomerate firms have productive segments in growing industries and other
large divisions in declining industries.

   Conglomerates operating across multiple industries have experience in allocating resources and inte-
grating operations. Since acquisitions require extensive organizational skill in integrating operations, while
capital expenditures typically represent incremental additions to existing operations, we would expect that
diﬀerences in organizational form aﬀect acquisitions more than capital expenditures at existing plants. In
particular, conglomerates’ ability to integrate diﬀerent business units and allocate capital can increase the
payoﬀ to providing capital for acquisitions to segments of conglomerate firms compared to single-segment
firms, while capital expenditures may involve similar decisions and skills for both conglomerate and single-
segment firms.    We test whether conglomerates and single-segment firms that have a financial deficit
allocate funds for acquisitions and capital expenditures at existing plants diﬀerently.     We thus test the
following hypothesis:

   H3: The eﬀects of organizational form and financial dependence are greater for acquisitions than for
capital expenditures.

   The eﬀect of financial dependence on conglomerate segments and single-segment firms may diﬀer be-
cause conglomerates eﬃciently provide resources to segments with insuﬃcient internal resources that permit
them to make value increasing acquisitions. However, it is also possible that conglomerate segments over-
invest in acquisitions, perhaps due to agency reasons. While we cannot measure the private value created
by acquisitions, which depends on the price paid, we can examine the subsequent changes in the acquired
assets’ productivity. Increases in productivity are consistent with the hypothesis that the acquisitions are
economically eﬃcient. We would expect these eﬀects to be particularly important in growing industries.
We test these predictions in the following hypothesis:

   H4: Acquisitions by conglomerate firms result in increases in productivity of acquired segments. The
increases in productivity are greatest in growth industries.

                                                      8
    Organizational form and financial dependence may also aﬀect other capital budgeting decisions. We also
examine how firms’ decisions to close plants and to build new plants are aﬀected by financial dependence
and organizational form across industry conditions.


3     Data, Long-Run Industry Conditions and Variable Construction

In this section we describe the data, how we classify long-run industry conditions and how we calculate
the variables used to test our hypotheses. The primary dependent variables we investigate are a firm’s
within-industry acquisitions of other plants and its segment-level capital expenditures. We also examine
plant births and exits. Our first dependent variable, within-industry acquisition, takes on the value of one
at the segment level if the conglomerate segment or stand-alone firm purchases one or more plants in that
existing industry, and the value of zero otherwise. Our second measure, capital expenditures, measures
plant-level capital expenditures at the plants owned by each firm at the beginning of each year and not
sold during the year.
    The primary independent variables we use are segment and plant productivity, the long-run change in
aggregate industry conditions, and predicted financial dependence and organizational structure.

3.1    Data

We use data from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD), maintained by the Center for Economic
Studies at the Bureau of the Census. The LRD database contains detailed plant-level data on the value of
shipments produced by each plant, investments broken down by equipment and buildings, and the number
of employees.9
    The LRD tracks approximately 50,000 manufacturing plants every year in the Annual Survey of Man-
ufactures (ASM). The ASM covers all plants with more than 250 employees. Smaller plants are randomly
selected every fifth year to complete a rotating five-year panel. Note that while the annual data is called
the Annual Survey of Manufactures, reporting is not voluntary for large plants and is not voluntary once
a smaller firm is selected to participate. All data has to be reported to the government by law and fines
are levied for misreporting.
    The data we use covers the period 1974 to 2000. To be in our sample, firms must have manufacturing
operations producing products in SIC codes 2000-3999.              Since we construct measures of productivity
(described in section 3.3) using 5 years of data, our regressions cover the period 1979-2000. We require
  9
    For a more detailed description of the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) see McGuckin and Pascoe (1988) and also
Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).



                                                          9
each plant to have a minimum of three years of data. For each firm, we also exclude all its plants in an
industry (at the three-digit SIC code) if the firm’s total value of shipments in the industry is less than $1
million in real 1982 dollars.
       The database also identifies plants that change ownership.             For ownership change we rely on this
identification which was available for all years except 1978 (for an unknown reason coverage codes did not
identify ownership change in this year). Plant birth and death were identified by John Haltiwanger using
payroll records from the Longitudinal Business Database.10
       To obtain a measure of organizational structure, we aggregate each firm’s plant-level data into firm
industry segments at the three-digit SIC code. We call these industry firm-level portfolios of plants
“segments.” Segments, defined this way, capture all the plant-level operations of a firm in an industry.11
We classify firms as single segment or multiple segment, based on the three-digit SIC code. We classify a
firm as a multi-segment firm if it produces more than 10 percent of its sales in a second SIC code outside
its principal three-digit SIC code. Using the 10 percent cut-oﬀ facilitates comparison with previous studies
as 10 percent is the cut-oﬀ that public firms report.            For multiple-segment firms, we also classify each
segment as either a main segment or a peripheral segment. Main segments are segments whose value of
shipments is at least 25% of the firm’s total shipments. Given we calculate growth rates and also divide
capital expenditures by lagged capital stock, we also lose the initial year a firm or firm segment enters the
database. We also lose observations that are non-contiguous.
       We include a firm’s lagged size and the lagged number of plants in the segment as control variables.
We also include the industry capital intensity, calculated as the sum of all capital expenditures divided by
the sum of all industry shipments. We industry and year adjust all capital expenditure and productivity
data, subtracting out the industry-year averages.

3.2      Long-run Industry Conditions

We classify industries on the basis of exogenous shifts in their operating environments that may require
diﬀerent financial and organizational capabilities of firms, and that may therefore enable us to identify the
advantages of diﬀerent organizational forms.
       Given the diﬀerences in industry conditions previously shown in Figure 1, we capture the stages in
  10
    We thank John Haltiwanger for providing us with these linkages.
  11
    The segments we construct do not correspond to those reported by COMPUSTAT. However, segment data reported by
COMPUSTAT are subject to reporting biases. Firms have considerable flexibility in how they report segments as shown by
Pacter (1993). Firms may also have strategic reasons for the specific segments they choose or choose not to report, as Hayes
and Lundholm (1996) shows. Hyland (1999) finds that only 72 percent of firms that report under the FASB standards that
they go from one segment to more than one segment actually increase their number of segments.



                                                            10
an industry life cycle by classifying 3-digit SIC manufacturing industries into four categories using both
shipments growth and changes in the number of firms. The first cut divides industries into those in which
the growth of the real value of shipments during our sample period, 1972-1997 exceeds the median growth
of all manufacturing industries and the into those in which the growth of shipments fell below the median.
Many industries in the latter category experience an actual decline in shipments. Our second cut divides
industries into those in which the growth of the number of producers exceeds the median growth in the
number of producers for a manufacturing industry and those industries in which the number of producers
is lower than the median, again for the 1972-1997 period.
   We also classify industries using ten-year floating windows, thereby allowing an industry to switch
between life-cycle classifications over time (for example, from growth to declining).     We use Census year
data for these industry classifications because an accurate count of the number of firms is available in these
years. Census years are every five years beginning with 1972. To classify an industry in a particular year
using floating windows, we use the census year following a particular year and calculate the change to that
census year from the census 10 years prior. Thus for 1993 we would calculate the change in the real value
of shipments from 1987 to 1997. We also examine subperiods, specifically the 1980s and 1990s and found
no material diﬀerences versus the 10 year analysis that we report.
   Table 1 presents summary statistics by industry category. The table shows that the industries in our
four categories diﬀer significantly. Over the period 1972-1997 real shipments increase by an average of
43% in Growth Industries and decrease by 42% in Declining industries. Real shipments in Consolidating
industries change little (a two percent increase). Shipments fall by 28% in Technological Change industries.
As expected, the number of producers increases (+83.6%) in Growth industries and decreases (-34.6%) in
Declining industries.   Technological Change and Consolidating industries present a contrast. Despite a
large drop in real output, the number of producers in the former increases by 45%. In the latter, despite
a stationary output level, there is a drop of 10.2% in the number of producers.
   We also present long-run statistics for the 5 industries surrounding the average change in each category
to give a more detailed description of which industries are in each category. Declining industries include iron
and steel foundries, rubber and plastics footwear. Technological Change industries include metalworking
machinery and equipment. Consolidation industries include paper mills and carpet and rugs.             Growth
industries include plastics, drugs and communications equipment.

                                           Insert Table 1 here

   In a declining industry both the number of firms and real shipments are growing more slowly than in

                                                      11
a median industry. In many such industries the number of producers is falling and firms face the task of
managing decline or optimally exiting. Cash flow may be low or negative and firms belonging to a conglom-
erate may be able to use its greater resources to obtain a competitive advantage. By examining diﬀerences
in investment and acquisition activity of conglomerates and single-segment firms in these industries we can
tell whether conglomerates shift resources away from industries with declining shipments.
   Real shipments are also declining or growing slowly in Technological Change industries. However, the
high rate of growth of new producers in those industries implies that there exist growth opportunities.
Thus, by comparing the diﬀerences in investment patterns of conglomerates and single-segment firms in
Declining and Technological Change industries we can examine whether conglomerate firms’ response to
decline in shipments depends on the existence of growth opportunities in an industry.

3.3   Variable Construction: Financial Dependence and Productivity

A. Financial Dependence
   To obtain a measure of the extent to which stand-alone firms and conglomerate segments can finance
their investment internally we define a segment to be financially dependent (independent) in particular year
if the sum of the capital expenditures reported by all its plants exceeds (is less than) the total cash flow
reported by these same plants. Cash flow is defined as the gross margin adjusted for inventory changes.
A conglomerate segment or stand-alone firm that is financially independent is able to fund its plant-level
capital expenditures directly from cash flow, without obtaining resources from head-oﬃce, other divisions,
or from the financial markets.
   To control for endogeneity, we first predict financial dependence and use the predicted financial de-
pendence in our regressions.     Our dependent variable takes on the value one if a segment is classified as
financially dependent, and zero otherwise.     For each segment in each year, predicted financial deficit is
estimated using by regressing actual financial dependence on industry and firm-level variables that capture
a segment’s anticipated need for additional financing beyond that produced via that segment’s internal
cash flow.
   In the regressions, our independent variables are the change in industry real shipments, lagged industry
profitability measured by industry value added divided by industry shipments, industry capital intensity,
lagged segment-level productivity (fixed eﬀect from a production function) estimated using five years of
lagged data from the segment’s industry, and the log of firm size.
   Table 2 shows that a segment’s cash flows depend on industry characteristics, in particular shipment-
growth. To capture industry-level diﬀerences we include several control variables. To control for potential


                                                     12
growth in the industry we use the change in industry shipments. To capture the amount of internal cash
available to a segment we use industry value added, the diﬀerence between gross sales of the industry
and the cost of materials, labor and energy used in production, divided by industry sales. To control for
industry specific use of large amounts of fixed assets, we use industry capital intensity, the sum of industry
capital expenditures divided by industry sales. The industry value added and industry capital intensity
measures are computed annually. All segment- and industry-level variables are at the three-digit SIC code
level. We include lagged segment productivity and segment productivity squared in the specification to
allow for the possibility that highly productive firms invest more than their cash flows.
       Our measure of predicted financial dependence is thus the predicted probability a segment will have
investment greater than the segment’s internal cash flow controlling for industry-level growth, internal cash
flows and capital intensity, and firm-level productivity and size.              The predicted financial dependence is
then used to examine how the relation between investment and predicted financial dependence is aﬀected
by its ownership status (conglomerate or stand-alone), size, productivity and industry type.12
B. Productivity of Industry Segments
       We calculate productivity for all firm segments at the plant level and aggregate this data into segments
using weighted averages. Our primary measure of performance is total factor productivity (TFP). TFP
takes the actual amount of output a plant produces with a given amount of inputs and compares it to a
predicted amount of output. “Predicted output” is what the plant is expected to have produced, given the
amount of inputs it used. A plant that produces more than the predicted amount of output has a greater-
than-average productivity. This measure does not impose the restrictions of constant returns to scale and
constant elasticity of scale that a “dollar in, dollar out” cash flow measure requires. For robustness and
comparability with prior studies, we also explore how segment growth is related to segment operating
margin, both of the segment in question and of the conglomerates other segments. However, this operating
margin diﬀers from a typical cash flow number because our plant-level data does not measure indirect
segmental level costs, such as advertising and research and development
       To calculate a plant’s predicted output, we assume that the plants in each industry have a translog
production function. This functional form is a second-degree approximation to any arbitrary production
function, and therefore takes into account interactions between inputs.                   In estimating the production
function we use the last five years of data for each plant - thus the first year of our data for which we
have calculated productivity is 1979.          For each industry we estimate this production function using an
  12
    A division can be public and also be part of a conglomerate. Our specifications in the working paper version of this paper
(available on SSRN) allow for this possibility.



                                                             13
unbalanced panel with plant-level fixed eﬀects. To estimate productivity, we take the translog production
function and run a regression of log of the total value of shipments on the log of inputs, including cross-
product and squared terms:
                                                  N
                                                  X                    N X
                                                                       X N
                             ln Qit = A + fi +          cj ln Ljit +             cjk ln Ljit ln Lkit,                    (1)
                                                  j=1                  j=1 k=j

where Qit represents output of plant i in year t, and Ljit is the quantity of input j used in production for
plant i for time period t. A is a technology shift parameter, assumed to be constant by industry, fi is a
plant-firm specific fixed eﬀect (if a plant changes owners a new fixed eﬀect is estimated. We leave oﬀ the
                                                PN
firm subscript for tractability), and cj =        i=1 cji   indexes returns-to-scale. We deflate for industry price at
the four digit level.
       We obtain two measures of plant-level TFP from equation (1). First we have a firm-industry segment
fixed eﬀect, fi , which we use in the regression to predict segment financial dependence. The segment fixed
eﬀect captures persistent productivity eﬀects, such as those arising from managerial quality (Griliches
(1957) and Mundlak (1961, 1978)). It also captures a segment’s ability to price higher than the industry
average. Second, we obtain a firm-plant residual that we aggregate up into segments using predicted
output to construct a segment weighted productivity that we use in our regressions examining acquisitions,
investment and plant birth.
       In each case we standardize plant-level TFP by subtracting out industry average TFP in each year and
dividing by the standard deviation of TFP for each industry. We standardize to control for diﬀerences in
precision with which productivity is estimated within industries. This correction is analogous to a simple
measurement error correction and is similar to the procedure used to produce standardized cumulative
excess returns in event studies.13         In computing the segment-level productivity in our regressions we
construct a weighted average of the individual plant productivities, with weights equal to the predicted
output of each plant.
       We also include other firm and segment-level variables in our regressions to provide additional control
for unmeasured productivity diﬀerences and other factors, such as size, that can influence firm investment.
We include the log of firm size and the number of plants operated in an industry segment at the beginning
of the year. We define firm size as the total deflated (using industry price deflators) value of shipments in
1982 dollars.
       In estimating the TFPs in our sample, we use data for over 1,000,000 plant years, and for approximately
  13
    This standardization does not aﬀect the results we report. The results have similar levels of significance when we do not
standardize productivity in this manner.



                                                              14
50,000 plants each year. In the productivity regression for each industry, we include three diﬀerent types of
inputs, capital, labor, and materials, as explanatory variables. All these data exist at the plant level. Our
productivity calculations do not capture any headquarters or divisional level costs that are not reported
at the plant-level (i.e. overhead, research and development).      The ASM also does not state the actual
quantity shipped by each plant, but shows only the value of shipments.        We thus deflate the value of
shipments by 1982 price deflators to get a real value of shipments. For all inputs and outputs measured in
dollars, we adjust for inflation by using four-digit SIC deflator data from the Bartelsman and Gray (1994)
database. Each input has to have a non-zero reported value. Kovenock and Phillips (1997) describe these
inputs and the method for accounting for inflation and depreciation of capital stock in more detail.


4     Results
4.1   Summary Statistics

We first present summary statistics by both industry classification and also organization type.      In par-
ticular we examine the relation between industry type and three variables of interest, cash flows, capital
expenditures and plant acquisition.

                                                 –––––—
                                            Insert Table 2 here
                                                 –––––—

    Table 2 shows that the number of single-segment firms is far greater than the number of conglomerate
firms. However, the number of segments operated by conglomerate firms and the percent of industry output
produced by conglomerate firms is greater - with the exception of Growth industries - than that produced
by single-segment firms. Interestingly, in Growth industries conglomerate firms operate 38 percent of the
industry segments but produce a far greater percentage, 63.2 percent, of industry output. Thus, segment
sizes of conglomerate firms relative to single segment firms are the largest in Growth industries.
    The second panel of Table 2 shows that for segments as a whole the ratio of average annual cash
flow to sales is positively related to the real rate of shipments growth. The ratio is highest in Growth
industries at 7.30% and lowest in Declining industries at 4.13%. The diﬀerence in these two ratios is
statistically significant at the five percent level.   Examining the cash flow statistics by organizational
type, Table 2 shows that plants of conglomerate segments consistently realize substantially higher cash
flows than those of stand-alone firms for all industry categories.    Segment size and organizational type


                                                       15
aﬀect the diﬀerences in cash flows between segments of single- and multiple-segment firms. Large segments
consistently realize substantially higher cash flows than small segments. The diﬀerence is approximately
five to seven percentage points, and is particularly striking in Declining industries, where small segments
are barely breaking even at the segment level.14 When we focus on large segments only, and vary the
organizational form, the table shows that conglomerate segments consistently realize cash flows that are
1.5-3 percentage points higher than single-segment firms.
       Next, we examine the ratio of average annual plant-level capital expenditures to lagged capital stock.
This ratio is highest in Growth industries and lowest in Declining industries. The single-segment firms’
capital expenditure to lagged capital stock ratio exceeds that of the mean segment of multi-segment firms
in all industry categories. However, overall, the capital expenditure rates are similar across organizational
forms.
       The last block of numbers in Table 2 shows the percentage of total segment growth accounted for by
within-segment acquisitions. The results show that proportion of firm growth accounted by acquisition
is substantially higher for multiple-segment firms than for single-segment firms. In Declining industries,
within-industry growth by acquisition for multiple-segment firms it is 26.07 percent, whereas it is only 5.31
percent of firm growth for single-segment firms.             In Growth industries the diﬀerence is even larger. In
Growth industries the within-industry growth via acquisition by multiple-segment firms is 36.08 percent,
25 percentage points more than proportion of growth of single-segment firms accounted by acquisition.
Across industry categories, we see that within-industry growth via acquisition for multiple-segment firms
in Growth industries is also 10 percentage points higher than the corresponding number for multiple-
segment firms in Declining industries.15
       These summary statistics show that diﬀerences in acquisition rates between multiple- and single-
segment firms are substantial.           Capital expenditure rates are fairly stable across industries, segment
size and firm organization, while acquisition rates vary sharply across diﬀerent firm sizes and organiza-
tional forms. The literature on the relation between conglomerate cash flow and investment has focussed
on whether conglomerates’ capital expenditures are eﬃcient or whether they are driven by financial con-
straints and agency issues. Although the data sources are not directly comparable because most previous
studies use COMPUSTAT data, these initial results show that capital expenditures are not very diﬀerent
  14
      This suggests that models that predict early exit of larger producers in declining industries may be missing an important
empirical diﬀerence between small and large segments.
   15
      When we calculate the importance of acquisition using the numbers of plants purchased, we also find that conglomerate
firms’ acquisition rate in terms of number of plants purchased divided by the number of existhing plants is also two to three
times greater than that of single-segment firms. In particular, the rate of acquisition by conglomerate firms in Consolidation
and Growth industries is 3.1 and 2.6 times, respectively, the rate of single-segment firms.



                                                              16
for single- and multiple-segment firms, and are in fact a higher percentage for single-segment firms. How-
ever, these summary statistics show that plant acquisition are sensitive to industry conditions, segment
size and significantly greater for multiple-segment firms. The findings that eﬀects of organizational form
are greater for acquisitions than capital expenditures at existing plants are consistent with Hypothesis 3.
   We next investigate segments’ capital expenditures and plant acquisitions in a multivariate framework
and examine how financial dependence of industry segments impacts acquisition and investment.

4.2   Financial Dependence and Firm Organizational Status

We begin our analysis of financial dependence in Table 3. Our goal is to analyze how financial dependence
and industry factors aﬀect a firm’s investment and acquisition decisions.       However, given that a firm
segment’s financial deficit may be endogenous, we first run a first-stage regression where we predict the
financial dependence of a firm’s segment at the three-digit SIC code. We use predicted dependence in our
later regressions that examine investment and acquisitions.
   In Table 3, we estimate a segment is predicted to be financially dependent using a panel logistic
specification.   A segment is classified as financially dependent, with financial dependence equal to 1,
when its capital expenditures exceeds the segment’s cash flow, and zero otherwise. We regress financial
dependence on lagged firm and industry-level variables that capture its need for external (to the segment)
financial capital.

                                           Insert Table 3 here

   Column 1 of Table 3 shows that a segment in a fast growing industry is less likely to be financially
dependent than a segment in a slow growing industry. The table’s results show that segments in capital
intensive industries are more likely to be financially dependent. The relation between the probability of
financial deficit and a segment’s productivity is convex as there is a negative coeﬃcient on productivity
and a positive coeﬃcient on productivity squared. Very high productivity thus increases the likelihood of
financial dependence. This convexity causes a firm to be financially dependent at the 87th percentile of
productivity, holding other characteristics at their median values. Lastly, large firms are less likely to be
financially dependent.
   In Table 2, Columns 2 and 3, we estimate this specification on two sub-samples: segments in industries
with above median and below median change in real shipments over our long-run 25 year period. The
sub-sample results are similar to those for the whole sample with several exceptions. The coeﬃcient
of the change in industry shipments changes from negative to positive (albeit insignificant) in growth


                                                     17
industries.     Second, the coeﬃcient on lagged industry profitability is approximately one-third smaller
in high-growth industries than in low-growth industries.               Thus, while high-growth industries are more
profitable, they demand even more capital to meet industry growth as profitability has a smaller impact on
financial dependence in these industries. Third, the squared productivity term remains positive and highly
significant in high-growth industries but is basically zero for slow-growth industries. Thus, in slow-growth
industries there is no partial oﬀsetting eﬀect that makes highly productive segments more likely to be
financially dependent. In these industries, productive segments are less likely to financially dependent than
in high growth industries. These results are consistent with highly productive firm segments demanding
more capital to invest in high-growth industries, thus increasing their likelihood of financial dependence.
       To control for endogeneity of organizational status we conduct a similar analysis to examine the pre-
dicted decision to become a conglomerate. We use the predicted firm status in our subsequent regressions.16
In Table 4 we examine whether individual segments are more likely to be part of conglomerate firms. We
undertake this analysis for two reasons. First, we recognize that firm status is endogenous and thus wish to
use predicted firm status in subsequent regressions that examine investment and acquisitions. Second, the
influence of industry factors on whether segments belong to conglomerate firms is of independent interest.
       We estimate a logistic regression where the dependent variable is equal to one if the segment is part of
a conglomerate firm in Column 1 of Table 4. Because we are exploring the role of financial dependence
on the decision to be a conglomerate segment, our specification is similar to the one predicting financial
dependence in Table 3. However, since our hypotheses predict that conglomerate segments have advantages
in some industry categories we include long-run changes in industry shipments as a predictor. Since we do
not split the sample by long-run changes in industry shipments, the inclusion of this variable is permitted.

                                                 Insert Table 4 here

       The results show that in industries with high long-run growth industry shipments, segments are more
likely to be part of a conglomerate firm. Short-run (annual) changes do not increase the probability that a
segment belongs to a conglomerate firm. Industry capital intensity is a particularly important predictor of
whether a segment belongs to a conglomerate firm, with a relative-odds ratio of 176. Thus, a ten-percent
increase in industry capital intensity increases the likelihood of a segment belonging to a conglomerate by
17.6 times. Productivity also has a significant impact on the status of a firm segment.                     Segments with
  16
     In a previous draft, available from the authors, we used actual firm status in the regressions.       The coeﬃcients of
the actual firm status indicator variables (not instrumented) were more significant for acquisitions and significant for plant
exit. The significance of key interaction variables was similar in all cases. Thus, we view the results reported here as more
conservative.



                                                             18
low productivity and segments that are very highly productive are relatively more likely to be part of a
conglomerate firm, yielding a U-shaped relation between productivity and conglomerate status.

4.3      Plant Acquisitions

A. Financial Dependence and Acquisitions
       This section analyzes the eﬀect of predicted financial dependence and firm organization on within-
industry plant acquisitions. Table 5 examines the eﬀect of our diﬀerent long-run industry categories using
both 10 and 25 year windows. The 25 year window captures long run trends in the industry. The 10 year
window allows an industry to switch categories over time. For any given year, the industry category for
the 10 year window is calculated using the change in real value of industry shipments from surrounding
census years.17
       We estimate predicted financial dependence of segments using the specification presented in Table 3.
We estimate the predicted probability of conglomerate status using the specification of Table 4.                          As a
measure of segment productivity we construct a weighted average of each plants productivity with weights
equal to plant predicted shipments. We include the lagged number of firm plants in each segment as a
control variable.18

                                                        –––––—
                                                  Insert Table 5 here
                                                        –––––—

       In order to examine whether the eﬀects are statistically diﬀerent from each other for diﬀerent industry
categories, we form a triple-interaction variables. To form this variable we interact the predicted probability
that a segment is part of a conglomerate with its predicted dependence and with the quadrant indicator
variables.19
       Table 5 reveals several patterns. First, for all industry categories, except for Declining industries in
the 10-year window, single-segment firms that are predicted to be financially dependent have a lower
  17
     We also estimate this specification using continuous measures of the changes in industry conditions - instead of the 4
separate quadrant indicators used here. We include the change in the number of firms and the change in industry shipments
in separate specifications, over both 10- and 25-year periods to examine the eﬀect of each of these long-run changes separately.
The results are very similar and are avaible in a previous version of the paper.
  18
     We also checked whether the results are robust to including firm size as a substitute for the number of firm plants. The
results were similar and conclusions unaﬀected by this change.
  19
     We also constructed a similar interaction variable for public firm status. The version of this paper available on SSRN
shows that public firm status also oﬀsets part of the negative eﬀect of predicted dependence in Growth industries.         The
variable public interacted with predicted dependence is positive and significant in Growth industries for the 25 year period.
However, this eﬀect was much smaller than that for conglomerate firms thus we focus the paper on organizational form.


                                                              19
probability of acquiring plants in their industry from other firms.             Second, in all categories, except for
Declining industries, this negative eﬀect of financial dependence on acquisitions is oﬀset for conglomerate
firms.   This oﬀsetting eﬀect is shown by the positive coeﬃcient on the interaction of predicted financial
dependence with conglomerate firm status and the quadrant indicator variable. The interaction eﬀect is
greatest in growing industries (Growth and Consolidating). The coeﬃcient of the interaction variable for
Growth industries is statistically greater than for the other industry categories for the 10-year window,
and all industry categories except Consolidating industries for the 25-year window (chi-squared tests not
reported). Thus these results support the prediction in Hypothesis 1 that the eﬀects of organizational form
on mitigating the eﬀects of financial dependence is greatest in growing industries.
    Lastly, given Lamont and Polk’s (2002) finding that the diversity of conglomerate’s operations across
industries aﬀects its value, we include a variable capturing a firm’s diversity of opportunities. We include
the standard deviation of industry growth across a conglomerate firm’s segments. The regressions show
that this variable is unrelated to the probability of a firm making acquisitions.20
    Tables 6A further investigates the eﬀects of organizational form in Growth industries.                 We examine
Growth industries in detail because our previous results indicate that organizational form has a particularly
large eﬀect in these industries. Column 1 of this table examine the eﬀect of conglomerate firms’ status by
itself when the interaction term between conglomerate status and predicted dependence is not included.
In the third column we include a variable that measures the relative productivity of the firm’s division
in the growth industry relative to that of main divisions, if any, that the firm has in declining industries.
This variable is calculated as the simple diﬀerence in productivity between these divisions. If a firm has
no division in a declining industry.       We use this variable to examine whether productive conglomerate
segments if growth industries grow faster if the conglomerate has a less productive division in a declining
industry, as predicted by Hypothesis 2.          Finally, Columns 4 and 5 split the segments into high and low
productivity subsamples. This enables us to see high and low productivity segments of conglomerates in
growth industries have diﬀerent investment patterns.

                                                     –––––—
                                               Insert Table 6A here
                                                     –––––—

    Column one of Table 6A shows that conglomerate firm status positively is positively related to the
  20
     Using the input-output matrix we also examined whether these results varied by whehter or not the conglomerate’s
divisions were in related versus unrelated industries. We found that the results for financial dependence were not aﬀected
much by whether the conglomerate segments are unrelated or related.


                                                           20
rate of acquisitions. As shown in the second column, the coeﬃcient on the interaction variable between
predicted conglomerate status and the predicted financing deficit is also positive and significant. Columns
three and five in Table 6A show that conglomerate segments in Growth industries have a significantly higher
probability of acquiring plants if the conglomerate also has a less productive main division in a declining
industry.   These results show that multi-segment firms acquiring additional plants in their productive
segments in growth industries and relaxing financial dependence for these segments. As predicted by
Hypothesis 2, this eﬀect is greater when conglomerate firms also have a division in a declining industry.

B. Economic Significance of Our Results
   To investigate the economic significance of these eﬀects, we compute the probability that a segment
belonging to diﬀerent subsamples of single-segment and multi-segment firms acquires a plant. For each
subsample we use the median value of each variable and then vary the predicted probability that a segment
is financially dependent from the 10th to the 90th percentile. We compute the probability that a segment
makes an acquisition for diﬀerent levels of the predicted probability of financial dependence.

                                               –––––—
                                         Insert Table 6B here
                                               –––––—

   Table 6B reports the economic significance of our results. We report the probability of within-industry
acquisitions for conglomerate and single-segment firms using the specification in Table 5A, column 2. We
also report economic eﬀects for the Declining industry quadrant using a similar specification for compa-
rability. The table shows that multi-segment firms have substantially higher probabilities of making an
acquisition than single-segment firms. Thus, for example, in Growth industries a conglomerate segment
with the median levels of all variables for conglomerate segments has a 6.26% probability of making an ac-
quisition in an any year, whereas the single-segment firm has a 0.57% probability of making an acquisition
at the median levels of the variables for single-segment firms. As the probability of being financially con-
strained increases from the 10th percentile to the 90th percentile the probability of acquisitions increases
for multi-segment firms but decreases for single-segment firms. Thus financially dependent single-segment
firms are less likely to acquire plants, whereas financially dependent conglomerate segments are more likely
to acquire plants. Given that financial dependence occurs when a segment’s investment is high relative to
its cash flow, this suggests that segments of conglomerate firms acquire plants when capital expenditures
exceed segment cash flow, while single-segment firms have diﬃculty in making acquisitions when capital
expenditures exceed cash flow.

                                                    21
   To investigate the causes of these diﬀerences in acquisition probabilities between single-segment firms
and conglomerate segments we recompute the probability of acquisition for single-segment firms using the
median values of the data from conglomerate segments and the coeﬃcient estimates for single-firms. We
obtain these probabilities by setting the conglomerate dummy and segment rank to zero. The computed
probabilities are estimates of the probability that single-segment firms would have acquired plants if they
had the median data values of the conglomerate firms in our sample. The estimates show that there a sub-
stantial proportion of the diﬀerence in estimated probabilities is explained by diﬀerences in characteristics of
single-segment and conglomerate firms. Thus, in Growth Industries, the median single-segment firm would
have had 4.22% probability of making an acquisition if it had the data from the median multi-segment firm
(as opposed to the actual median single-segment firm, which has a 0.39% probability of acquisition). The
diﬀerence between the median conglomerate segment’s estimated 6.26% estimated probability of making
an acquisition and the 4.55% probability the single-segment would have had if it had the median values
of the data for a conglomerate firm can be attributed to diﬀerences in organizational form. The results
show that organizational form makes a larger diﬀerence for segments predicted to be financially dependent
than for segments not predicted to be financially dependent. Comparing across the first and last rows for
Declining and Growth industries (comparing conglomerate segments to single-segments with the data from
conglomerate segments), it is striking that organizational form makes a larger diﬀerence (almost twice as
large) in Growth industries than in Declining industries.
   In the third and fourth panels, we also spilt the data into high and low productivity segments and
compute the predicted probability of an acquisition using the specifications in columns 5 and 6 of Table 6A.
The results show that the previous eﬀects of organizational form are higher for more productive segments
of conglomerate firms. As shown in the third panel, the probability of a within-industry acquisition for
multi-segment firms increases to 7.97% when predicted financial dependence is at the 90th percentile. This
evidence is consistent with conglomerate firms helping acquire plants in productive business segments.
   These results shows that within-industry acquisition probabilities depend on firm organizational form
in several diﬀerent ways.    First, conglomerate firms do acquire more within their industries than single
segment firms overall. Second, particularly in Growth industries, acquisition probabilities increase with
predicted financial dependence for conglomerate firms’ productivity segments, while they decrease with fi-
nancial dependence for single-segment firms. This finding is consistent with conglomerate firms providing
resources to segments with growth opportunities.       Third, the acquisition probability of a conglomerate
firm’s most productive segments in growth industries increases when it has a division in a declining in-
dustry - a result that is consistent with the theoretical prediction in Stein (1997) and Maksimovic and


                                                      22
Phillips (2002) and also with Boston Consulting Group’s prescription for non-growth industries to help
fund “shining stars.” The results are not consistent with theories which predict that conglomerate firms
subsidize their less-eﬃcient divisions because of influence costs.
C. Post-Acquisition Changes in Productivity
   To examine whether these acquisitions are associated with value creation, Table 7 presents the ex post
changes in productivity for the acquired plants. We compute the changes in productivity over a four-year
window. These changes in productivity are industry and year adjusted.

                                           Insert Table 7 here

   Table 7 shows that productivity changes for conglomerate acquisitions are significantly greater than zero
in Technological Change and, in particular, in Growth industries. In all windows, -1 to +1, +2, +3 and +4
we find that industry-adjusted productivity significantly increases. In contrast, plants purchased by single-
segment firms in these industries either show no significant increase or a slight decrease in productivity.
   In sum, growth by acquisition is greater for segments of firms that are organized as conglomerates.
Predicted financial dependence reduces the probability that a single-segment firm grows by acquisition, but
has a considerably smaller, if any, eﬀect on conglomerate segments. Consistent with Hypothesis 4, plants
acquired by conglomerate firms in Technological Change and Growth industries experience significant
increases in productivity post-acquisition.    These results are not consistent with agency theories that
predict that conglomerates overexpand into industries without good growth prospects and in which they
have little expertise.
   Overall, the analysis suggests that acquisition activity of conglomerates is consistent with Stein’s (1997)
model of the benefits of internal capital markets and the predictions about the eﬃcient reallocation of assets
within conglomerate firms in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002). These results are not consistent with models
that predict subsidization of poorly performing divisions or divisions with poor growth prospects.       The
results are also not consistent with agency or empire building models that predict expansion into industries
without considering the ex post prospects and productivity in these industries.

4.4   Capital Expenditures

We next examine the impact of predicted financial dependence and organizational form on capital expen-
ditures.   To test the eﬀect of financial dependence and organizational form on capital expenditures, we
interact predicted conglomerate firm status with predicted financial dependence.        In Table 8, we esti-
mate our capital expenditures regression for the four diﬀerent industry categories separately. Alternative


                                                     23
specifications using industry interaction variables, as in Table 5A, give similar results.

                                           Insert Table 8 here

   Table 8 shows that the eﬀects of financial dependence and conglomerate structure depend on industry
categories. Predicted financial dependence negatively aﬀects capital expenditures in all categories. How-
ever, the negative eﬀect of financial dependence is greatest for single-segment firms than for conglomerate
segments, as the interaction term, conglomerate status times predicted dependence, is positive and signif-
icant for all categories. We do find that this interaction term is significantly higher for Consolidation and
Growth industries versus Declining and Technological Change categories.
   Finally, the weighted average plant-level productivity of a segment is significantly related to investment
in all industry categories. This finding contrasts with the case of acquisitions where the eﬀect was only
present in growth industries. The relation between a segment’s productivity and its capital expenditures is
more robust than the relation between its productivity and the probability of within-industry acquisitions.
   As a robustness test, we also checked whether the same results hold when we consider only major
investments by firms. Whited (2002) shows that peripheral divisions of conglomerates make large invest-
ments more frequently that similarly sized single-segment firms. We rerun the regressions taking as our
dependent variable an indicator variables that takes the value 1 if the ratio of capital expenditures over
lagged capital stock employed by the segment exceeds the 90th percentile of this variable, industry ad-
justed. These regressions are more likely to pick up major investments by smaller segments because large
segments with many plants are more likely to be able to smooth their investment flows across time.
   These unreported regressions show that our results are robust across all industry categories. In each
case, single-segment firms not predicted to be financially dependent are most likely to invest the most, and
single segment firms predicted to be financially dependent invest the least. The investment of conglomerate
segments falls between these two levels, with those conglomerate segments predicted to be financially
dependent investing less than financially independent segments.        We also find that in every industry
category the more productive firms have a higher probability of a major investment than the less productive
firms.
   Comparing these results for capital expenditures with the results for acquisitions (Table 5 and 6A), we
find evidence consistent with Hypothesis 3, that the eﬀect of conglomerate organization on acquisitions
is stronger than it is on capital expenditures.     This evidence is of interest since the study of capital
expenditures has received the most attention by previous research.



                                                      24
4.5      New Plant Openings and Plant Exit

We next examine the eﬀect of predicted financial dependence and firm organization on new plant openings
and plant exit over across our industry categories. For new plant openings, we aggregate a firm’s plants
up into three-digit industries to examine whether a particular firm-segment acquires an additional plant.

                                                Insert Table 9 here

       Table 9 shows that in Growth and Consolidating industries predicted financial dependence has a sig-
nificant negative eﬀect on plant openings of for single-segment firms.              Conglomerate firms mitigate the
eﬀects of predicted financial dependence on new plant openings for their segments in Growth industries.
Table 9 shows that the key conglomerate interaction variable only aﬀects plant births in Growth industries
and Consolidation industries.21 As expected, we also find that segments with a higher number of plants
are more likely to open plants in all industry categories.

                                               Insert Table 10 here

       Table 10 examines plant exit over the diﬀerent industry categories.               We run these regressions at
the plant level and assign the dependent variable equal to one if the plant exits in a given year and zero
otherwise. Table 10 shows that the eﬀect of predicted financial dependence on plant exit is insignificant
in all categories except for Growth industries. The eﬀect of conglomerate firm status is limited. Plants
of conglomerate firms that belong to segments predicted to be financially dependent are less likely to
close in Declining industries as shown by the interaction variable conglomerate*predicted dependence.
In other industry categories this eﬀect is insignificant.           More eﬃcient plants are also less likely to be
closed down. Segment size aﬀects closure in two ways. As the number of plants in a segment increases,
closure probabilities increase. However bigger segments are less likely to be closed down, as shown by the
coeﬃcient on segment rank.22
       Overall, the results for new plant openings and plant exit diﬀer over our long-run industry categories.
New plant openings and plant exit depend on firm organizational form in several diﬀerent ways. First, in
growth industries, conglomerate firms that are predicted to be financially dependent have a significantly
higher probability of new plant openings compared to dependent single-segment firms. Second, the proba-
bility of new plant openings by private, single-segment firms are the most adversely aﬀected by predicted
  21
     Results in the working paper show that this eﬀect was robust to including public firm status variable.
  22
     Unpreported regressions show that public firms are more likely to close plants, significantly so in Consolidation and
Growth industries. However the interaction eﬀect of predicted public status with financial dependence was insignificant for
all industry categories.


                                                            25
financial dependence. Third, there is a more limited eﬀect of conglomerate organizational form and finan-
cial dependence on plant exit. In declining industries, conglomerate firms are less likely to close plants
of segments predicted to be financially dependent. However, this eﬀect is insignificant in other industry
categories. These results suggest that organizational form aﬀects exit and plant openings diﬀerently, most
likely because plant openings require significant resources, including the ability to integrate the new plant
into existing operations, while plant exit does not. The results are consistent with Hypotheses 2 and 4
that conglomerate firms have skills in integrating new acquisitions and providing resources that aﬀect large
decisions like acquisitions and plant openings in productive industry segments.


5      Conclusions

A growing corporate finance literature examines how multi-industry firms allocate investment across divi-
sions. This literature tacitly assumes industries do not diﬀer much and that the relevant diﬀerences can be
summarized by simple measures of investment opportunities. We argue that the competitive environment
of an industry depends on changes in long-run industry conditions. Industries in diﬀerent stages of their
life cycle diﬀer in the opportunities for profitable restructuring and in exploitable growth opportunities.
These diﬀerences in the competitive environment have the potential to alter the comparative advantage of
conglomerate multi-industry firms relative to single-industry firms. A comparative analysis of investment
by segments of conglomerates and single-industry firms has to take these diﬀerences into account. To this
end, we classify U.S. manufacturing industries into four diﬀerent long-run industry categories based on the
growth rates of real shipments and changes in the number of producers.
    We find evidence that the eﬀects of firm organization vary across these long-run industry changes. We
have four major results that show the importance of long-run industry conditions.

       First, in industries where shipments are growing, within-industry acquisitions and new plant open-
      ings are significantly aﬀected by firm organizational form. Conglomerates’ segments are much more
      likely to purchase a plant adding to their existing segments than are single-industry firms.        By
      contrast, capital expenditure rates are fairly stable across industries, segment size and firm organi-
      zation.

       Second, examining acquired plants post-acquisition, we find that plants acquired by conglomer-
      ate firms in Technological Change and, in particular, in Growth industries significantly increase in
      productivity post-acquisition.



                                                     26
       Third, we find evidence that within-industry acquisition rates are higher for conglomerates in growth
      industries when their divisions have high relative productivity versus their divisions in declining
      industries. Since the conglomerate eﬀect on acquisitions is stronger for segments of high productivity
      there does not appear to be subsidization of a conglomerate’s less eﬃcient segments.

       Fourth, for new plant openings, we find that there is a significant positive eﬀect of belonging to
      a conglomerate in growth industries.    Conglomerate firms oﬀset the eﬀects of predicted financial
      dependence on new plant openings in growth industries. The eﬀects on plant exit are more limited.

   These findings are consistent with the existence of benefits of internal capital markets as argued by
Stein (1997) and examined empirically by Khanna and Tice (2001) and Peyer (2001). The finding that the
probability of an acquisition in growth industries increases for conglomerate firms which have high produc-
tivity segments in growing industries and substantial other segments in declining industries are consistent
with the theoretical prediction in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002). These results are not consistent with
models that predict subsidization of poorly performing divisions or divisions with poor growth prospects.
The results are also not consistent with agency or empire building models that predict ineﬃcient expansion
into industries.
   These findings have important implications for the literature on conglomerates’ allocation of invest-
ment. This literature uses capital expenditures to proxy for investment by a segment. Thus, it leaves
out plant acquisition, which is an important component of conglomerate firms’ investment but is not an
important component of single-industry firms’ investment. We document large eﬀects of organizational
form on financial dependence on acquisitions and plant openings. The diﬀerences in these eﬀects of firm
organization are largest in growing industries. These eﬀect of organizational form on financial dependence
on acquisitions has not been previously identified and is even stronger than the usually studied relation
between conglomerate status and capital expenditures.
   Overall, these findings document important eﬀects of firm organization that vary over long-run changes
in industry conditions.    The findings are consistent with conglomerate in growth industries providing
resources that help business segments reduce or break the link between a segment’s predicted financial
dependence and its growth via acquisition and new plant opening decisions.




                                                    27
                                          REFERENCES
Bernardo, Antonio and Bhagwan Chowdhry, 2002, Resources, Real Options and Corporate Strategy,
    Journal of Financial Economics 63, 211—34.
Campa, Jose, and Simi Kedia, 2002, Explaining the Diversification Discount, Journal of Finance.
Chevalier, Judith, 2002, Why do firms undertake diversifying mergers? An examination of the investment
    policies of merging firms, Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Fluck, Z. and A. Lynch, 1999, Why Firms Merge and then Divest: A Theory of Financial Synergy, Journal
    of Business 72, 319-346.
Gertner, Robert H., David S. Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, 1994, Internal versus External Capital Markets,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 1211-30.
Ghemawat, Pankaj. ”Capacity Expansion in the Titanium Dioxide Industry.” The Journal of Industrial
   Economics 33, no. 2 (December 1984): 145-163.
–—, and Barry Nalebuﬀ. ”Exit.” The RAND Journal of Economics 16, no. 2 (summer 1985): 184-194
–—, and Tarun Khanna. ”The Nature of Diversified Business Groups: A Research Design and Two Case
    Studies.” Harvard Business School Working Paper Series, No. 97-043, 1996
Gort, Michael and Steven Klepper, 1982, Time Paths in the Diﬀusion of Product Innovations, Economic
    Journal 92 1982: 630-653
Graham, John, Michael Lemmon, and Jack Wolf, 2002, Does Corporate Diversification Destroy Value?,Journal
    of Finance.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
    Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jovanovic, Boyan, 1982, Selection and the Evolution of Industry, Econometrica; 50(3), 649-70.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
    Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jensen, Michael C. and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs
    and Ownership Structure, Journal of Finance and Economics 3, 305-360.
John, Kose, and Eli Ofek, 1995, Asset sales and the increase in focus, Journal of Financial Economics
    37, 105-126.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Michael Weisbach, 1992, The success of acquisitions: evidence from divestitures,
    The Journal of Finance 47, 107-138
Khanna, Naveen, and Sheri Tice, 2001, The Bright Side of Internal Capital Markets, Journal of Finance
   forthcoming.
Klepper, Steven and Elizabeth Grady, 1990, The evolution of new industries and the determinants of
    market structure. Rand Journal of Economics 21:24-44.
Klepper, Steven, 1996, Entry, exit, growth, and innovation over the product life cycle. American Economic
    Review 86:562-583.
–—, 1997, Capital structure and product market behavior: An examination of plant exit and investment
    behavior, Review of Financial Studies 10, 767-804.
Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets, Journal of
   Finance, 52, 83-109.
Lamont, Owen. and Christopher Polk, 2002, ”Does Diversification Destroy Value? Evidence From The
   Industry Shocks,” Journal of Financial Economics 63, 51-77.


                                                  28
Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel, 1992, Takeovers and corporate overhead, in Corporate Takeovers
    and Productivity, Frank R. Lichtenberg, ed.: (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Lucas, Robert, 1978, On the size distribution of business firms, Bell Journal of Economics 9, 508-23.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 1998, Asset Eﬃciency and the Reallocation Decisions of
   Bankrupt Firms, Journal of Finance.
–—, 2001, The Market for Corporate Assets: Who Engages in Mergers and Asset Sales and are there
    Gains?, Journal of Finance.
–—, 2002, Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate Resources Ineﬃciently Across Industries?, Journal of Finance.
Matsusaka, John G., and Vikram Nanda, 2001, Internal capital markets and corporate refocusing, Journal
   of Financial Intermediation.
Meyer, Bruce, 1990, Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells, Econometrica 58(4): 757 - 782.
Minton, Bernadette and Karen Wruck, 2001, Financial Conservatism: Evidence on Capital Structure
    from Low Leverage Firms, Working paper Ohio State University.
Mitchell, Mark L., and Harold J. Mulherin, 1996, The impact of industry shocks on takeover and restruc-
    turing activity, Journal of Financial Economics 41:2, 193-229
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1990, Do managerial objectives drive bad acqui-
   sitions, Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.
Opler Tim C., Sheridan Titman, 1994, Financial distress and corporate performance, Journal of Finance
    49, No. 3, 1015-1040.
Opler, Tim C., René M. Stulz, Lee Pinkowitz and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The Determinants and
    Implications of Corporate Cash Holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.
Peyer, Urs, 2001, Internal and External Capital Markets, Mimeo, University of North Carolina.
Rajan, Raghuram G., Henri Servaes and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The cost of diversity: The diversification
    discount and ineﬃcient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35-80.
Ravenscraft, David, and F.M. Scherer, 1987, Mergers, Sell-oﬀs, and Economic Eﬃciency (Brookings
    Institution, Washington, D.C.).
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets: divisional
    rent-seeking and ineﬃcient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537-2564.
Schlingemann, Frederik, P., Rene M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling, 2002, Asset liquidity and segment
     divestitures, Journal of Financial Economics.
Schoar, Antoinette, 2002, Eﬀects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity, Journal of Finance, 57
    2379-2403.
Shin, H. and Rene Stulz, 1998, Are Internal Capital Markets Eﬃcient? Quarterly Journal of Economics
    531-52.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
     approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1365.
Stein, Jeremy, 1997, Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources, Journal of
     Finance 52, 111-33.
Villalonga, Belen, 2003, Diversification discount or premium? New evidence from BITS establishment-
     level data, Journal of Finance, forthcoming
Whited, Toni, 2001, Is ineﬃcient investment the cause of the conglomerate discount?, Journal of Finance.



                                                  29
                                        Table 1
                              Long-Run Industry Conditions
Table presents summary statistics by long-run industry changes and organization over 25 years. Declining
(technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are industries that have long-run change in the real value
(PPI deflated) of industry shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest) fiftieth percentile and
the long-run change in the number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth percentile.
     Industry Classification /                                    Long-run (25 year) Change in:
          SIC code                                           Industry Shipments Number of Firms
     All Declining Industries - Average Change                    -41.95%              -34.64%
      Industries surrounding the average change in shipments
           332 Iron and Steel Foundaries                          -52.56%              -25.79%
           302 Rubber And Plastics Footwear                       -47.35%              -37.25%
           311 Leather Tanning And Finishing                      -47.15%              -47.88%
           271 Newspapers: Publishing and Printing                -41.88%              -40.48%
           341 Metal Cans And Shipping Containers                 -37.22%                1.42%

     All Technological Change Industries - Average Change             -28.41%                44.96%
     Industries surrounding the average change in shipments
          281 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals                          -30.53%                54.09%
          329 Abrasive, Asbestos, And Miscellaneous                   -28.59%                41.46%
          354 Metalworking Machinery And Equipment                    -25.92%                44.60%
          342 Cutlery, Handtools, And General Hardware                -22.55%                28.93%
          356 General Industrial Machinery And Equipment              -17.73%                54.00%

     All Consolidation Industries - Average Change                      1.75%               -10.22%
     Industries surrounding the average change in shipments
          228 Yarn And Thread Mills                                    -2.20%               -28.23%
          203 Canned, Frozen, And Preserved Fruits, Vegetables         -0.87%                -8.45%
          201 Meat Products                                             4.90%               -26.62%
          262 Paper Mills                                               6.88%               -23.46%
          227 Carpets And Rugs                                         15.97%               -15.72%

     All Growth Industries - Average Change                            42.99%                83.55%
     Industries surrounding the average change in shipments
          282 Plastics Materials And Synthetic Resins                  17.24%                61.43%
          381 Search, Detection, Navigation, Guidance                  36.39%               198.89%
          283 Drugs                                                    61.89%               123.85%
          308 Plastic Products                                        129.45%               161.42%
          366 Communications Equipment                                202.02%                90.84%

All average changes are significantly different across industry categories.
                                                                     Table 2
                                                  Investment, Acquisitions and Industry Conditions
Table presents investment and acquisition statistics by long-run industry changes and organization over 25 years. Declining
(technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are industries that have long-run change in the real value (PPI deflated)
of industry shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest) fiftieth percentile and the long-run change in the
number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth percentile.
                                                                                            Industry classifications
                                                                                                   Technological
                                                                            Declining               Change       Consolidation           Growth

Summary Statistics by Organizational Form
   Number of firms:      Single-segment firms                                     3,731                   3,378                  2,855      11,322
                         Multiple-segment firms                                     675                     867                    577       1,463
        Average number of segments for multiple segment firm                       6.53                    6.17                   5.62        4.81
        Percent of total segments of multiple-segment firms                    54.16%                  61.29%              53.18%          38.33%
        Percent of industry output produced by                                 64.70%                  69.18%              67.18%          63.18%
                               multiple-segment firms
Average annual plant-level cash flow / sales
                                                                                                                                                     d
        Plants of: All firms                                                  4.13%                   4.96%              6.72%           7.30%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Single-segment firms                                                3.65%                   3.11%              5.54%           5.61%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Multiple-segment firms                                              5.35%                   7.87%              9.76%           10.43%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Small firms                                                         0.53%                   1.76%              2.60%           3.71%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Large firms                                                         7.69%                   8.13%              10.82%          10.87%
                                                                                                                                                     d
            Large single-segment firms                                        7.48%                   6.59%               9.90%          9.26%
                                                                                                                                                     d
            Large multi-segment firms                                         8.02%                   9.49%              12.17%          12.56%

Average annual plant-level capital expenditures / lagged capital stock
                                                                                                                                                     d
        Plants of: All firms                                                  16.93%                 17.31%              17.59%          19.39%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Single-segment firms                                                17.24%                 18.10%              18.02%          20.09%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Multiple-segment firms                                              16.17%                 16.10%              16.49%          18.14%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Small firms                                                         16.14%                 17.33%              16.45%          18.88%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Large firms                                                         17.29%                 17.30%              18.03%          19.63%
Percent of total shipments growth accounted
   for by acquisitions
                                                                                                                                                     e
          Single-segment firms                                                5.31%                   7.42%              8.85%           9.05%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Multiple-segment firms                                              26.07%                 30.17%              30.71%          36.08%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Small firms                                                         15.95%                 21.25%              20.30%          24.61%
                                                                                                                                                     d
          Large firms                                                         20.08%                 24.56%              24.43%          28.52%
d,e
      Difference between Declining and Growth industries is significantly different from zero at the one-, five-percent level.
                                                  Table 3: Financial Dependence
Panel logit regressions examining the probability a division of a firm will invest more than its divisional cash
flow. Annual change in industry shipments is the change in industry shipments at the three-digit SIC code level
deflated by industry price deflators to give the real change in industry shipments. Industry capital intensity is
capital expenditures and lagged industry profitability are both divided by industry sales at the three-digit SIC
code level. Firm-industry productivity is a firm-industry fixed effect from a production equation estimated
using five years of lagged data. Relative odds ratios are the change in the relative likelihood of financial
dependence from a one unit increase in the variable. All regressions contain industry and year fixed effects.
(Robust standard errors that correct for autocorrelation within segments in parentheses).
Dependent Variable: Dependence = 1 if Divisional Investment > Divisional Cash Flow
                                                                                                 Change in Long-Run Shipments
                                                                            All Industries        Decline (-)   Growth (+)
Variables:
                                                                                             a                   a
Annual (Short-run) Change in Industry Shipments                                     -0.202             -0.221         0.112
          standard error                                                            (.054)              (.076)        (.081)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 0.798              0.802          1.119

Lagged Industry Profitability (Value Added/Shipments)                               -0.699 a           -1.014
                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                      -0.458
                                                                                                                                b

          standard error                                                            (.158)              (.238)         (.213)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 5.896              0.363          0.633

Industry Capital Intensity                                                           2.115 a           5.614 a        0.819 b
           standard error                                                           (.350)             (.395)         (.412)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 5.896           274.239           2.268

Firm-Industry Productivity: Fixed Effect (lagged)                                   -0.779 a           -0.772 a       -0.789 a
          standard error                                                            (.005)              (.007)         (.006)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 0.459              0.462          0.454
                                       2                                                     a
(Firm-Industry Productivity) (lagged)                                               0.044              0.005          0.071 a
          standard error                                                            (.003)             (.005)         (.003)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 1.044              1.005          1.074

log(firm size) (lagged)                                                             -0.577 a           -0.582
                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                      -0.576
                                                                                                                                a

            standard error                                                          (.013)              (.022)         (.017)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 0.562              0.559          0.562

log(firm size)2 (lagged)                                                            0.022 a            0.022 a        0.022 a
            standard error                                                          (.001)             (.001)         (.001)
                 relative odds ratio                                                 0.562              1.001          1.001

Number of Observations                                                             409,815           159,382         250,433

Psuedo R-squared                                                                      0.14             0.133            0.13

a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                                 Table 4: Firm Organization Status
Panel logit regressions examining the probability a segment of a firm will be part of a conglomerate
firm. Long-run change in industry shipments is the change in industry shipments at the three-digit
level over 1972-1997 divided by industry price deflators to give the real change. Annual change in
industry shipments is the annual change in industry shipments. Industry capital intensity is capital
expenditures divided by industry sales at the three-digit SIC code level, calculated in each year. Firm-
industry productivity is a firm-industry fixed effect from a production equation estimated using five
years of lagged data. Relative odds ratios are the change in the relative likelihood of financial
dependence from a one unit increase in the variable. All regressions contain industry and year fixed
effects. (Robust standard errors that correct for autocorrelation within segments in parentheses).
                                                                              Dependent Variable
                                                                                Conglomerate
                                                                                  Firm = 1
Variables:
                                                                                                  a
Long-run (25 year) change in industry shipments                                         0.243
          standard error                                                                (.019)
          relative odds ratio                                                           1.275
                                                                                                  a
Annual change in Industry Shipments                                                     -0.619
          standard error                                                                 (.085)
          relative odds ratio                                                            0.538
                                                                                                  a
Industry Capital Intensity                                                              5.175
           standard error                                                               (.546)
           relative odds ratio                                                        176.788
                                                                                                  a
Firm-Industry Productivity: Fixed Effect (lagged)                                       -0.119
          standard error                                                                 (.018)
          relative odds ratio                                                            0.888
                                        2                                                         a
(Firm-Industry Productivity) (lagged)                                                   0.158
          standard error                                                                (.019)
          relative odds ratio                                                           1.171
                                                                                                  a
log(firm size) (lagged)                                                                 3.024
            standard error                                                              (.042)
            relative odds ratio                                                        20.583

log(firm size)2 (lagged)                                                                -0.074    a

            standard error                                                               (.002)
            relative odds ratio                                                          0.928

Number of Observations                                                                409,815
Psuedo R-squared                                                                          0.57
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                               Table 5: Plant Acquisition
Regressions examine the relationship between plant acquisition, predicted financial dependence and firm organization.
Predicted dependence is the predicted probability of financial dependence using the specification of Table 3. The
growth (Consolidating, Technological Change) quadrant is when the change in real value of shipments is in the upper
(upper, lower) fiftieth percentile and change in the number of firms is in the upper (lower, upper) fiftieth percentile of
industries over 10 and 25 year periods. Conglomerate firm status is the predicted probability using the specifications
of Table 4. Productivity of segment is the weighted average of plant-specific productivity for that segment. All right-
hand-side variables represent values prior to the year of the acquisition. Relative odds ratios, which represent a change
in the relative odds of acquisition, can be obtained by taking the natural exponent of reported coefficients. All
regressions contain industry and year fixed effects. (Robust standard errors that correct for autocorrelation within
segments in parentheses).
                                                        Length of time used to determine life-cycle quadrants
Dependent Variable: Plant Acquisition                                               10 Year Window               25 Year Window

Variables:                                                                   coefficient         standard   coefficient       standard
                                                                                                   error                        error
Predicted financial dependence
               * Quadrant 1 Indicator: Declining                                     0.334        (.244)          0.179         (.162)
                                                                                             b                            a
                      * Quadrant 2 Indicator: Tech. Change                          -0.278        (.131)         -0.250         (.113)
                                                                                             b
                      * Quadrant 3 Indicator: Consolidating                         -0.355        (.156)         -0.214         (.198)
                                                                                             b                            b
                      * Quadrant 4 Indicator: Growth                                 1.066        (.485)         -1.037         (.456)
                                                                                             a                            a
Conglomerate multi-industry indicator (predicted)                                    3.135        (.070)          3.110         (.080)
                                                                                             a                            a
Segment rank within firm (1=largest)                                                 0.070        (.005)         -0.069         (.005)
Conglomerate*dependence*Quadrant 1 indicator                                        -0.042        (.244)          0.085         (.203)
                                                                                             a                            a
                      * Quadrant 2 Indicator: Tech. Change                           0.512        (.177)          0.330         (.120)
                                                                                             a                            a
                      * Quadrant 3 Indicator: Consolidating                          0.555        (.152)          0.779         (.230)
                                                                                             a                            a
                      * Quadrant 4 Indicator: Growth                                 1.319        (.440)          1.420         (.412)
Average Plant-level Productivity of segment (lagged)                                 0.021        (.083)          0.022         (.083)
Diversity: standard deviation of growth across segments                             -0.129        (.120)         -0.047         (.068)
                                                                                             a                            a
Number of Plants in Segment (lagged)                                                 0.028        (.002)          0.028         (.002)
Quadrant 2 Indicator: Tech. Change                                                   0.020        (.150)          0.387         (.714)
                                                                                                                          a
Quadrant 3 Indicator: Consolidating                                                  0.171        (.116)          2.786        (1.015)
Quadrant 4 Indicator: Growth                                                         0.089        (.115)         -0.186        (1.426)
                                                                                             a                            a
Constant                                                                            -4.785        (.155)         -7.434        (1.012)

Number of segment-years                                                            408,430                                    408,430
Psuedo R-squared                                                                   14.96%                                     15.05%
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                                                 Table 6A: Plant Acquisition in Growth Industries
Regressions examine the relationship between plant acquisition, predicted financial dependence and firm organization. Predicted
dependence is the predicted probability of financial dependence using the specification of Table 3. Conglomerate firm status are the
predicted probability using the specifications of Table 4. Productivity of segment is the weighted average of plant-specific
productivity residuals for that segment. All independent variables represent values prior to the year of the acquisition. Relative odds
ratios, which represent a change in the relative odds of acquisition, can be obtained by taking the natural exponent of reported
coefficients. All regressions contain industry and year fixed effects. (Robust standard errors that correct for autocorrelation within
segments in parentheses).

                                                                                          Growth Industries
Dependent Variable: Plant Acquisition                                                                                           Productivity-Split
                                                                                                                           Bottom 50%       Top 50%
Variables:
Predicted financial dependence                                                 -0.272 a    -0.661 a       -0.664 a              -0.460 a      -0.915 a
                                                                               (.081)       (.129)         (.129)                (.177)        (.190)

Conglomerate multi-industry indicator (predicted)                               3.689 a     3.504
                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                               3.507
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                  3.626
                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                               3.398
                                                                                                                                                        a

                                                                               (.063)      (.080)             (.081)             (.116)       (.113)

Segment rank within firm (1=largest)                                            0.044 a     0.044 a            0.044 a            0.044 a      0.043 a
                                                                               (.003)      (.003)             (.003)             (.004)       (.004)

Conglomerate*predicted dependence                                                           0.545 a            0.547 a            0.237        0.898 a
                                                                                           (.138)             (.138)             (.186)       (.208)

Relative productivity versus declining division                                                                0.145 c          -0.022         0.352 a
                                                                                                              (.081)             (.107)       (.117)
Average Plant-level Productivity of segment (lagged                             0.090 b     0.093 b            0.044              0.064        0.061
                                                                               (.045)      (.045)             (.050)             (.096)       (.088)

Lagged number of plants                                                      -0.0004      -0.0001        -0.0002               -0.0079        0.0041
                                                                               (.004)       (.005)         (.004)                (.007)        (.005)


Number of segment-years                                                      185,281      185,281        185,281                92,106        93,175

Psuedo R-squared                                                               21.8%       21.8%          21.8%                 21.7%         22.3%
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                          Table 6B: Economic Significance
Table presents predicted probabilities of a within-segment acquisition varying the predicted probability of
financial dependence from the 10th to the 90th percentile. All other variables are held at the sample medians
for the respective subset of data (multi- and single-segment). Predicted probabilities are calculated using
coefficients from Table 6A, column 2, for growth industries and a similar specification for declining industries.
High (low) productivity segments are segments above (below) the industry-year median. Predicted probabilities
for high productivity segments use coefficients from Table 6A, column 5. The last row for each quadrant uses
the medians of the data from the multi-segment firm subset but assume the firm is single segment, thus setting
the multi-segment firm indicator equal to zero.
Predicted financial dependence at the
following percentiles:                                 10th        25th       50th        75th       90th
                                                     Declining Industries: Quadrant 1
Multi-segment firms                                        4.38%      3.88%       3.52%      3.96%       4.54%
Single-segment                                             0.66%      0.41%       0.18%      0.10%       0.10%
Single-segment using medians of                            3.49%      2.34%       1.11%      0.40%       0.19%
data from multi-segment firms
                                                      Growth Industries: Quadrant 4
Multi-segment firms                                        6.08%      5.94%       6.26%      6.58%       7.30%
  Multi-segment firms: high-productivity segments          6.32%      6.15%       6.52%      7.07%       7.97%
Single-segment                                             0.69%      0.64%       0.57%      0.50%       0.44%
  Single-segment firms: high-productivity segments         0.65%      0.62%       0.57%      0.52%       0.49%
Single-segment using medians of                            5.46%      4.95%       4.55%      4.10%       3.28%
data from multi-segment firms
                                           Table 7: Productivity Changes Post Acquisition

Table presents changes in plant productivity for years after plant acquisition. Productivity is the sum of a firm
fixed effect plus the residual from an estimated industry production function. Changes in productivity are
industry and year adjusted. Declining (technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are industries
that have long-run change in industry shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest) fiftieth
percentile and the long-run change in the number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth
percentile. (Standard error of mean in parentheses).


                                    Industry Category               Years -1 to 1       Years -1 to 2       Years -1 to 3       Years -1 to 4
Declining Industries
 Plants purchased by Conglomerate Firms
                                                                                                                                                b
    Average Productivity Change                                             0.007               0.009              0.029               0.052
    Standard Error                                                         (.020)              (.023)             (.025)              (.027)
    Number of Plants                                                        1,365              1,146              1,011                  888
   Plants purchased by Single-Segment Firms
     Average Productivity Change                                            0.028               0.022              0.007               0.001
     Standard Error                                                        (.021)              (.024)             (.029)              (.034)
     Number of Plants                                                       1,057                 882                690                 552
Technological Change Industries
 Plants purchased by Conglomerate Firms
                                                                                    a                   a                   a
   Average Productivity Change                                              0.034              0.045              0.039               0.032 b
   Standard Error                                                          (.012)              (.013)             (.012)              (.016)
   Number of Plants                                                         3,681              3,305              2,980                2626
   Plants purchased by Single-Segment Firms
                                                                                                                            c
     Average Productivity Change                                           -0.012             -0.029              -0.042              -0.042
     Standard Error                                                        (.018)             (.021)              (.024)              (.027)
     Number of Plants                                                       1,554              1,289               1,004                 822
Consolidating Industries
 Plants purchased by Conglomerate Firms
   Average Productivity Change                                              0.010               0.016              0.017               0.022
   Standard Error                                                          (.012)              (.014)             (.015)              (.016)
   Number of Plants                                                         3,400              3,006              2,710                 2454
   Plants purchased by Single-Segment Firms
     Average Productivity Change                                            0.004               0.002             -0.012              -0.007
     Standard Error                                                        (.017)              (.020)             (.024)              (.025)
     Number of Plants                                                       1,829              1,458               1,167                 941
Growth Industries
 Plants purchased by Conglomerate Firms
                                                                                    a                   a                   a
   Average Productivity Change                                              0.041              0.053              0.048               0.046 a
   Standard Error                                                          (.008)              (.009)             (.010)              (.011)
   Number of Plants                                                         8,016              6,922              6,068                5191
   Plants purchased by Single-Segment Firms
                                                                                                        b
     Average Productivity Change                                            0.005             -0.025              -0.018              0.007
     Standard Error                                                        (.011)             (.012)              (.015)              (.017)
     Number of Plants                                                       4,600              3,720               2,820               2186
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                             Table 8: Capital Expenditures
Logistic regressions examine the relationship between firm organization, predicted financial dependence and firm
segment-level investment. Predicted dependence is the predicted probability of dependence using the specification of
Table 3. Conglomerate firm status is the predicted probability using the specifications of Table 4. Productivity of
plant is the plant-specific productivity. Declining (technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are
industries that have long-run change in industry shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest)
fiftieth percentile and the long-run change in the number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth
percentile. All regressions contain industry and year fixed effects. (Robust standard errors that correct for
autocorrelation within segments in parentheses).
Dependent Variable: Capital Expenditures / Lagged Capital Stock (Industry-Year Adjusted)

                                     Industry Category                    Declining             Tech. Change Consolidation       Growth
Variables:
                                                                                                               b             b               a
Predicted financial dependence                                                     -0.038            -0.038         -0.066         -0.071
                                                                                   (.057)            (.018)         (.028)         (.028)

Conglomerate multi-industry indicator (predicted)                                  0.014              0.002         0.006           0.003
                                                                                   (.012)             (.002)        (.006)          (.003)

Conglomerate*predicted dependence                                                  0.019              0.020 a       0.092
                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                    0.119
                                                                                                                                             a

                                                                                   (.013)             (.004)        (.015)          (.013)
                                                                                            c                  a             a               a
Segment rank within firm (1=largest)                                            -0.001               -0.002        0.0010            0.002
                                                                               (.0004)              (.0005)        (.0003)         (.0003)

                                                                                            a
Average Plant-level Productivity of segment (lagged)                               0.025              0.012 a       0.038 a         0.062 a
                                                                                   (.006)             (.002)        (.012)          (.011)
                                                                                            a                  b                             a
Number of industry plants (lagged)                                              -0.003              -0.0002        -0.0001        -0.0020
                                                                               (.0003)              (.0001)        (.0003)        (.0003)

                                                                                            a
Constant                                                                           0.301              0.382 a       0.291 b         0.352 a
                                                                                   (.021)             (.024)        (.029)          (.029)

Observations                                                                   92,282                74,472        68,869         195,266

Number of firm-industry segments                                               18,091                14,235        14,289          39,672

Adj. R-squared                                                                      0.20               0.19          0.21            0.26
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                                                  Table 9: New Plants
Logistic regressions examine the relationship between firm organization, predicted financial dependence and
new plant openings. Predicted dependence is the predicted probability of dependence using the specification of
Table 3. Conglomerate is the predicted probability that the firm produces in at least two different three-digit
industries using the specification of Table 4. Productivity of plant is the plant-specific productivity. Declining
(technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are industries that have long-run change in industry
shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest) fiftieth percentile and the long-run change in
the number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth percentile. (Robust standard errors in
parentheses). Odds ratios are the change in the relative likelihood of plant exit from a one unit increase in the
variable. Year and industry fixed effects are included.
Dependent Variable: New Plant Opening

                                     Industry Category                    Declining             Tech. ChangeConsolidation      Growth

Variables:
                                                                                                                           a               a
Predicted financial dependence                                                      0.023             0.119      -0.557          -0.461
         standard error                                                            (.128)            (.137)      (.158)           (.101)
         relative odds ratio                                                        1.023             1.126       0.573            0.631
                                                                                            a
Conglomerate multi-industry indicator (predicted)                                   2.032            2.084 a      2.203 a        1.818 a
       standard error                                                              (.094)            (.105)       (.122)         (.075)
       relative odds ratio                                                          7.629             8.037        9.052          6.160

                                                                                                                           b
Conglomerate*predicted dependence                                                  -0.240             0.367        1.248         0.780 a
       standard error                                                              (.255)            (.294)       (.252)         (.146)
       relative odds ratio                                                          0.787             1.443        3.483          2.181
                                                                                            a
Segment rank within firm (1=largest)                                               -0.066            -0.068 a    -0.107 a        -0.084 a
        standard error                                                             (.012)             (.107)      (.020)          (.007)
        relative odds ratio                                                         0.936              0.934       0.899           0.920

Average Plant-level Productivity of segment (lagged)                                0.153 c          0.118        0.130          0.062
        standard error                                                             (.088)            (.092)       (.097)         (.056)
        relative odds ratio                                                         1.165             1.125        1.139          1.064

                                                                                            a
Number of plants in segment (lagged)                                                0.052            0.078 a      0.046 a        0.096 a
       standard error                                                              (.004)            (.009)       (.004)         (.005)
       relative odds ratio                                                          1.053             1.082        1.047          1.101

Number of segment-years                                                            86,968            71,358      66,875         189,221

Number of firm-industry segments                                                   18,210            14,322      14,473          39,891
Psuedo R-squared                                                                    0.124             0.130       0.144           0.125
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
                                                    Table 10: Plant Exit
Plant-level logit regressions examine the relationship between firm organization, predicted financial dependence
and plant closing. Predicted dependence is the predicted probability of dependence using the specification of
Table 3. Conglomerate firm status is the predicted probability using the specification of Table 4. Declining
(technological change, consolidation, growth) industries are industries that have long-run change in industry
shipments over 1972-1987 in the lowest (lowest, highest, highest) fiftieth percentile and the long-run change in the
number of firms in the lowest (highest, lowest, highest) fiftieth percentile. Odds ratios are the change in the
relative likelihood of plant exit from a one unit increase in the variable. All regressions contain industry and year
fixed effects. (Robust standard errors that correct for autocorrelation within segments in parentheses).
Dependent Variable: Plant Exit

                                     Industry Category                   Declining              Tech. Change Consolidation        Growth

Variables:

Predicted financial dependence                                                      0.187              0.031        -0.041          -0.200
         standard error                                                            (.166)             (.232)        (.174)          (.123)
         relative odds ratio                                                        1.206              1.031         0.960           0.819
                                                                                                                              a
Conglomerate multi-industry indicator (predicted)                              -0.080                -0.125         -0.428          -0.509 a
       standard error                                                          (.139)                (.166)         (.139)           (.090)
       relative odds ratio                                                      0.923                 0.882          0.652            0.601
                                                                                            a
Conglomerate*predicted dependence                                              -1.255                -0.345         -0.363          -0.120
       standard error                                                          (.325)                 (.358)         (.371)          (.215)
       relative odds ratio                                                      0.285                  0.708          0.696           0.887
                                                                                            a
Segment rank within firm (1=largest)                                                0.044             0.030 a       0.044 a         0.031 a
        standard error                                                             (.004)             (.005)        (.005)          (.003)
        relative odds ratio                                                         1.045              1.030         1.045           1.031
                                                                                            a
Average Plant-level Productivity of segment (lagged)                           -0.369                -0.441 a       -0.386 a        -0.444
        standard error                                                         (.015)                 (.016)         (.016)          (.011)
        relative odds ratio                                                     0.691                  0.643          0.680           0.641
                                                                                            a                  a              a               a
Number of plants in segment (lagged)                                                0.009             0.008         0.004           0.015
       standard error                                                              (.001)             (.001)        (.001)          (.002)
       relative odds ratio                                                          1.009              1.008         1.004           1.015


Number of plant-years                                                        151,247                115,495        128,401         276,658

Number of firm-industry segments                                               18,209                14,322         14,472          38,891

Psuedo R-squared                                                                    0.03               0.04           0.04            0.04
a,b,c
        Significantly different from zero at the one-, five-, ten-percent level.
