NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTI-PRODUCT FIRMS AND PRODUCT SWITCHING
Andrew B. Bernard
Stephen J. Redding
Peter K. Schott
Working Paper 12293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12293
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2006

Bernard and Schott thank the National Science Foundation (SES-0241474), and Redding thanks the
Leverhulme Trust and Princeton University, for research support. This paper is a combination of papers
previously circulated under the titles “Multi-product Firms and the Dynamics of Product Mix” and “Product
Choice and Product Switching.” We are especially grateful to Esteban Rossi-Hansberg for helpful comments
and suggestions. We are also grateful to Marc Melitz, Sharon Oster, Peter Neary, John Sutton, John Van
Reenen, Stephen Yeaple and seminar participants at CEPR, Dartmouth, LSE, Princeton and Yale for helpful
comments. The research in this paper was conducted while Bernard and Schott were Special Sworn Status
researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Boston Research Data Center. Research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau or the
NBER. The paper has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. Bernard: 100 Tuck Hall,
Hanover, NH 03755, tel: (603) 646-0302, fax: (603) 646-0995, email: andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu.
Redding: Houghton Street, London, WC2A 2AE, tel: (44 20) 7955-7483, fax: (44 20) 7831-1840, email:
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk. Schott: 135 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06520, tel: (203) 436-4260, fax: (203)
432-6974, email: peter.schott@yale.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Andrew B. Bernard, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching
Andrew B. Bernard, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 12293
June 2006
JEL No. D21, E23, L11, L60
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the frequency, pervasiveness and determinants of product switching among
U.S. manufacturing firms. We find that two-thirds of firms alter their mix of five-digit SIC products
every five years, that one-third of the increase in real U.S. manufacturing shipments between 1972
and 1997 is due to the net adding and dropping of products by survivors, and that firms are more
likely to drop products which are younger and have smaller production volumes relative to other
firms producing the same product. The product-switching behavior we observe is consistent with an
extended model of industry dynamics emphasizing firm heterogeneity and self-selection into
individual product markets. Our findings suggest that product switching contributes towards a
reallocation of economic activity within firms towards more productive uses.
Andrew B. Bernard
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu
Stephen J. Redding
London School for Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk
Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

1.

2

Introduction

The extent to which resources are allocated to their most eﬃcient use is a core issue
of economics. Until now, research into industry dynamics has addressed this issue by
focusing almost exclusively on the contribution of firm entry to resource reallocation, i.e.,
whether newly created firms or plants are more productive than the dying firms and plants
they replace.1 This paper examines a new, “extensive” margin of firm adjustment, the
reassignment of resources that takes place within surviving firms as they add and drop, i.e.
“switch”, products.
Our analysis of product switching is made possible by our construction of a unique new
longitudinal dataset that tracks U.S. manufacturing output at the firm-product level across
quinquennial U.S. Manufacturing Censuses from 1972 to 1997. In this dataset, a “product”
is defined as one of approximately 1,800 five-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
codes, e.g., “Passenger Cars”.2 We observe the full set of products each manufacturing
firm produces in each year and analyze how incumbent firms’ product mix evolves for
the more than 140,000 firms that survive on average from one Census year to the next.
To our knowledge, these are the most comprehensive data on multi-product production
yet assembled; they are more detailed than the data contained in typical manufacturing
censuses, which record only the primary industry of firms or plants.
We find product switching to be frequent, widespread and influential in determining both
firm and aggregate outcomes. Nearly one-third of the increase in real U.S. manufacturing
shipments between 1972 and 1997 is due to the net adding and dropping of products by
continuing firms, a contribution to aggregate growth that dwarfs that of firm net entry, which
accounted for a five percent decline. On average, two-thirds of U.S. manufacturing firms
alter their mix of products between Censuses, and two-thirds of those firms change their
product mix by both adding and dropping at least one product. Switched products account
for a considerable fraction of individual firms’ activity, with added and dropped products
each representing roughly half of a switching firm’s total output. Adding and dropping also
exert considerable influence on the scope of firms, with an average of 47 percent of firms
1
There is a large empirical literature in macroeconomics on firm creation and destruction and their implications for industry dynamics and the firm-size distribution. See, for example, Albuquerque and Hopenhayn
(2002), Baily et al. (1992), Cooley and Quadini (2001), Dunne et al. (1989a,b), Foster et al. (2001, 2006),
and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright (2005) among others.
2
Throughout the paper we use the terms “product” and “good” to denote a five-digit SIC category.
We reserve the terms “sector” and “industry” to refer to two- and four-digit SIC categories, respectively.
Examples of industries and sectors are given in Section 2..

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

3

adding products outside their existing set of four-digit SIC industries between Census years.
Further analysis of how firms switch products reveals a surprisingly small role for mergers
and acquisitions. Fewer than 1 percent of firms’ product additions between 1972 and 1997,
for example, occur because of the acquisition of another firm’s plant. In fact, 94 per cent
of product additions occur within a firm’s existing production facilities. On the other
hand, while product switching does not imply ownership changes, ownership changes are
often associated with product switching: on average, 95 percent of firms engaging in M&A
concomitantly adjust their mix of products.
The trends we document are all the more striking given that our definition of a product,
though substantially narrower than the industries usually employed in panel microdata,
remains relatively coarse. The five-digit SIC category “Passenger Cars”, for example, does
not distinguish the station wagons, sports cars or other types of vehicles contained within
that product category. Indeed, given the unobserved changes firms presumably make to
their products within five-digit SIC product categories, our findings likely underestimate
the true importance of firms’ adjustments to their extensive margins.
In the second half of the paper we consider diﬀerent classes of explanations for the
product-switching behavior we observe and highlight features of the data that successful
future theories of the firm must incorporate. The first group of explanations we examine
focuses on factors that are product-specific but common across firms, such as demand
or supply shocks. Demand shocks might induce product switching by leading firms to
add “hot” products for which demand is rising and drop “cold” products for which it is
falling. Similarly, supply shocks associated with technological progress or international
trade and outsourcing might push firms to drop uncompetitive products in favor of goods
more consistent with U.S. comparative advantage.3 If demand or supply shocks were the
dominant forces accounting for product switching, products’ add and drop rates would
exhibit a negative correlation as all firms systematically add ascending products and drop
declining ones. In fact, we find products’ add and drop rates to be positively rather than
negatively correlated, indicating that while some firms are dropping a particular product,
others are adding it. This positive correlation is hard to reconcile with explanations of
product switching that are based purely on a net reallocation of activity from one group of
products to another.
A more compelling explanation of product switching is provided by a natural extension
3

Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006), for example, find that U.S. manufacturing firms are more likely to
switch out of industries where exposure to imports from low-wage countries is high.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

4

of existing models of industry dynamics (e.g. Jovanovic 1982, Hopenhayn 1992 and Ericson
and Pakes 1995) that receive support from empirical studies of firm creation and destruction
(e.g., Baily et al. 1992, Dunne et al. 1989a,b, and Foster et al. 2001, 2006). In these
models firms produce a single product, rendering firm creation and destruction equivalent
to product-market entry and exit. Here, we imagine a more general model where firms are
permitted to add new goods to their product mix over time by incurring product-specific
sunk costs of entry. Firms discover their initial productivity in a product after paying its
sunk cost of entry, with productivity being imperfectly correlated across product markets.
Firms drawing a suﬃciently high productivity become producers while firms drawing a
low productivity exit immediately, i.e., without ever commencing production. Once a firm
begins production of a new product, its actual or perceived productivity in that product
evolves over time as stochastic shocks to productivity or learning take place. Firms drop a
product when its productivity falls below the level needed for zero profitability. Dropping
a product does not necessarily end the life of a firm, however, because it may remain active
in other product markets where its productivity remains relatively high.4
This generalized model of firm (and industry) dynamics accords well with the stylized
product-switching facts noted above. In its steady-state equilibrium, the flow of firms that
add a product each period must equal the flow of firms that drop the product. As a
result, the model features equilibrium product adding and dropping that is consistent with
the frequency and pervasiveness of product switching observed in the data. Furthermore,
products’ equilibrium add and drop rates in the model are positively correlated, as in the
data. In the model, these rates depend upon products’ sunk costs of entry: products with
low sunk costs of entry exhibit high entry and high exit rates, and vice versa.
Additional aspects of firms’ extensive-margin adjustments suggest that product switching contributes towards a within-firm reallocation of resources to their best use. A key
implication of the firm dynamics model we describe is that firms add and drop products on
the basis of their relative productivity across products. In the model, firm-product productivity is correlated positively with firm-product output and firm-product tenure, i.e., the
length of time the firm has produced a product. In the data, the probability that a firm
drops a product does indeed vary negatively with firm-product output and tenure. We also
find evidence that a firm’s productivity is correlated positively across its products: single4

See Dunne et al. (1988, 1989b) for an empirical analysis of diversification as a form of market entry
distinct from plant birth. Dunne et al. (2005) investigate the relationship between the form of productmarket entry and plant death.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

5

product firms with relatively high productivity in their existing product are more likely to
add a new product to their mix of goods than a relatively low-productivity firm producing
the same initial product.
Though the generalization of existing theory we envision is consistent with many aspects
of product switching, it is challenged by other features of the data that relate to broader
questions about the boundaries of the firm and the determinants of firm dynamics. First,
though the model treats firms as bundles of products, it is silent on which products should
be co-produced within firms versus separately produced across firms. Our examination of
firms’ product portfolios reveals that firms are most likely to co-manufacture products within
the same industry or within similar industries (e.g., lumber and furniture or electronics and
instruments). Second, the relative contributions of firms’ intensive (output per product)
and extensive (number of products) margins in determining firm growth and the firm-size
distribution are not well understood. Finally, while the extended model predicts a positive
correlation between products’ add and drop rates, it is not clear why adding and dropping
frequently occurs within the same firm across Census years, and why the majority of this
reallocation occurs not only within firms but within their surviving production facilities.
Our unanswered questions about product switching mirror a lack of a theoretical consensus on the boundaries of the firm and the determinants of firm dynamics. Both topics
are areas of active research and one of the key contributions of the paper is to identify a new
dimension of firm behavior for emerging theories of the firm to explain. Empirical research
to date has concentrated either on product diversification at a point in time (e.g. Gollop
and Monahan 1991 and Baldwin and Gu 2005) or on the more discrete margin of firm entry and exit (e.g. Baily et al. 1992, Dunne et al. 1989a,b and Foster et al. 2001, 2006).
Existing theoretical work on multi-product firms, by contrast, focuses on issues associated
with managing a firm’s range of products at a particular point in time rather than changes
in product mix over time (e.g. Baumol 1977, Panzar and Willig 1977, Brander and Eaton
1984, Shaked and Sutton 1990 and Eaton and Schmidt 1994).
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our dataset.
Section 3 documents the contribution of product switching to aggregate U.S. manufacturing growth. Section 4 provides evidence on the prevalence and firm-level consequences of
product switching among U.S. manufacturing firms. Sections 5 and 6 discusses potential
explanations for the trends observed in the data. Section 7 explores the implications of the
results for work on the boundary of the firm. Section 8 concludes.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

2.

6

Data Description

Our dataset is derived from the U.S. Census of Manufactures of the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. Manufacturing Censuses
are conducted every five years and we examine data from 1972 to 1997. The sampling
unit for each Census is a manufacturing “establishment”, or plant, and the sampling frame
in each Census year includes information on the mix of products produced by the plant.
Very small manufacturing plants (referred to as Administrative Records) are excluded from
the analysis unless otherwise noted because data on their mix of products are unavailable.
Because product-mix decisions are made at the level of the firm, we aggregate the LRD to
that level for our analysis.
Our definitions of “sector”, “industry” and “product” are based upon 1987 Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) categories, which segment manufacturing output generally
according to its end use.5 We refer to two-digit SIC categories as sectors, four-digit SIC
categories as industries and five-digit SIC categories as products or goods.6 In the LRD,
aggregate manufacturing contains 20 sectors, 459 industries and 1848 products.
For each firm in each Census year, we record the set of products and therefore the set of
industries and sectors in which the firm produces. We also observe firms’ total and productlevel output, as well as their total input usage and wage bills. Output, capital stocks,
employment of production and non-production workers and wagebills are also observable
for individual plants within firms and can be aggregated up to the level of the firm. For
surviving firms, we track the products that firms add and subtract from their product mix
across Censuses. There are an average of 141,561 surviving firms in each Census year for
which such extensive-margin adjustments can be observed.7 The Data Appendix provides
further details concerning construction of the data.
Table 1 provides a sense of the relative level of detail between products and industries.
5
The SIC classification scheme was revised substantially in 1977 and again in 1987. Industry identifiers
from Censuses prior to 1987 have been concorded to the 1987 scheme. Our results are not sensitive to this
concordance: we get substantially similar results if we focus exclusively on the 1987 to 1997 portion of the
LRD.
6
Our terminology diﬀers from that of the Census Bureau. The Census refers to an five-digit SIC categories
as “product lines” and reserves the term “product” for seven-digit SIC categories. For a complete list of
five-digit products see U.S. Census (1996).
7
Roughly one-third of manufacturing firms exit between Census years. Our focus on surviving firms
excludes the product-changing activities of exiting and entering firms (i.e. we do not record an exiting firm
as a firm that drops all of its existing products). However, the theoretical model discussed below allows for
endogenous firm exit as well as product switching.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

7

The table lists the products captured by SIC industry 3357, “Nonferrous Wiredrawing and
Insulating”, which is one of the industries in SIC sector 33, “Primary Metal Industries”.
The thirteen products in this industry range from copper wire (33571) to fiber optic cable
(33579). Though these products share a grossly similar end use, they can diﬀer substantially
in terms of the materials and technologies required to manufacture them.
As indicated in Table 2, the typical two-digit manufacturing sector has 24 four-digit
industries and 76 five-digit products.8 The number of products per sector ranges from a
low of 12 in Leather (SIC 31) to a high of 187 in Industrial Machinery (SIC 35). Similarly,
the average number of products per industry within sectors ranges from a low of 1.1 in
Leather to a high of 5.1 in Printing & Publishing (SIC 27).9 Nonferrous Wiredrawing and
Insulating (SIC 3357), the industry highlighted in Table 1, is just one of 26 Primary Metal
Industries, and its products represent 14 percent (13/89) of the total number of products
in that sector.
Products vary substantially in terms of how they are produced both within and across
sectors. This variation is documented in the last four columns of Table 2, which report
products’ mean and standard deviation capital and skill intensity, by sector.10 Across
sectors, capital intensity varies from $15,000 per worker in Leather (SIC 31) to $494,000
per worker in Petroleum (SIC 29) while skill intensity ranges from 0.05 in Primary Metal
(SIC 33) to 0.26 in Printing & Publishing (SIC 27). Within-sector variation in products’
input intensities is demonstrated by the standard deviations reported in columns six and
eight. Coeﬃcients of variation for capital intensity are relatively high for Lumber (SIC 24),
Apparel (SIC 23) and Chemicals (SIC 28). For skill intensity, they are highest for Printing
& Publishing (SIC 27), Transportation (SIC 37) and Apparel (SIC 23).
We find that firms producing multiple products, industries and sectors dominate U.S.
manufacturing. This dominance is demonstrated in Table 3, which reports the share of U.S.
manufacturing firms and output accounted for by multi-product firms. Though the majority
8

Results for SIC 21, Tobacco, are excluded from Table 2 to conform with U.S. Census Bureau disclosure
guidelines.
9
There is a substantial amount of variation in the precision of industry and product classification. For
example, Passenger Cars (SIC 37111) and Combat Vehicles (SIC 37114) are examples of products in the
Motor Vehicle industry (SIC 3711), while Textbook Binding and Printing (SIC 27323) and Religious Books,
Binding and Printing (SIC 27323) are examples of products in the Book Printing industry (SIC 2732).
10
Capital and skill intensity are defined as the real book value of buildings and equipment per worker
($000), and the share of non-production workers in total employment, respectively. We do not observe input
usage (or wages) for individual products. Means and standard deviations for products are computed as the
average input intensity of all plants producing the product within the relevant sector. Means are weighted
by plant-product output. Results for Tobacco (SIC 21) are excluded due to Census disclosure guidelines.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

8

of firms (59 percent) produce just a single product, firms that produce multiple products
represent 91 percent of output, while firms present in multiple industries and sectors are
responsible for 87 percent and 76 percent of output, respectively.11 Table 3 also reveals
that the average multi-product firm produces 4.0 goods, that the average multi-industry
firm manufactures in 3.1 industries and that the average multi-sector firm is present in 2.5
sectors. Multi-industry and multiple-sector firms represent 70 percent and 30 percent of all
multi-product firms, respectively.
As indicated in Table 4, when firms do produce multiple products, output across them is
highly skewed. Each column of the table reports the average output share of each product,
in descending order, across all firms producing the noted number of products, up to ten.12
The average share of the largest product declines from 81 to 45 percent as the number of
products firms produce increases from two to ten. For firms manufacturing five or more
products, each product ranges from 1.5 to 2.5 times as big as the next largest product.13
Finally, Table 5 compares the characteristics of firms producing multiple products, industries and sectors versus those producing only a single product, industry or sector, respectively. Comparisons are for 1997 and are obtained by regressing the log of the noted
firm characteristic on a dummy variable indicating the firms’ status after controlling for
industry fixed eﬀects. As indicated in the table, multi-product firm shipments are on average 77 percent higher than those of single-product firms. Multi-product firms also exhibit
higher employment, wages, labor productivity (i.e., shipments per worker) and total factor
productivity than single-product firms.14 Similar diﬀerences are found with respect to firms
producing multiple industries and sectors. All of the diﬀerences displayed in the table are
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
3.

Product Switching and Aggregate U.S. Manufacturing

In this section we demonstrate that product adding and dropping by surviving firms
accounts for a large share — nearly one-third — of the aggregate growth in real U.S. manu11

Multi-product firms represent more than 80 percent of output in all two-digit SIC sectors. As a share
of firms, they range from 28 percent in Leather (SIC 31) to 54 percent in Food (SIC 20).
12
Firms producing at most ten products represent roughly 45 percent of all manufacturing value in the
pooled 1972 to 1997 sample.
13
If the distribution of product size within firms followed a power law, the ratio of each good’s output
share to the next-ranked product would be a constant. See the further discussion in Section 7.
14
For TFP, we use the multi-factor superlative index number of Caves et al. (1982) to construct the
percentage diﬀerence in firm productivity from the mean of all firms in the same primary four-digit SIC
industry in each Census year t.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

9

facturing output between 1972 and 1997.
It is straightforward to decompose the aggregate change in U.S. manufacturing output
from Census years t − 5 to t, ∆Yt into the sum of the output changes due to new (N ),
exiting (X), and continuing (C) firms,
X
X
X
∆Yjt +
∆Yjt +
∆Yjt ,
(1)
∆Yt =
j∈N

j∈X

j∈C

where j indexes firms. At each continuing firm, output growth can be decomposed further
into the contributions of added (A), dropped (D) and continuing (B) products,
X
X
X
∆Yijt +
∆Yijt +
∆Yijt ,
(2)
∆Yjt =
i∈A

i∈D

i∈B

where i indexes products. Finally, the output of goods produced in both periods can be
broken down into products that grow (G) and shrink (S),
X

∆Yijt =

i∈B

X

∆Yijt +

i∈G

X

∆Yijt .

(3)

i∈S

Substituting, we can write the aggregate change in U.S. manufacturing output as
"
#
X
X
X X
X
X
X
∆Yt =
∆Yjt +
∆Yjt +
∆Yijt +
∆Yijt +
∆Yijt +
∆Yijt .(4)
j∈N

j∈X

j∈C

i∈A

i∈D

i∈G

i∈S

The first two terms account for the contribution of firm entry and exit. Terms three and four
represent the change due to product adding and dropping by surviving firms, i.e., adjustments to firms’ extensive margins. The last two terms symbolize the growth and decline of
continuing firms’ continuing products, i.e., their intensive margins. Since aggregate output
in equation (4) is an unweighted sum of the individual terms, the percentage contribution
of each component is not sensitive to the choice of units of measurement or to the choice of
a particular theoretical framework.
Table 6 decomposes U.S. manufacturing growth according to these contributions for
each Census interval as well as for the entire 1972 to 1997 sample period. The decomposition is shown in percentage terms by dividing year-to-year changes by initial manufacturing
shipments. Census years are listed in column one and overall growth rates for the noted
periods are reported in column two. The remaining columns document the net and gross
contributions of firm entry and exit (columns three to five), firms’ extensive-margin adjustments (columns six to eight), and firms’ intensive-margin adjustments (columns nine to

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

10

eleven). The final row of the table reports the share of 1972 to 1997 growth accounted for
by each gross and net contribution over that period. Note that in each row of the table,
the net contributions sum to the overall change noted in column two.
From 1972 to 1997, real U.S. manufacturing output grew 65 percent, with increases in
each five year period except 1977 to 1982. As indicated in the second-to-last row of the
table, this 65 percentage point increase is the sum of a 3 percentage point decline due to
net firm entry, a 19 percentage point increase due to net product additions by continuing
firms, and a 50 percentage point increase due to the net growth of continuing products at
continuing firms. Thus, firms’ extensive-margin adjustments accounted for nearly one-third
— 29 percent — of the change in real U.S. manufacturing shipments over the sample period.15
Table 6 also demonstrates the substantial “excess” reallocation of economic resources
associated with product switching.16 Between 1972 and 1997 gross product additions raised
aggregate manufacturing output by 189 percent while gross product deletions reduced it by
170 percent. These gross contributions are quite large compared to the increase of 19
percent from net product adding, indicating that firms altered their productive capacity
far more substantially than was needed to amass their net contribution to overall growth.
They are also larger than the gross intensive-margin adjustments, which were 127 percent
and -77 percent, respectively. While a substantial literature examines excess reallocation of
resources due to entry and exit of firms, the causes and consequences of such reallocation
within surviving firms has received scant attention.
4.

Product Switching

This section documents the prevalence and impact of product adding and dropping by
U.S. manufacturing firms from 1972 to 1997. It also examines the extent to which firms
adjust their extensive margins at existing facilities rather than via merger and acquisition.
4.1.

The Frequency of Product Switching

We document the prevalence of product switching by dividing firms into four exhaustive
and mutually exclusive groups based on the manner in which they alter their product mix
15

A similar decomposition (not shown but available upon request) performed according to plants rather
than firms indicates that extensive-margin adjustments at the plant level account for 34 percent of real
shipment growth.
16
The use of the term “excess reallocation” originates in the literature on job creation and destruction in
Davis and Haltiwanger (1992).

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

11

between Census years. Possible actions are: (1) None - the firm does not change its mix of
products; (2) Drop - the firm only drops products; (3) Add - the firm only adds products;
and (4) Both - the firm both adds and drops (i.e., “churns”) products.
Table 7 reports firm activity across these dimensions for the pooled 1972 to 1997 dataset.
Cells in the top panel of the Table report the average percent of firms reporting each activity
across five-year Census intervals, while cells in the bottom panel report percentages weighted
by firm output. Figures in the table are computed for surviving firms only.17 The three
columns in each panel report results for all firms, single-product firms and multi-product
firms, respectively.
As indicated in the upper panel of the table, 68 percent of all surviving firms alter
their product mix every five years, 12 percent by dropping at least one product, 11 percent
by adding at least one product and 45 percent by both adding and dropping at least one
product.18 Comparison of these results with those in the two adjacent columns indicates
that single-product firms are more likely to leave their product mix unchanged than multiproduct firms (46 percent versus 11 percent). Note that single-product firms cannot Drop
and survive.
Product switching is even more frequent when weighted by firm output, indicating that
large firms are relatively more likely to add and drop products than small firms. As indicated
in the bottom panel of the Table 7, an average of 93 percent of all manufacturing output
is produced by firms that change their product mix across Census years. Firms that churn
products account for the largest share of output, at 81 percent.19
4.2.

The Impact of Product Switching

We quantify the firm-level impact of product switching along three dimensions. First, we
show that product adding frequently pushes firms into new industries and sectors. Second,
we demonstrate that newly added and dropped products represent a sizeable portion of firm
17

Firms that enter and exit are by definition “adders” and “droppers” respectively. We exclude them to
focus on product turnover at incumbents.
18
The statistics in Table 7 exhibit no systematic variation over time: the share of firms engaging in each
activity was 30, 12, 14, and 44 percent for None, Add, Drop, and Switch during the 1972 to 1977 interval
and 33, 14, 12, and 41 percent, respectively, over the 1992 to 1997 interval. Firms also do not appear to be
switching into and out of the same products over time. Re-adding a formerly dropped product represents
less than 7 percent of all product switches observed in the data.
19
Product switching pervades all sectors of U.S. manufacturing. The average share of firms reporting any
product-switching activity ranges from a high of 78 percent in Printing & Publishing (SIC 27) to a low of
43 percent in Leather (SIC 31), confirming that the prevalence of product switching is not driven by high
levels of activity in a small number of sectors.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

12

activity. Finally, we report significant relationships between product switching and changes
in firm performance.
Product switching frequently induces firms to extend or contract the range of industries
and sectors they produce. Table 8 compares extensive-margin adjustments across three
levels of aggregation — products (column 2; reproduced from Table 7), industries (column
three) and sectors (column four) — using the same typology of activities introduced above.
Industry or sector adding refers to firms adding at least one product outside its existing
set of industries or sectors. Likewise, industry or sector dropping indicates that firms have
dropped all products in a given industry or sector.
The first row of the Table records the average share of firms making no adjustments
between Census years. As indicated, firms generally switch products within industries:
product switching (68 percent) is more prevalent than industry switching (47 percent),
while industry switching is more frequent than sector switching (21 percent). This relative
ordering is intuitive given that jumps between two-digit sectors are likely to be more extreme
than shifts within four-digit industries. Nevertheless, product adding does induce an average
of 34 percent of firms to enter at least one new industry between Census years, and 14
percent of firms to break into at least one new sector. To the extent that adding industries
and sectors requires adopting unfamiliar production and distribution technologies, these
percentages suggest that product switching often involve substantial changes in the nature
and scope of the firm.
Table 9 reveals that a substantial fraction of multi-product firm output is accounted for
by recently added or about-to-be dropped products. The first row of the table reports the
average share of output in year t comprised by products added between Census years t − 5
and t among firms that do any adding. The second row of the table reports a similar share
with respect to products dropped between Census years t and t + 5. Column two reports
averages across all added and dropped products, while columns three and four are restricted
to adds and drops that extend or contract the set of industries and sectors firms produce,
respectively. As indicated in the second column of the table, recently added products represent an average of 49 percent of output across multi-product firms, while about-to-be
dropped products account for an average of 46 percent of output. The remaining columns
demonstrate that 26 percent (8 percent) of current period output is due to industries (sectors) that are new to the firm, while 23 percent (9 percent) percent of current period output
is in industries (sectors) that the firm will have abandoned by the next Census year. These
results reinforce the message of Table 8, which is that extensive-margin adjustments entail

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

13

relatively large changes in firm activity.
To provide some descriptive statistics on the relationship between product switching
and firm outcomes we consider simple OLS regressions of changes in firm characteristics
between Census years on dummy variables capturing contemporaneous product switching
behavior,
∆Zjt = αt + αn + β 1 Dropjt + β 2 Addjt + β 2 Bothjt + εjt .

(5)

where ∆Zjt represents the annualized log diﬀerence in a firm outcome between Census
years t − 5 and t, αt and αn represent year t and industry n fixed eﬀects and Drop, Add and
Both are defined as above.20 The firm characteristics we consider are output, employment,
average wage per worker, labor productivity and total factor productivity.21
Regression results, reported in Table 10, include all firms over the pooled 1972 to 1997
sample period. Each row of the table reports results for a diﬀerent firm-outcome regression.
Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the industry level are reported in parentheses
below coeﬃcients. The number of firm-year observations included in each regression as well
as each regression’s R2 are reported in the final two columns of the table.
As indicated in the table, firm performance as well as input use are significantly correlated with firms’ extensive-margin adjustments. Predictably, output and employment
growth increases with product adding and declines with product dropping. Firms that
both add and drop products across Census years exhibit both increasing employment and
output. Wages, on the other hand, rise with all extensive-margin adjustments.
The last two rows of the table report results for two measures of productivity. Labor
productivity is positively correlated with all extensive-margin adjustments, which is understandable given the coeﬃcients reported separately for output and employment. Total
factor productivity, in contrast, rises with product adding as well as with product switching, but declines with product dropping. The decline in TFP at firms that drop products
is consistent with a decline in capital productivity that is more precipitous than the rise
in labor productivity, i.e. output falls following product dropping and it takes time for the
capital stock to adjust.
20
Firms are assigned to the industry which represents the largest share of their output. The results are
not sensitive to this assignment.
21
As noted in footnote 14 above, we use the multi-factor superlative index number of Caves et al. (1982)
to construct the percentage diﬀerence in firm productivity from the mean of all firms in the same primary
four-digit SIC industry in each Census year t. Computing TFP for multiple-product firms is problematic
because the grouping of firms into appropriate industries is imprecise. See, for example, Bernard, Redding
and Schott (2005) and De Loecker (2005). We include here for comparison purposes.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

14

We caution that these results are merely intended to provide descriptive statistics on
the correlation between firm outcomes and the decision to add and drop products. They
show that adjustments to product mix are associated with changes in observed firm characteristics. Because the determination of product mix is itself endogenous, the regression
coeﬃcients capture both the correlation between changes in firm outcomes and the nonrandom decision to add or drop products, as well as the impact of product-mix adjustments
on firm outcomes conditional on the decision to add or drop products.
We now examine the method by which firms switch products over time before moving
on in Section 5 to concentrate on the issue of how extensive-margin adjustments themselves
can be modeled.
4.3.

How Product Switching Occurs

There are a variety of ways in which firms change products. They can add goods
at existing plants, at newly constructed facilities, or by acquiring an existing plant from
another firm. Similarly firms can drop products at continuing plants, by closing plants or
by selling plants to another firm. Surprisingly, we find that very few product-mix changes
occur because of mergers and acquisitions; the vast majority take place within firms’ existing
facilities.
Table 11 reports the distribution of product adds (top panel) and drops (bottom panel)
according to how they are accomplished. As indicated in the first columns of each panel,
94 percent of added and dropped products, respectively, are added and dropped by existing
plants. The role of mergers and acquisitions (M&A), in particular, is exceedingly small: less
than 1 percent of both adds and drops are the result of plant acquisitions or divestitures.
M&A activity possesses a relatively more pronounced — though still small — association with
sector switching. On average, 1.9 and 1.4 percent of firms add and drop sectors via M&A,
respectively.
Though product switching is not synonymous with M&A, M&A is tightly linked with
product switching. Table 12 compares product- and sector-switching activity according to
whether or not firms concomitantly acquire or divest a plant. As indicated in the table,
firms involved in an ownership change are relatively more likely to change their product
mix. An average of 95 percent of firms that engage in M&A also alter their product mix,
compared with an average of 68 percent for firms that do not participate in an acquisition or
divestiture. For sector switching the importance of M&A is even more stark: the analogous
percentages are 60 and 21 percent.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

15

Taken together, the results in this section establish that virtually all product switching
is done at firms’ existing plants while very little of it is the result of M&A. However, firms
that undergo ownership changes are much more likely to alter their mix of products and
industries than firms with no ownership changes.
5.

Why Do Firms Switch Products?

In the preceding sections we have shown that product switching by U.S. manufacturing
firms is frequent, often occurs within firms’ existing plants, may span diverse activities,
involves a substantial proportion of firm output, and makes a notable contribution to firm
and aggregate growth. In this section we examine alternative explanations for this behavior, distinguishing between those that are product-specific, firm-specific, and firm-productspecific. Our empirical results suggest that firm-product-specific explanations are the most
compelling, and we provide evidence that a natural extension of existing models of industry
dynamics is able to explain a number of aspects of product switching.
5.1.

Product- or Firm-Specific Explanations

One class of explanations for product switching emphasizes forces that are productspecific but common to all firms, for example shocks to products’ relative demand or supply. While demand shocks might be driven by consumers’ jumping from unfashionable
to fashionable products over time, supply shocks might result from changes in production
technologies or trade liberalization. Because both of these explanations emphasize a net
reallocation of economic activity between groups of products, they imply a negative correlation between products’ add and drop rates: “hot” products should be added but not
dropped while the reverse should be true of “cold” products.
Figure 1 displays the mean rate at which five-digit SIC manufacturing products are
added and dropped by U.S. manufacturing firms over the 1972 to 1997 sample period. A
product’s add and drop rates in year t are computed as the number of firms adding and
dropping the product, respectively, between Census years t − 5 and t divided by the average
number of firms producing the product in both years.
As shown in the figure, there is a clear positive correlation between the rates at which
U.S. manufacturing products are added and dropped. This correlation, which is statistically significant at conventional levels, indicates that the extensive-margin adjustments we
observe in the data cannot be explained solely in terms of a net reallocation of economic

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

16

activity from one group of products to another. Although the fact that add and drop rates
do not lie perfectly along a 45 degree line indicates that there is some net transfer of output
across products in the data, other forces are also clearly at work.
A second class of explanations for product switching focuses on factors that are specific
to firms but common to all products. A positive productivity shock to all of a particular
firm’s manufacturing facilities, for example, might increase the profitability of all of the
firm’s products and thereby induce the firm to add a marginal product that it previously did
not find it profitable to produce.22 Such explanations, however, are hard to reconcile with
the fact, reported in Table 7, that firms frequently add and drop products simultaneously
across Census years. That stylized fact suggests that firm-specific shocks diﬀerentially aﬀect
products; we refer to such explanations as firm-product-specific in the next section.23
A more fundamental diﬃculty for both firm- and product-specific explanations of product switching is that firm-product characteristics are found to be influential determinants of
product switching even after controlling for the characteristics of both firms and products.
In Section 6, below, we show that firms are more likely to drop products when firm-product
output is relatively small and when firm-product tenure is relatively short.
One remaining possibility is to think of firm- and product-specific explanations working
in tandem. Suppose, for example, that there is both a positive shock to a firm’s productivity
that is symmetric to all of its products and, at the same time, a negative, economy-wide
shock to the profitability of just one the firm’s products. In this case, the positive firmspecific shock may induce the firm to add one or more new products while the negative
product-specific shock may drive the firm to drop that particular product. This explanation
is consistent with simultaneous product adding and dropping across Census years noted
above, but it imposes the strong assumption that there are no idiosyncratic factors that
aﬀect the profitability of a firm-product pair.
A simple empirical inquiry indicates that this assumption is both implausible and rejected by the data. Regressing a dummy for whether firms drop products between Census
years on a full set of firm fixed eﬀects in addition to a full set of product fixed eﬀects, we find
22

See Chandler (1920) for one of the classic early discussions of a firm’s trade-oﬀ between scale and scope.
One way of reconciling simultaneous adding and dropping with a firm-specific model of product switching
is to argue that the “simultaneity” observed in Table 7 is entirely due to time aggregation, i.e., the fact that
we observe firms across five-year intervals rather than annually. Concurrent adding and dropping observed
across five-year intervals could be driven by annual productivity shocks that are exclusively firm specific and
either uncorrelated or negatively correlated over time. One or two years of positive shocks followed by one
or two years of negative shocks, for example, could push the firm to add one set of goods and drop another.
23

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

17

R2 s of just roughly 50 percent.24 These results imply an important role for idiosyncratic
factors that are specific to individual firm-product pairs.
5.2.

The Interactions of Firms and Products

An alternative class of explanations for the product switching we observe among U.S.
manufacturing firms emphasizes the interactions of firm and product attributes. Firm
shocks, such as the accumulation of R&D knowledge or the substitution of one management
team for another, may have uneven eﬀects across products. As a result, the profitability
of products not currently manufactured by the firm may rise relative to those that are. If
some factors of production (e.g. managerial time) are in limited supply, the firm may find it
profitable to add a new product whose relative profitability has risen and drop an existing
product whose relative profitability has fallen. Lucas (1978), for example, emphasizes the
inelastic supply of managerial talent in a model explaining relative firm size. Klette and
Kortum (2004), on the other hand, explore the role of innovation in determining a firm’s
scope across product markets.
Firm-product-specific explanations of product switching also encompass the existence
of product shocks that have asymmetric eﬀects across firms. Rossi-Hansberg and Wright
(2005), for example, emphasize product-specific shocks to human capital accumulation in
influencing the distribution of firm size. Alternatively, skill-biased technological change that
raises the skill intensity of a good’s production may induce skill-abundant firms to add the
product while driving skill-scarce firms to drop it.25
More generally, firm-product-specific accounts of product switching emphasize factors
that are idiosyncratic to individual firm-product pairs. One set of such explanations focuses
on product sunk costs of entry and producer heterogeneity within and across product markets. As noted above, theoretical models incorporating these elements already are employed
to explain firm creation and destruction. Our empirical analysis of product switching, however, indicates that the insights of these models possess much wider relevance as they can
be applied to surviving firms’ adjustments to their extensive margins.
In existing models, firms generally pay an up-front sunk cost to create the firm, after
which ex ante uncertainty concerning firm productivity is resolved. This uncertainty either
takes the form of stochastic shocks to firm productivity (as in Hopenhayn 1992, Ericson
24

These OLS regressions take the form described in equation (6) of Section 6. below.
The substitution of products that are skill-intensive for those that are less intensive within firms and
industries may help explain the within-firm and within-industry skill-upgrading observed in U.S. manufacturing since the early 1980s (see Riggs and Zarotiadis 2005).
25

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

18

and Pakes 1995, Melitz 2003 and Bernard, Redding and Schott 2006) or learning about
an uncertain value of true firm productivity (as in Jovanovic 1982).26 In both classes of
models, if productivity falls below some threshold value, firms endogenously exit. Steadystate equilibria feature a constant mass of active firms, with the result that the flow of new
firms incurring the sunk cost and starting production must equal the flow of existing firms
choosing to exit. High rates of firm entry and exit are associated with high sunk costs,
while low rates are associated with low sunk costs.27
In a similar way, a compelling explanation of product switching has surviving firms
facing ex ante uncertainty about their productivity in new (to the firm) product markets.
To enter a new product market, the firm must incur a product-market-specific sunk cost
of entry. The firm begins production after paying the sunk entry cost for the new market
(i.e., adds the new product) if the productivity draw for the new product is above the
threshold at which production is profitable. Firm-product productivity evolves over time
as stochastic shocks to productivity occur or learning takes place. The firm exits a product
market (i.e., drops a product) if actual or revealed firm-product productivity falls below
the zero profitability threshold. In equilibrium, the flow of firms adding the product equals
the flow of existing firms that drop it, yielding a positive correlation between products’ add
and drop rates.
Several of the stylized facts we document are consistent with this framework. In particular, the frequency and pervasiveness of product adding and dropping by U.S. manufacturing
firms in our sample are highly suggestive of product switching occurring in equilibrium. This
feature of the data accords with sunk entry cost models, where the steady-state flow of firms
that add a new product would equal the steady-state flow of firms that drop the product.
6.

Empirical Implications of Firm-Product Explanations

In this section we examine additional implications of models featuring product sunk
costs of entry and stochastic firm-product productivity.
6.1.

Covariation Between Product Adding and Dropping

Product sunk cost of entry models imply a positive correlation between the rate at which
surviving firms add and drop products. This correlation further implies that gross product
26

For models of endogenous sunk costs, see Sutton (1991).
Plant entry and exit rates are strongly positively correlated across industries in many countries. See for
example Dunne et al. (1988) for the United States and Disney et al. (2003) for the U.K..
27

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

19

adding and dropping in each product be large relative to their net eﬀect: at the limit,
if product add and drop rates lined up along the 45 degree line, the net contribution of
adds and drops would be zero while absolute value of each gross contribution would exceed
zero for all products. As noted above we find a positive correlation between products’ add
and drop rates in Figure 1. This finding accords with the results of the decomposition of
aggregate manufacturing growth reported in Table 6, where the gross contributions of firms’
extensive-margin adjustments to output growth are large relative to their net contribution
in every year of the sample.
6.2.

Selection Within Firms and Product Markets

Another implication of product sunk costs of entry models is that firms retaining production of a particular product should be systematically more productive in manufacturing
that product than firms choosing to drop it. In the models of Hopenhayn (1992) and Jovanovic (1982), firm productivity is positively correlated with firm output as well as the
age of the firm. Application of this relationship to product market entry suggests that
firms opting to drop a product should have relatively low output of the product and should
have produced the product for a relatively short period of time compared with other firms
electing to continue manufacturing the product.28
Both of these implications are consistent with the data. Table 13 reports OLS29 regression results of a dummy indicating that a firm drops a product between Census years 1992
and 1997 on firms’ 1992 relative product size (Size jit ) and tenure in the product market
(Tenure jit ) as well as relative firm size (Size jt ) and firm age (Age jt ) and the number of
products the firm produces (Products jt ),
Dropjit = αi + β 1 Size jit + β 2 Tenure jit + β 3 Size jt + β 4 Age jt + β 5 Products jt + εjit ,(6)
where, as above, j and i index firms and products, respectively.30 Very similar results hold
for other years in the data.
Firm-product size and firm-product tenure are measured relative to their averages for
the product via log diﬀerencing in each Census year. As a result, they control for diﬀerences
28

It is not possible to directly measure productivity of a product within a firm in the data.
We use an OLS linear probability model here in order to include firm and product fixed eﬀects. Inclusion
of these fixed eﬀects in a logistic regression is impractical given the size of our sample.
30
We examine these implications in the context of product dropping because construction of an analogous
product-adding sample is impractical given the size of our dataset. In each year, there are on average 140,000
firms, each of whom can add one or more of over 1848 products.
29

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

20

across products in output and tenure, both at a point in time and over time. Similarly,
firm size and age are measured relative to the average of firms producing the same mix
of products, by year.31 Additional specifications include firm fixed eﬀects, product fixed
eﬀects, and both sets of fixed eﬀects together.
The first column of Table 13 reports regression results when fixed eﬀects are excluded.
As shown in the first two rows, firms are less likely to drop a product if their shipments and
tenure are larger than other firms producing the same product. In contrast, results in the
third and fourth rows of the column reveal that firms are more likely to drop a product if
their total shipments across all products are larger and if they are older than other firms
producing the same product mix.32
The statistical significance of the firm-product variables, after controlling for the analogous characteristics of the firm, provides support for firm-product-based explanations that
emphasize factors idiosyncratic to firm-product pairs. In particular, the negative coeﬃcients
on firm-product relative size and age directly support the predictions of product sunk cost
models and suggest that purely firm-based explanations for product switching that neglect
factors idiosyncratic to the firm-product are incomplete. Since the firm-product variables
are measured relative to the average of all firms in the product market, the results also cast
doubt on exclusively product-specific explanations of product switching.
The remaining columns of Table 13 bolster this conclusion by demonstrating that the
regression results are robust to the inclusion of a full set of firm fixed eﬀects, a full set of
product fixed eﬀects, as well as full sets of both firm and product fixed eﬀects. These fixed
eﬀects control for all unobserved firm- or product-specific considerations that may influence
the probability with which a product is dropped. We note that firm-specific covariates are
dropped in the last two columns of the table due to the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects.
The finding that firm relative size and age are positively correlated with product dropping is at first surprising given that the literature on firm entry and exit finds these variables
to be negatively correlated with the probability of firm death. However, the distinction between a firm’s exit from individual product markets and the destruction of the firm is
important in resolving this tension. Our finding that firm-product relative size and tenure
are negatively correlated with product dropping exactly parallels the finding for firm death.
31

The correlation of Sizejit and Sizejt is 0.12 while the correlation of Agejit and Agejt is 0.26. Both
correlations are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
32
While measuring productivity for multi-product firms is problematic (see Bernard et al. 2005 and De
Loecker 2005), a similar pattern of results (available upon request) is found in analogous regressions that
also control for firm labor productivity or TFP.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

21

Interestingly, our results suggest that large and old firms may be more likely to survive
precisely because they of their ability to move in and out of individual product markets.33
The results in Table 13 have broader implications as well. Above, we find that firms’
extensive-margin adjustments are an important component of aggregate U.S. manufacturing
growth. Here, we demonstrate that firm-product drops exhibit systematically lower relative
size and tenure than surviving firm-product pairs. To the extent that relative size and tenure
are positively correlated with firm-product productivity, our findings provide evidence of
systematic reallocation of economic activity towards higher productivity output both across
products within firms as well as across firms within manufacturing. These findings suggest
that existing studies of industry dynamics likely underestimate the role of reallocation in
overall economic growth: by focusing almost exclusively on the birth-death margin, they
neglect surviving firms’ extensive margin.
6.3.

Firm Productivity and Product Switching

Models with product sunk costs of entry allow for the possibility that a firm’s productivity in one product market is correlated with its productivity in other markets. If this
correlation is positive, another implication of the product sunk cost models is that, among
firms with the same product mix, the firms with the higher productivity should be more
likely to add a new product. The intuition for this implication is straightforward: with
productivity positively correlated across product markets, high productivity firms are more
likely to draw a productivity above the threshold needed to sustain entry.
This implication is also consistent with the data. To examine it, we focus on singleproduct firms because this restriction enables us to abstract from problems of measuring
productivity in multi-product firms (see Bernard et al. 2005 and De Loecker 2005). Table 14
reports OLS34 regression results of a dummy indicating product adding by a single-product
firm between Census years t and t + 5 on firm productivity in year t,
Addjt = αt + αi + β 1 Productivity jt + εjt ,

(7)

where αt and αi are year and product fixed eﬀects, respectively, and the productivity of
33

Indeed, the ability to enter and exit individual product markets flexibly may be itself a capability of
firms, as discussed for example by Helfat and Raubitschek (2000), Sutton (2005) and Teece at al. (1997).
Our results are also consistent with Bernard and Jensen (2007), who find that the production of multiple
products is associated with a significantly lower probability of plant death.
34
Here, as above, we use an OLS linear probability model so that product fixed eﬀects can be included.
Inclusion of these fixed eﬀects in a logistic regression is impractical given the size of our sample.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

22

firm j is measured in terms of either labor productivity or total factor productivity (TFP).
We include product fixed eﬀects to compare the actions of firms producing the same initial
product. Productivity is compared before a product is added and hence before the firm
becomes multi-product.
As shown in Table 14, product adding by single-product firms is positively and statistically significantly correlated with both TFP and labor productivity. This positive correlation remains even when controlling for firm size (i.e., employment) and age. These
findings are consistent with the predictions of product sunk entry costs models with stochastic productivity if, as seems plausible, firm productivity is positively correlated across
products.
The results in Table 14 are also consistent with the idea that the productivity advantage
of multi-product firms noted in Table 5 is not simply caused by their production of a larger
number of products. In part, it appears to capture a selection eﬀect: single-product firms
who subsequently become multi-product firms are on average more productive than other
single-product firms even before they become multi-product.
7.

Discussion

In the preceding two sections, we showed that a natural extension of existing models of
industry dynamics is consistent with many aspects of product switching, and that several of
its theoretical predictions receive direct empirical support. There are other features of the
firm-product data, however, that are not well explained by the extended model and that
raise broader questions about the boundaries of multiple-product firms and the determinants
of firm dynamics. These features, interesting in their own right, also provide guidance for
future theories of the firm.
The first set of questions relates to the breadth of firms’ product mix. In existing models
of industry dynamics, the firm is implicitly identified with a single product. In the extended
model we describe above, firms are allowed to produce multiple products. Factors governing
the equilibrium number and types of products co-produced by the firm, however, are not
specified. In Table 15, we report the frequency with which firms co-produce products within
and across two-digit SIC sectors from 1972 to 1997. The dark (light) shading indicates coproduction that is significantly more (less) frequent than expected based on the individual
probabilities of producing each product.35 As shown in the table, the probability that a firm
35

We assess statistical significance by comparing the observed co-production frequencies to those that
would be expected under a null hypothesis that the decisions to produce row and column products are

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

23

produces a product in the row sector conditional on production of a product in the column
sector is relatively high within two-digit sectors as well as between two-digit sectors that
appear related (e.g. Electronics and Instruments or Lumber and Furniture). Furthermore,
the matrix of data as a whole rejects the null hypothesis that the probability a firm produces
a product is independent of the firm’s existing product mix (p-value = 0.000).
The results in Table 15 pose a variety of questions for further theoretical research.
Why are some pairs of products produced within firms and others across firms? Does coproduction reflect complementarities between products or common firm capabilities that
are shared across the products? If there are complementarities or shared capabilities, what
constrains equilibrium firm scope? Why do some firms become multi-product while others
remain single-product? How is the decision to become a multi-product firm related to the
systematic diﬀerences in performance observed between single and multi-product firms?36
A second set of questions concerns how firms grow. Existing empirical research on
this issue examines whether firm growth is independent of firm size (i.e., Gibrat’s Law)
or whether it exhibits age or scale dependence (see for example Sutton 1997, Cooley and
Quadini 2001, Albuquerque and Hopenhayn 2002 and Rossi-Hansberg and Wright 2005).
One of the key findings of our paper is that, just as industry dynamics are shaped by the
endogenous selection of firms, so firm dynamics are influenced by the endogenous selection
of products. In particular, product adding and dropping are systematically correlated with
changes in firm size and productivity, and multi-product firms are larger and more productive than single-product firms. Further research is needed into the respective roles of firms’
intensive (how much of each product is produced) and extensive (how many products are
produced) margins in firm growth.
A third and related set of questions focuses on the distribution of product sizes within
firms. An active research agenda currently seeks to explain the observed distribution of
firm sizes within industries and to determine whether it is well-approximated by a Pareto
distribution (see for example Axtell 2001, Cabral and Mata 2003, Luttmer 2004 and RossiHansberg and Wright 2005). Here, we find skewness in the distribution of output across
independent. Under this null, the expected frequency with which a particular pair of sectors is co-produced
follows an independent Poisson distribution. An individual cell’s deviation from random co-production
−e
√ rc ∼ N (0, 1) , where orc and erc are the observed
therefore follows a standard normal distribution, orc
erc
and expected frequencies in row r and column c, respectively. Summing across cells,
for
Xthe (ostatistic
2
rc −erc )
testing whether the entire matrix of frequencies is generated by random co-production,
,
is
erc
r,c

distributed chi-squared (Cochran 1952).
36
See Sutton (2005) for further discussion of firm capabilities and Gibbons (2004) for a survey of recent
research on the boundaries of the firm.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

24

firms as well as in the distribution of products within firms. A commonly used benchmark
for size distributions is Zipf’s law, which would predict a constant ratio of output shares
between the top two products regardless of the number of products produced.37 Instead,
in Table 4, we find that the ratio of output shares between the top two products is falling
from 3.2 to 2.2 as the number of products at the firm increases from 2 to 10, i.e. that
the distribution of output shares is shifting more than proportionately towards the smaller
products as the number of products increases at the firm.
A final group of questions relates to how product switching is accomplished. We find that
firms frequently decide to both add and drop products between Census periods and that
the vast majority of product switching occurs within firms’ existing production facilities
rather than via mergers and acquisitions. It is not directly apparent from an extended
model of industry dynamics why firms would add and drop products “simultaneously”.
One potential explanation is an inelastic supply of factors of production such as managerial
time, but this explanation provides little insight into why product switching often occurs
within firms’ surviving plants. Indeed, managerial time is arguably a firm rather than a
plant-specific factor of production. Future models of firm dynamics must explain both firm
scope at a point in time and provide insight into the factors governing reallocation between
firms, within firms and within plants.
It is perhaps not surprising that a natural extension of existing models of industry
dynamics oﬀers an incomplete explanation of product switching. The questions of the
boundaries of the firm and firm dynamics are areas of active research. One of the key contributions of our paper is to identify a new dimension of firm behavior for emerging theories
of the firm to explain. The explanation of product switching is not only of interest in itself,
but also because of the potential for this new dimension of firm behavior to discriminate
between competing theories of the firm, and because we find product switching to have important microeconomic implications for firms and macroeconomic consequences for broader
economic aggregates.
8.

Conclusions

Of primary concern in economics is the extent to which resources are allocated to their
most eﬃcient use. Virtually all empirical research on reallocation as a source of output
growth and productivity advancement has focused on the entry and exit of firms and plants
37

See, for example, Zipf (1949).

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

25

or on changes in the composition of output across firms and plants. Here, we demonstrate
the relative importance of looking within firms to the products added and dropped over
time. Using a dataset that tracks U.S. manufacturing output at the firm-product level
from 1972 to 1997, we find that firms add and drop five-digit SIC products with surprising
intensity and frequency. On average, 68 percent of U.S. manufacturing firms alter their mix
of products every five years, with 45 percent of firms both adding and dropping at least one
product. These adjustments drive an average of 47 percent of firms to enter new or exit
existing four-digit SIC industries, and 21 percent of firms to extend or contract their set of
two-digit SIC sectors. Overall, we find that product switching accounts for a substantially
larger share of aggregate U.S. manufacturing growth than net firm births and deaths.
Observed patterns of product switching do not match explanations that focus solely on
the characteristics of products or solely on the attributes of firms. In particular, rationales
for product switching based on a net reallocation of economic activity away from “cold”
products to “hot” products are diﬃcult to square with the positive correlation observed
between the rate at which a product is added and dropped. Another feature of the data
at odds with these exclusively firm- or product-specific explanations of product switching
is that firm-product pairs that dissolve diﬀer systematically within product markets from
firm-product combinations that survive.
In contrast, many aspects of product switching are consistent with a natural extension
of existing models of industry dynamics that have been used to explain firm creation and
firm destruction following Jovanovic (1982) and Hopenhayn (1992). This natural extension allows firms to produce multiple products and features sunk entry costs and producer
heterogeneity that are specific to individual products. Variation in sunk entry costs across
product markets generates the observed positive correlation between the rate of product
adding and dropping. It also suggests firms self-select into product markets on the basis of
productivity, an implication that is consistent with our observation that more productive
firms are more likely to add products.
More generally, our findings raise broader questions of the boundaries of the firm and
the determinants of firm dynamics, areas where theoretical research is nascent and ongoing.
A key contribution of our paper is the empirical evidence on a new dimension of firm
behavior that can help guide future theoretical research. Our examination of surviving
firms’ extensive margin adjustments highlights the fact that even basic concepts, such as a
firm’s industry, become far more nuanced when firms produce sets of products that change
over time. More generally, our analysis raises a host of questions about the scope of the

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

26

firm and the influence of product, firm and market characteristics on this scope over time.
To what extent do firms add and drop products in response to trade liberalization and
other forms of deregulation? How does the recognition of multi-product firms and product
switching change our understanding of the determinants of firm growth and the firm-size
distribution? How is product switching related to the specialization of firms across products?
Does product switching influence job creation and destruction? To what degree does product
switching depend on national policies and institutions, such as barriers to entry and labor
market regulation?
Not all of these questions can be answered with the data used in this paper and we have
only scratched the surface of other possible topics for further research. The striking importance of firms’ extensive margins in our data calls out for more empirical work creating
even more finely detailed datasets, tracking firms’ product mix across more disaggregate
categories and at higher frequencies. The empirical findings that we report also suggest
the need for more theoretical modelling of firm-product dynamics and their aggregate implications. Additional theoretical research will not only shed further light on the empirical
findings in this paper, but also yield new predictions to serve as a guide for future empirical
research.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

27

References
Albuquerque, R. and Hopenhayn, H. (2002) “Optimal Lending Contracts and Firm Dynamics”, Center for Economic Research Working Paper, 493, University of Rochester.
Axtell, R. L. (2001) “Zipf distribution of US Firm sizes”, Science, 293, 1818-1820.
Baily, N., Hulten, C. and Campbell, D. (1992) “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing
Plants”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 187-267.
Baldwin, J. and Gu, W. (2005) “The Impact of Trade on Plant Scale, Production-Run
Length and Diversification”, Statistics Canada, mimeograph.
Baumol, W. (1977) “On the Proper Cost Tests for Natural Monopoly in a Multiproduct
Industry”, American Economic Review, 67(5), 809-22.
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen. (2007). “Firm Structure, Multinationals and Manufacturing Plant Deaths”, Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Bernard, A. B , J. B. Jensen and P. K. Schott. (2006). “Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure to
Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants”, Journal
of International Economics, forthcoming.
Bernard, A. B. , S. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2005) “Products and Productivity”, NBER
Working Paper #11575.
Bernard, A. B., S. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2006) “Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms”, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Brander, J and Eaton, J (1984) “Product Line Rivalry”, American Economic Review, 74(3),
323-34.
Cabral, L and Mata, J (2003) “On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts and
Theory”, American Economic Review, 93(4), 1075-1090.
Caves, D., Christensen, L. and Diewert, E. (1982) “The Economic Theory of Index Numbers
and the Measurement of Input, Output and Productivity”, Econometrica, 50, 6, 13931414.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

28

Chandler, A. D. (1920) Scale and Scope: the Dynamics of Insustrial Capitalism, Cambridge:
The Belknap Press.
Cochran, W. G. (1952) “The Chi-Squared — Test of Goodness and Fit”, Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23, 315-45.
Cooley, T and Quadini, V (2001) “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics”, American Economic Review, 91(5), 1286-1310.
Davis, S. J. and Haltiwanger, J. (1992) ‘Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 819-63.
De Loecker, J. (2005) ‘Product Diﬀerentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Structural Estimation of Productivity’, K.U. Leuven, mimeograph.
Disney, R., Haskel, J., and Heden, Y. (2003) ‘Restructuring and Productivity Growth in
UK Manufacturing’, Economic Journal, 113(489), 666-694.
Dunne, T., S. Klimek, and M. J. Roberts. (2005) “Exit from Regional Manufacturing Markets: The Role of Entrant Experience” International Journal of Industrial Organization,vol. 23, no. 5-6, June, 399-421.
Dunne, T. , M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson. (1988) “Patterns of firm entry and exit in U.S.
manufacturing industries.” Rand Journal of Economics, vol. 19 No.4 Winter, 495-515.
Dunne, T. , M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson. (1989a) “The Growth and Failure of U.S.
Manufacturing Plants”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 4 , pp. 671-698.
Dunne, T. , M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson. (1989b) “Plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 7, No.
1. , pp. 48-71.
Eaton, C. and Schmidt, N. (1994) “Flexible Manufacturing and Market Structure”, American Economic Review, 84(4), 875-88.
Ericson, R. and Pakes, A. (1995) “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work”, Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53-82.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan, (2001) “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons
from Microeconomic Evidence.” in New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Hulten,

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

29

Charles R; Dean, Edwin R; Harper, Michael J, eds, NBER Studies in Income and Wealth,
vol. 63. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan, (2006) “Market Selection, Reallocation, and
Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, forthcoming.
Gibbons, R. (2004) “Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm?”, MIT Department of Economics Working Paper, 04-34.
Gollop, F. M. and J. L. Monahan (1991), “A Generalized Index of Diversification: Trends
in U.S. Manufacturing.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 73(2), 318-330.
Helfat, C. E. and R. S. Raubitschek. (2000) “Product Sequencing: Co-evolution of Knowledge, Capabilities and Products.” Strategic Management Journal, Vol 21: 961-979.
Hopenhayn, H. (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”, Econometrica, 60(5), 1127-1150.
Jovanovic, B. (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry”, Econometrica, 50(3), 64970.
Klette, T. and Kortum, S. (2004) ‘Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation’, Journal of
Political Economy, 112(5), 986-1018.
Lucas, R. E. (1978) “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms”, The Bell Journal of
Economics, 9(2), 508-23.
Luttmer, E. G. J. (2004) “The Size Distribution of Firms in an Economy with Fixed and
Entry Costs”, Working Paper 633, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Melitz, M. J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity”, Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.
Panzar, J. and Willig, R. (1977) “Economies of Scale in Multi-output Production”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91(3), 431-93.
Riggs, T. L. and G. Zarotiadis (2005) “Soft and Hard Within- and Between-Industry
Changes of US Skill Intensity: Shedding Light on Worker’s Inequality”, U.S. Census
Bureau, mimeograph.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

30

Rossi-Hansberg, E. and Wright, M. (2005) “Establishment Size Dynamics in the Aggregate
Economy”, Princeton University, mimeograph.
Shaked, A. and Sutton, J. (1990) “Multi-product Firms and Market Structure”, Rand Journal of Economics, 21(1), 45-62.
Sutton, J. (1991) Sunk Costs and Market Structure, MIT Press: Cambirdge MA.
Sutton, J. (1997) “Gibrat’s Legacy”, Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1), 40-59.
Sutton, J. (2005) Competing in Capabilities, Clarendon Lectures, Oxford University Press:
Oxford.
Teece, D., G. Pisano, and A. Shuen, (1997) “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management”, Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509-34.
United States Census (1996) “1992 Census of Manufactures and Census of Mineral Industries: Numerical List of Manufactured and Mineral Products”, U.S. Government
Printing Oﬃce, Washington DC 20402.
Zipf, G. K. (1949) Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Eﬀort, Cambridge, MA:
Addison-Wesley Press.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

A

31

Appendix: Collection of Product-Level Production Data in the Census of
Manufactures

Information on the products that firms produce is collected at the plant level. In
each of the Census years we analyze, plants received a form noting all of the seven-digit
SIC categories contained within the industries in which they previously noted participation.
(See http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/pdf/97mc/ for the forms used in the 1997 Census.)
Firms use these forms to record the quantity and value of each seven-digit category in which
they have positive production, adding new product codes and deleting outdated ones as
necessary. Roughly 7,000 of the 15,000 seven-digit SIC categories are recorded directly
in the LRD; the rest are recorded at the more aggregate five-digit SIC level. Thus, to
obtain a complete and consistent set of five-digit SIC products for all manufacturing firms,
we aggregate any seven-digit categories in the LRD up to the roughly 1,800 five-digit SIC
products that are recorded for all firms. A complete list of the two-, four- and five-digit
SIC categories are available from U.S. Census (1996) available online at www.census.gov.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 1: Five-Digit SIC Products in Four-Digit SIC Industry 3357
SIC
Description
33
Primary Metal Industries
3357
Nonferrous Wiredrawing and Insulating
33571
Aluminum Wire
33572
Copper Wire
33573
Other Nonferrous Metal Wire
P
33575
Nonferrous Wire Cloth
r
33576
Apparatus Wire and Cord Sets
o
33577
Magnet Wire
d
33578
Power Wire
u
3357A
Electronic Wire
c
3357B
Telephone Wire
t
3357C
Control Wire
s
3357D
Building Wire
3357E
Other Wire NES
33579
Fiber Optic Cable
Source: U.S. Census Bureau (1996).

32

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 2: Products per Industry and Product Characteristics, by Sector
Products/
Capital Intensity
Skill Intensity
Mean
Std Dev
Mean
Std Dev
Two-Digit SIC Sector
Industries Products Industry
20 Food
49
157
3.2
106
103
0.26
0.10
22 Textile
23
79
3.4
44
25
0.17
0.06
23 Apparel
31
75
2.4
16
36
0.22
0.10
24 Lumber
17
59
3.5
85
627
0.18
0.06
25 Furniture
13
36
2.8
23
10
0.23
0.06
26 Paper
17
55
3.2
147
154
0.23
0.06
27 Printing & Publishing
14
72
5.1
35
23
0.44
0.26
28 Chemicals
29
102
3.5
231
256
0.37
0.08
29 Petroleum
5
15
3.0
494
363
0.31
0.06
30 Rubber & Plastics
15
63
4.2
58
30
0.24
0.05
31 Leather
11
12
1.1
15
11
0.17
0.06
32 Stone & Concrete
26
47
1.8
84
73
0.22
0.05
33 Primary Metal
26
89
3.4
115
87
0.24
0.05
34 Fabricated Metal
38
135
3.6
45
27
0.27
0.07
35 Industrial Machinery
51
187
3.7
42
26
0.36
0.10
36 Electronic
37
111
3.0
39
26
0.29
0.10
37 Transportation
18
65
3.6
38
27
0.33
0.17
38 Instruments
17
44
2.6
39
36
0.39
0.10
39 Miscellaneous
18
53
2.9
26
20
0.26
0.08
Notes: Table reports the number of four-digit SIC industries and five-digit SIC products within the
noted two-digit SIC sector, respectively. Capital and skill intensity are the real book value ($000) of
buildings and equipment per worker, and non-production workers per total employment, respectively.
Mean and standard deviation input intensities are computed across all plants producing a product
within the relevant sector. Means are weighted by plant-product output. Results for Tobacco (SIC 21)
are excluded due to Census disclosure guidelines.

33

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 3: Prevalence of Firms Producing Multiple Products, Industries and Sectors
Mean Products,
Industries or Sectors
Type of Firm
Percent of Firms
Percent of Output
per Firm
Single-Product
59
9
1
Multiple-Product
41
91
4.0
Multiple-Industry
29
87
3.1
Multiple-Sector
13
76
2.5
Notes: Table displays a breakdown of firms according to whether they produce multiple
products (five-digit SIC categories), multiple industries (four-digit SIC categories) and
multiple sectors (two-digit SIC categories). Columns two and three summarize the
distribution of firms and output, respectively. Column four reports the mean number of
products for multiple-product firms, the mean number of industries for multiple-industry
firms and the mean number sectors for multiple-sector firms. Results are based on the
pooled 1972 to 1997 sample.

34

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

35

Table 4: Distribution of Within-Firm Output Shares, by Product

Average Share of Prodcut in Firm's Output
(High to Low)

Number of Products Produced by the Firm

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

100

81

71

64

59

55

52

50

48

45

19

22

23

22

22

21

21

21

20

7

10

11

11

12

12

12

12

4

6

6

7

7

8

8

2

4

4

5

5

5

2

2

3

3

4

1

2

2

2

1

1

2

1

1
1

Notes: Columns indicate the number of products produced by the firm. Rows
indicate the share of the produce, in descending order of size. Each cell is the
average across the relevant set of firm-products in the sample. Sample
includes all firms producing at least ten products in the 1972 to 1997
Censuses.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

36

Table 5: Mean Percentage-Point Diﬀerences Between Single- and Multiple-Product Firm
Attributes
Multiple
Product

Multiple
Industry

Multiple
Sector

Output

0.77

0.77

0.92

Employment

0.66

0.68

0.83

Wages

0.08

0.06

0.05

Production Worker Wages

0.08

0.06

0.05

Non-Production Worker Wages

0.05

0.03

0.03

Probability of Export

0.13

0.13

0.15

Labor Productivity

0.10

0.08

0.09

TFP
0.01
0.04
0.00
Notes: Table summarizes mean percent differences in 1997
between firms that produce multiple products, industries and
sectors versus those that produce a single product, industry and
sector, respectively. Results are obtained by regressing the log of
the noted firm characteristic on a dummy variable indicating the
firms' status as well as industry fixed effects. All regressions are
OLS except for probability of firm export, which is a probit. All
differences are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. There
are roughly 150,000 observations for each regression.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

37

Table 6: Decomposition of Aggregate Real U.S. Manufacturing Output, 1972 to 1997
Source of Growth
Firm Entry and Exit
Firms' Extensive Margins
Firms' Intensive Margins
Aggregate
Firm
Firm
Added
Dropped
Growing Shrinking
Period
Growth
Net
Births
Deaths
Net
Products Products
Net
Products Products
1972-77
9
0
8
-9
-1
24
-24
10
22
-12
1977-82
-4
-3
10
-12
2
30
-28
-3
15
-19
1982-87
13
-2
16
-18
5
45
-40
10
24
-13
1987-92
10
0
15
-15
5
36
-31
5
18
-14
1992-97
27
2
16
-14
4
33
-29
21
32
-11
Total Change
65
-3
73
-76
19
189
-170
50
127
-77
% Total Change
100
-5
112
-118
29
291
-262
77
195
-119
Notes: Table decomposes the change in real U.S. manufacturing shipments across noted five-year intervals (rows one to five)
as well as across the entire 1972 to 1997 sample period (row 6). Column two reports the change in aggregate manufacturing
shipments. Columns three through five report the contributions of net and gross firm entry. Columns six through eight report the
contributions of net and gross product adding by continuing firms. Final three columns report the contributions of net and gross
output growth of continuing products by continuing firms. In each row, "net" columns sum to the aggregate change reported in
column two. Totals are based on the sum of firms' product-level shipments. Administrative Records are excluded.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 7: Product Switching by U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 1972 to 1997
Firm Activity
None
Drop Product(s) Only
Add Product(s) Only
Both Add and Drop Products

Percent of Firms
SingleMultipleAll Firms
Product Firms Product Firms
32
46
11
12
na
30
11
13
8
45
41
50

Output-Weighted Percent of Firms
SingleMultipleProduct Firms Product Firms
Firm Activity
All Firms
None
7
49
3
Drop Product(s) Only
7
na
8
Add Product(s) Only
5
20
3
Both Add and Drop Products
81
31
86
Note: Top panel displays average percent of surviving U.S. manufacturing firms
engaging in each type of product-changing activity across five-year intervals from
1972 to 1997. Bottom panel provides a similar breakdown but weighting each
firm by its output. Products refer to five-digit SIC categories. The four firm
activities are mutually exclusive. There are an average of 141,561 surviving firms
in each Census year.

38

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 8: Sector and Industry Switching by U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 1972 to 1997
Percent of Firms
Product
Industry
Sector
Firm Activity
Activity
Activity
Actvivity
None
32
53
79
Drop Only
12
13
8
Add Only
11
13
7
Both Add and Drop
45
21
7
Note: Table displays average share of surviving firms who engage in product,
industry and sector switching across five-year intervals from 1972 to 1997.
Product, industry and sector activity refers to the adding and/or dropping of fivedigit, four-digit and two-digit SIC categories, respectively. In each column, the
four firm activities are mutually exclusive. There are an average of roughly
141,561 surviving firms in each Census year.

39

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

40

Table 9: Average Output Share of Recently Added and Dropped Products, 1972 to 1997
Products that
Products that
All Added or
Result in Adding or Result in Adding or
Dropped Products Dropping Industries Dropping Sectors
Products Added t-5:t

49

26

8

Products Dropped t:t+5
46
23
9
Notes: Table reports the mean share of multi-product firm year t output represented by
products added between Census year t-5 and t and products dropped between Census years
t and t+5. First column refers to all products adds and drops. Second and third columns refer
to products that result in firms either adding or dropping industries and sectors, respectively.
Means are across all years of sample, 1972 to 1997.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

41

Table 10: Product Switching and Concomitant Changes in Firm Characteristics, 1972 to
1997
Drop Only

Add Only

Both Add
and Drop

Output

-0.0140 ***
0.0007

0.0203 ***
0.0007

0.0055 *** 447,399
0.0005

0.05

Employment

-0.0159 ***
0.0006

0.0184 ***
0.0006

0.0057 *** 447,399
0.0005

0.02

Wages

0.0009 ***
0.0004

0.0017 ***
0.0004

0.0011 *** 447,399
0.0003

0.03

Output/Worker

0.0014 **
0.0006

0.0013 **
0.0006

0.0006
0.0004

273,927

0.03

-0.0023 ***
0.0005

0.0041 ***
0.0005

0.0017 *** 273,927
0.0034

0.02

TFP

Obs

R

2

Notes: Table summarizes OLS regression results of log differences in firm
characteristics from Census year t-5 to t on dummies indicating
contemporaneous product switching activity. Each row summarizes the
regression for a different firm characterisitc. Each cell reports the coefficient for
the product-switching dummy variables noted at the top of the column. Standard
errors adjusted for clustering at the industry level are noted below each
coefficient. Regressions include year and industry fixed effects; coefficients for
fixed effects and constant are suppressed. Sample sizes vary as a result of
availability of data needed to compute right hand side variables. Regressions
cover all firms during the pooled 1972 to 1997 sample period. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

Table 11: Distribution of Added and Dropped, Products, By Method
Firm Adds Product(s) via:
Existing Plant(s) Only
Acquired Plant(s) Only
New Plant(s) Only
Combination

All Product Additions
94.3
0.4
1.6
3.6

Product Adds That
Result in Adding a
Sector
88.7
1.9
6.0
3.5

Percent of Firms
Product Drops That
Result in Dropping a
All Product Drops
Sector
Firm Drops Product(s) via:
Existing Plant(s) Only
94.1
89.1
Divested Plant(s) Only
0.2
1.4
Closing Plant(s) Only
2.0
5.8
Combination
3.7
3.6
Notes: Table reports the manner in which firms add (top panel) and drop
(bottom panel) products. Second column of each panel focuses on all product
adds or drops. Third column of each panel excludes product adds that occur
within the firms' existing set of sectors and product drops that do not result in
the firm exiting a sector. Figures shown are averages across the pooled 1972
to 1997 sample.

42

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

43

Table 12: Product Switching Activity and Concurrent Merger and Acquisition Activity
Product Switching
Sector Switching
Firm Activity
No M&A
With M&A
No M&A
With M&A
None
32
5
79
40
Drop Only
12
5
8
16
Add Only
11
17
6
26
Both Add and Drop
44
73
7
18
Notes: Table reports product and sector (two-digit SIC) switching activity for two
types of firms: those without any ownership changes, denoted "No M&A" and those
that acquire or divest a plant, referred to as "With M&A" firms.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

44

Table 13: Firm-Product Drop OLS Regressions, 1972 to 1997
Drop Product Drop Product

Drop Product

Drop Product

Relative Product Size

-0.0384 ***
0.0005

-0.0353 ***
0.0014

-0.0665 ***
0.0009

-0.0596 ***
0.0009

Relative Product Tenure

-0.1105 ***
0.0025

-0.1248 ***
0.0040

-0.1183 ***
0.0042

-0.1313 ***
0.0041

Relative Firm Size

0.0717 ***
0.0037

0.0573 ***
0.0054

Relative Firm Age

0.0377 ***
0.0019

0.0354 ***
0.0021

Number of Products

0.0023 ***
0.0001

0.0024 ***
0.0001

Firm Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

Yes

Product Fixed Effects

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.05

0.17

0.51

0.53

R-Squared

Observations
174,303
174,303
174,303
174,303
Notes: Table summarizes OLS regression results of dummy variable indicating a firmproduct drop between Census years 1992 and 1997 on firm-product and firm attributes in
1992. In each case, attributes are relative to firms with the same mix of products. Robust
standard errors are noted below each coefficient; standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the product level. Coefficients for fixed effects and constant are suppressed.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

45

Table 14: Product Adding and Firm Productivity, 1972 to 1997
TFP

Add
0.0541 ***
0.0065

Add
0.0592 ***
0.0065

ln(Output/Worker)

Add

0.0294 ***
0.0025

Add

0.0369 ***
0.0027

ln(Employment)

0.0512 ***
0.0023

0.0710 ***
0.0025

ln(Age)

0.0028 ***
0.0004

0.0025 ***
0.0003

Year Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Product Fixed Effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
0.08
0.16
0.16
R-Squared
331,431
331,431
503,348
503,348
Observations
Notes: Table summarizes OLS regression results of noted dummy variable indicating
product adding by single-product firms between years t and t+5 on noted covariates. First
two covariates are TFP (see text) and output per worker in year t. Second two covariates
are firm employment and firm age, both for year t. Sample covers 1972 through 1992
panels. Robust standard errors are noted below each coefficient; standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the product level. Coefficients for fixed effects and constant are
suppressed. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
respectively.

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

46

Table 15: Product Co-Production Within Firms, 1972 to 1997
Sector
20 22 23 31 24 25 26 27 30 28 29 32 33 34 35 37 36 38 39
2,439 25
210
19
30
22
51
46
75
178
23
41
32
75
79
27
36
35
37
20 Food
25
512 249
25
32
38
62
38
132
85
19
41
42
80
77
35
46
49
59
22 Textile
210 249 1,839 125 206 192 179 188 344 263
66
187 223 825 1,057 220 263 210 335
23 Apparel
19
25
125 147
16
19
19
20
58
24
.
14
13
34
29
12
19
23
46
31 Leather
30
32
206
16 2,846 429
87
47
157
75
20
91
59
213 118
68
68
48
86
24 Lumber
22
38
192
19
429 1,203 52
44
154
45
10
98
60
237 188
65
101
75
104
25 Furniture
51
62
179
19
87
52
538 408 239 116
31
61
56
154 142
38
64
70
92
26 Paper
38
188
20
47
44
408 6,510 134
92
35
48
52
187 152
57
90
69
253
27 Printing & Publishing 46
75
132 344
58
157 154 239 134 1,187 319
59
209 215 572 910 187 271 221 243
30 Rubber & Plastic
178
85
263
24
75
45
116
92
319 1,297 160 159 139 235 288
88
146 165 150
28 Chemicals
23
19
66
.
20
10
31
35
59
160 128 146
39
57
63
27
36
27
21
29 Petroleum
41
41
187
14
91
98
61
48
209 159 146 1,097 122 267 236
83
131
96
70
32 Stone & Concrete
32
42
223
13
59
60
56
52
215 139
39
122 847 615 789 162 225 127
78
33 Primary Metal
75
80
825
34
213 237 154 187 572 235
57
267 615 4,203 2,311 456 522 336 242
34 Fabricated Metal
77 1,057 29
118 188 142 152 910 288
63
236 789 2,311 4,887 571 688 464 226
35 Industrial Machinery 79
27
35
220
12
68
65
38
57
187
88
27
83
162 456 571 860 246 159
71
37 Transportation
36
46
263
19
68
101
64
90
271 146
36
131 225 522 688 246 1,254 511 135
36 Electronic
35
49
210
23
48
75
70
69
221 165
27
96
127 336 464 159 511 680 112
38 Instruments
37
59
335
46
86
104
92
253 243 150
21
70
78
242 226
71
135 112 1,137
39 Miscellaneous
Notes: Table summarizes the extent of product co-production by sector across multiple-product firms. A firm is counted in a cell if
it produces at least one product in both the row and column two-digit SIC sectors. Firms are counted in each cell only once, but
they may appear in more than one cell if they have two or more products spanning two or more sectors. Firms are counted in a
diagonal cell if they produce two products in the same sector. The counts displayed in each cell represent the average coproduction observed in the six Census years from 1972 to 1997; the total number of firm-year-coproduction observations is
308,111 across all years. Dark grey and light grey shading indicate substantially higher and lower co-production than would be
implied by a null hypothesis of random co-production (see text). The absence of shading indicates the absence of statistically
significant differences from this null hypothesis. A "." denotes a cell where information has not been reported to due Census
Bureau disclosure guidelines.

47

.75
.5
0

.25

Product Add
Rate
mna

1

1 .2 5

1 .5

Multi-Product Firms and Product Switching

0

.2 5

.5

.7 5

1

1.25

1.5

n d Rate
Product m
Drop
Figure reports the mean rate at which five-digit SIC manufacturing products are added and dropped by U.S.
manufacturing firms over the 1972 to 1997 sample period. A product's add (drop) rate in year t is computed
as the number of firms adding (dropping) the product between Census years t and t+5 divided by the average
number of firms producing the product in years t and t+5.

Figure 1: Average Product Add and Drop Rates, 1972 to 1997

