                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 RATIONAL DISCOUNTING FOR REGULATORY ANALYSIS

                                            W. Kip Viscusi

                                         Working Paper 12294
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12294


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




University Distinguished Professor of Law and Economics, Vanderbilt University. James Wawrzyniak
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by W. Kip Viscusi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rational Discounting for Regulatory Analysis
W. Kip Viscusi
NBER Working Paper No. 12294
June 2006
JEL No. Q50, D90, H10, L50

                                           ABSTRACT

This article examines the economic basis for what is termed “rational discounting,” which entails
full recognition of policy effects over time and exponential discounting at a riskless rate of return.
Policies often cannot be ranked unambiguously in terms of their present or future orientation. Both
failure to discount and preferential intergenerational discounting generate inconsistencies and
economic anomalies. Office of Management and Budget discounting guidelines now stipulate more
reasonable discount rates than earlier guidelines, but err in permitting open-ended preferential rates
for intergenerational effects. The article presents a methodology for monetizing the value of
statistical life for people of different ages and at different points in time. Review of regulatory
analyses indicates increased consistency of discounting practices. However, examination of two
policies with intergenerational effects, stratospheric ozone regulation and nuclear waste storage at
Yucca Mountain, reveal failures to adopt a rational discounting approach. The influence of
behavioral anomalies such as hyperbolic discounting may make full recognition of intertemporal
effects in benefit-cost analysis more consequential than the use of preferential discount rates.

W. Kip Viscusi
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Ave. South
Nashville, TN 37203-1181
and NBER
kip.viscusi@vanderibilt.edu
1. Introduction

         Intergenerational discounting should be no different than within-generation

discounting. The policy position I will advocate in this article is that distant benefits and

costs should be recognized fully in the policy analysis process, but that they should be

weighted based on the same discount rate methodology that is applied to effects on the

current generation.

         The impetus for a preferential rate may stem in part from the dramatic

mathematics of exponential discounting. Let the discount rate be r and policy benefits

and costs at time t be weighted by the discount factor 1 / (1 + r)t.1 Suppose the value of r

is 3 percent. Then benefits a year from now will have a weight of 0.97, benefits two

years from now will have a weight of 0.94, and so on. By the time one reaches twenty

years in the future, which might well be the latency period for cancer risks from some

environmental exposures, the discount factor is 0.55, or benefits and costs are weighted at

just over half of their within-period value. Likewise, the discount factor becomes 0.23

after 50 years, 0.05 after 100 years, and 1.45 x 10-13 for effects 1000 years in the future.

For the very distant future, all but the most consequential benefits and costs will drop out

of the analysis.2 The discount weight pattern is a straightforward consequence of valuing

all policy effects using a consistent discounting approach and need not be a cause for

alarm.

         Thoughtful commentators who advocate a preferential discount rate for future

generations have framed the issue in a manner that creates a bias toward thinking of what


1
  This formula can be found in a variety of basic texts. See, for example, footnote 7, p. 244 of Howell E.
Jackson et al., Analytical Methods for Lawyers, (New York: Foundation Press, 2003).
2
  For expressions of concern about this effect, see Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, “Pricing the
Priceless,” 150 U. Pa. L. Rev (2002), at 1571.


                                                      2
lower rate should be applied to effects on future generations.3 Thus, the question that is

posed is whether society should use the same discount rate for all policy benefits and

costs, or whether a lower rate should be used in the future. Indeed, the main policy issue

in their view is how much lower should the discount rate be for effects on future

generations?

        Rather than framing the intergenerational discounting question in terms of

preferential lower rates, I would like to frame the policy evaluation question in a more

fundamental way. Should effects on future generations even be considered in the policy

evaluation process? Why not set their values equal to zero? Notwithstanding the

possibility of constructing hypothetical social welfare functions in which the welfare of

future generations matters, the current generation’s policy choice task is much simpler.

How do we make choices now to maximize our own discounted well-being? The well-

being of future generations may enter our utility functions, or it might not. Some people

may care about future generations in an altruistic manner, but perhaps not a great deal.

Per capita income levels and living standards have risen over time, and if the past is any

guide, future generations will be more affluent and better off economically than we are,

just as we have had a higher standard of living than past generations. The current

citizenry consequently may feel quite justified in taking a within-generation perspective

and might not be too moved by the plight of their more affluent, distant descendants.

        The degree to which personal self interest may have profound consequences for

future generations is reflected in the public’s attitude toward climate change policies.

Efforts to combat global warming through gas taxes will necessarily have a deferred

3
 A superb advocacy of intergenerational preferences is Richard L. Revesz, “Environmental Regulation,
Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives,” Columbia Law Review 99(4) (1999), 1015-
1016.


                                                  3
impact on global climate change, which is a long term environmental problem. To what

extent will older age groups be willing to pay more for gasoline so that gasoline will be

less harmful to the environment? The analysis of the Eurobarometer survey data by

Hersch and Viscusi found that concern with this environmental amenity declined steadily

with age, which reflects the degree to which there is a strong component of self interest

governing the public’s willingness to pay for environmental benefits over time. More

specifically, in terms of the additional percent amount that respondents were willing to

pay for gasoline, the average response was a high value of 2.8 percent among those age

15-34, 2.3 percent for those 35-44, 2.1 percent for those 45-54, 1.6 for those 55-64, and

1.0 percent for those 65 and over.4 This dramatic dropoff in valuation led the authors to

conclude that there is a “generational divide in support for environmental policies.”5

        If people are self interested in the extreme, they might place no value whatsoever

on the well-being of future generations. From the standpoint of their policy assessments,

concerns about what discount rate should be used to value effects on future generations is

irrelevant. If the effects are treated as having zero value, the discounting of these

consequences does not enter. By including intergenerational effects in our policy

evaluation calculus, we have already made perhaps substantial headway toward placing a

substantial value on interests subsequent generations have in today’s policies.

        Matters might of course be quite different if future generations could bribe us to

make sacrifices now to advance their interests. But we do not know what their

preferences are, and there is no mechanism by which they can transfer resources to us.


4
  See Table 1 of Joni Hersch and W. Kip Viscusi, “The Generational Divide in Support for Environmental
Policies: European Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 11859 (2005), forthcoming in Climatic Change,
2006.
5
  Id., title page.


                                                  4
Legislatures can run budget deficits to shift costs to the future, but these are not targeted

to advance specific policies that future generations have selected. Thus, the extreme

present generation approach is to value future generation effects at zero and to use

conventional discounting for current generation effects.

       The reference point I will adopt for my article does not embody intergenerational

preference or intergenerational neglect. Rather, I will assume that we treat effects on

future generations in a manner that is consistent with the discounting approach applied to

outcomes within our own generation. These future effects will be recognized fully and

brought back to present value with no deduction from the benefits, even though current

populations will not be directly affected. Benefits and costs to future generations will

have the same standing as effects on the current generation. This symmetrical treatment

already embodies a quite strong degree of altruism toward future generations that might

greatly exceed the current citizenry’s actual valuation of future generations’ welfare.

However, just as intergenerational discounting preferences will create anomalies and

inconsistencies, it is straightforward to show that intergenerational discounting neglect

will create parallel problems. Using the same discount rate r symmetrically for all policy

benefits and costs will be my policy evaluation reference point.

       Before considering the appropriate intergenerational policy, I will first examine

how discount rates affect the future orientation and the environmental responsiveness of

the policy. Each of these matters may be unclear unless sufficient structure is imposed on

the policy choice. I then consider anomalies arising from failure to discount, which is

perhaps the extreme example of intergenerational preference, and use of preferable

discount rates for policies affecting future generations. These discounting practices and




                                              5
those currently in use for regulatory analysis will lead to irrational economic

consequences and intertemporal inconsistencies. Finally, the article examines the

behavioral anomalies that affect people’s discounting behavior. Because of the

irrationalities of individual discounting, there is likely to be inadequate policy emphasis

on efforts with deferred benefits. Thus, the major policy deficiency may be a failure to

value policies with long-term effects by the same extent as people would do if they had

rational intertemporal preferences.



2. Discounting and Temporal Orientation

2.1 The Ambiguity of Temporal Orientation

         Increasing the discount rate necessarily reduces the discount weight placed on

future costs and benefits.6 Because costs and benefits that occur immediately are not

discounted at all, higher discount rates necessarily place a lower relative value on future

costs and benefits. Researchers often attempt to characterize policies as being more or

less present-oriented.7 However, before getting into discounting issues in great detail, it is

worthwhile to explore whether this simple intuition of present or future orientation is

always a useful way to categorize policies.

         In many policy choice contexts, a higher rate of discount will generate

calculations that are less favorable to judgments of the policy’s net attractiveness.

Suppose all policy costs occur at the outset, and that all benefits are deferred. It is useful

to think in terms of the trajectory of net benefits, where net benefits in year t equal the

6
  My analysis adopts the benefit-cost criterion for policy choice. For a different approach, based on growth
maximization, see Tyler Cowen, “Caring about the Distant Future: Why It Matters and what It Means,”
2006, this issue.
7
  The role of discounting with respect to emphasis on policy effects for future generations is emphasized by
Revesz, supra note 3, at 946.


                                                     6
difference in the benefits bt in year t and costs ct in year t. The time path of (bt – ct) is

initially negative and then is positive. For this simple example, there is one sign reversal

in the pattern of net benefits over time. In such situations, increasing the discount rate

will decrease the present value of benefits by a greater relative amount than they will

decrease costs, which are more immediate.

         Within the set of possible policies that begin with negative net benefits followed

by periods of positive net benefits, there will be differences in the timing and duration of

the positive net benefit period. Policies in which the net benefits are more immediate will

be viewed as present-oriented, while policies with deferred net benefits might be termed

future-oriented. This simple characterization of policies is an apt description of very

well-behaved trajectories of benefits and costs.

         In more complex patterns of costs and benefits, the appealing logic of one policy

being more future-oriented than another does not hold up. To see how the ambiguity in

the ranking of temporal orientation arises, consider the closely related concept of the

internal rate of return, which I will call i.8 The internal rate of return i is the rate of

discount at which the present value of the difference between benefits and costs of the

policy is zero. For a conventional regulatory policy, one might expect the present value

of net benefits to be positive for low rates of discount and negative for high rates of

discount that are above the value of i. For these payoff streams, the net payoffs are

initially negative and then turn positive, so that there is one sign reversal. Support of a

lower discount rate consequently pushes the policy discussion into a region in which the




8
 A standard definition of the internal rate of return concept appears in Jackson et al., supra note 1, at 247-
249.


                                                       7
policy is more attractive, as there is no ambiguity in the temporal orientation of the

policy.

          Matters become more complicated in situations in which there is more than one

sign reversal in the time problem of net benefits. In these instances, there can be multiple

values of i that generate a zero present value.9 The number of such values of i cannot be

greater than the number of sign reversals in the payoff stream. As a consequence, for the

simple payoff stream that begins with negative net benefits followed by positive net

benefits, there is only one internal rate of return. With more than one sign reversal in the

payoff stream, there can be multiple internal rates of return. The phenomenon of multiple

internal rates of return is known as “reswitching.” In such instances, there may be no

simple way to assess the present-orientedness of the policy. Similarly, if one compares

the difference in benefits and costs of two policies, there may well be multiple sign

reversals in those differences. Thus, it may not be possible to employ a simple policy

choice rule such as choosing policy A at low discount rates or choosing policy B at high

discount rates.

          The reswitching phenomenon may be particularly important in environmental

contexts. In an early paper, Richard Zeckhauser and I showed that the presence of

irreversibilities, which are endemic to environmental decisions, may induce situations of

reswitching: policy B is preferred to policy A at low values of r and high values of r but

not at intermediate values.10 The presence of uncertainty of a possible environmental

irreversibility, which is also a common characteristic of environmental choices, also may

9
  For an early exploration of the reswitching issue, see Paul Samuelson, “Some Aspects of the Pure Theory
of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 51, 469-496 (1937), and Paul Samuelson, “A Summing Up,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 80, 563-583 (1966).
10
   W. Kip Viscusi and Richard J. Zeckhauser, “Environmental Policy Choice Under Uncertainty,” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 3 (1976), 103.


                                                    8
induce such reswitching.11 Ranking policies in terms of the degree to which they are

present-oriented or future-oriented consequently may not be a straightforward exercise,

as it is complicated by the influence of crossing payoff streams, the effect of

irreversibilities, and the role of uncertainty. 12 A preferable approach is to select the

discount rate that is appropriate and determine which policies generate the greatest

present value of the spread between benefits and costs.

        As a result, there will be two principal features of my treatment of appropriate

discounting policies. First, the focus will be on the choice of the appropriate discount

rate irrespective of whether doing so should be characterized as being more present-

oriented or more future-oriented. Second, before characterizing policies as being more or

less future-oriented, it is essential that the time pattern of payoffs meets the requisite

criteria for such simple designations. When benefit and cost streams are complex, there

may be no unambiguous ranking of policies in terms of their temporal emphasis.



2.2 Are Low Discount Rates Pro-Environment?

        Whether a low or high discount rate is pro-environment is also not well-defined in

general. Even if it is clear that a policy is more future-oriented, that temporal orientation

does not imply that the policy is more pro-environment. Current destruction of natural

wilderness areas to provide longer-term timber production or oil and natural gas reserves

will impose environmental costs now and in the future, with deferred intermediate

financial gains. If there are negative net benefits in the near term, positive net benefits in


11
  Id. at 105-108.
12
  For further discussion of the role of irreversibilities more generally, Dexter Samida and David A.
Weisbach, “Paretian Intergenerational Discounting,” University of Chicago Law School Working Paper
2005, this issue.


                                                   9
the intermediate term, and negative net benefits in the distant future, such a pattern of

costs and benefits fits the reswitching profile, with possibly two internal rates of return

and no unambiguous temporal ranking.

        Even with more well-behaved benefit and cost trajectories, a higher discount rate

may be the pro-environment approach. My involvement with environmental issues began

with a critique of the dam building operations by the U.S. Department of Interior’s

Bureau of Reclamation.13 That agency, which is the Western counterpart of the Army

Corps of Engineers, has built dams that are engineering marvels, such as the Hoover

Dam. However, even after most of the good sites for dams had been used up, the agency

continued to construct new dams and sought to build dams in the Grand Canyon.14 Less

catastrophic but actual environmental harms have resulted from dams that the Bureau has

built, including the flooding of scenic areas, fish kills, and salinity problems.15 The

agency did not monetize these environmental effects, so that there was no environmental

discounting issue to consider.

        Dams are highly capital-intensive projects. As the rate of discount is increased,

the present value of the benefits are reduced, while the costs are not much affected. As a

result, the agency historically showed a preference for using low discount rates, such as

2.5 percent.16 Because a higher discount rate would make its policies appear less

attractive from a benefit-cost standpoint, the agency resisted efforts to bring the discount

rate in line with rates recommended by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget




13
   Richard L. Berkman and W. Kip Viscusi, Damming the West (New York: Grossman Publishers, 1973).
14
   Id. at 75-76, 117-118.
15
   Id. at 29-77.
16
   Id. at 229.


                                                10
(OMB).17 Recommendations that a higher discount rate be used would lead fewer

projects to pass a benefit-cost test, which in this instance would mean less environmental

harm. Thus, for these public works projects with adverse environmental effects, use of a

higher discount rate was a mechanism for deterring these efforts.18 Advocacy of a higher

discount rate was the pro-environment policy position.

         A quite interesting intertemporal tradeoff arose with respect to the 1992 Food and

Drug Administration approval of the drug Taxol, which is used to treat ovarian cancer.19

This drug, which was manufactured from the Pacific yew tree, would lead to the saving

of lives in the near term. However, cutting down the trees now will lead to depletion of

the stock of Pacific yew trees and long-term environmental harm. Is the more

responsible risk-reducing policy the one that saves lives or trees, and if it is trees, what

discount rate should be used to assess the future value of the trees? Fortunately, the

availability of hybrid yews and semi-synthetic Taxol diminished the controversy, but the

fundamental point remains. Often ranking policies that have environmental effects over

time in terms of the degree to which they reduce risk or are pro-environment is not a

simple matter, in this case because of competing risk concerns across time.



3. Discounting Anomalies

3.1 Problems with Failures to Discount20




17
   Id. at 88-89.
18
   Id, at 89.
19
   W. Kip Viscusi, “Discounting Health Effects for Medical Decisions,” in Frank Sloan, ed., Valuing
Health Care Costs, Benefits, and Effectiveness for Pharmaceuticals and Other Medical Technologies,
Cambridge, Cambridge UP, 1995, p.127..
20
   For a detailed exploration of claims that discounting leads to problematic and immoral results, see David
Samida and David A. Weisbach, supra note 12.


                                                    11
         If policy effects are not discounted, it will generate several anomalies, and it is

worthwhile to review them here.21 I will focus on four anomalies to give a sense of the

fundamental problems that will be encountered. More subtle inconsistencies, such as

those that I discuss with respect to intergenerational discounting, also may arise.

         The first problem is what I have called the “permanent cost slam dunk.”22

Suppose that a development policy will lead to the permanent loss of some very

inconsequential environmental amenity that has a value of $1 in each period. With that

loss extended for an infinite time horizon, the present value of the environmental harm is

infinite. No policy criterion with a finite payoff can ever offer great enough benefits to

offset this infinite loss. In contrast, with discounting, the infinite stream of $1 losses has

a present value of only 1 / r, or $33 with a 3 percent discount rate.23

         The second problem with zero discount rates is that it is always desirable to defer

policies if that same policy opportunity will be available in the future. Let policy A save

33 statistical lives this year at a cost of $100 million, so that it costs just over $3 million

to save a statistical life. Let policy B take effect one year later. It too could save 33

statistical lives at a cost of $100 million. However, if we take our $100 million today and

invest it at the rate r of 3 percent, then we will have $103 million to spend on saving lives

next year. At a cost per life saved of $3 million, we can now save 34 lives if we wait till

next year. Whether our policy criterion is a benefit-cost test or simply saving lives,

waiting is always the superior choice when there is no discounting, and there is a positive

interest rate.


21
   I present a more detailed discussion of these in Viscusi, supra note 19, at 134-136.
22
   Id. at 136.
23
   This formula for valuing an infinite stream of payoffs appears in footnote 9, p. 246 of Jackson et al.,
supra note 1.


                                                      12
        Third, if there are technological changes that will make future policies more

effective in saving lives, as with improved pollution control technologies for cars, waiting

is always superior. Suppose policy A saves 33 lives this year for $100 million, but policy

C entails expenditure of $100 million next year and will save 34 lives in 100 years. Even

without investing the $100 million to boost it to $103 million in year 2, policy C will

dominate, despite having to wait a century for the life-saving benefits.

        Fourth, benefits from any given policy action will rise as well. A positive income

elasticity of demand for risk-reducing policies of various kinds by definition will lead to a

higher willingness to pay for these same policy outcomes in the future. If benefit values

grow at some finite growth rate g, then the unit benefit value in t years will be (1 + g)t.

As t goes to infinity, these unit benefit values likewise become infinite. As long as there

is any positive annual growth rate in benefits, however small, the benefit value becomes

infinite if there is no discounting.

        Serious economic discussions do not suggest that zero discount rates are

appropriate; however, particularly in policy contexts, there might be suggestions that we

don’t discount lifesaving benefits or effects on future generations. The anomalies that

arise from not discounting are quite general. There are no special case exemptions from a

rational discounting approach.



3.2 The Problematic Mathematics of Intergenerational Discounting

        Most discussions of the consequences of discounting for the environment focus

on long-term policies, often including discounting of effects on future generations. A

higher discount rate necessarily gives effects on future generations a lower weight. In a




                                              13
paradigmatic case of benefits from activities now and in the near term with

environmental damage being imposed on future generations, there will be no sign

reversals of the environmental cost trajectory. A lower discount rate always enhances the

weight placed on future generation effects. Whether a preferential discount rate is

desirable in such contexts is a quite different matter.

         While it is seemingly simple to suggest that one might use a lower discount rate

for policy benefits and costs for future generations, the possible policy consequences of

doing so are problematic. At a more basic level, it is not even clear what might be meant

operationally by using a lower rate of time preference for future generations. As the

exploration of the various possibilities below will illustrate, none of the seemingly

plausible interpretations of time inconsistent discounting leads to reasonable behavior.

For concreteness, I will assume that the appropriate discount rate for current generation

effects is r and that the opportunity cost of capital does not change over time.24 Also, let

the current generation live for 50 years. The timing of the arrival of these “future

generations” and the duration of a generation is not well specified by advocates of the

intergenerational preference approach. Are we talking about 50 years, 100 years, 1000

years? I will leave aside this ambiguity and assume that the switch to future generations

is well defined. For simplicity I have assumed that there is only one future generation,

but the discussion can easily be generalized to multiple future generations.

         Table 1 summarizes four primary categories of different discounting possibilities.

The first row designates policies that only have effects on the current generation. For

these policies with benefits bt and costs ct in year t, the discount rate is r, as under current

24
   For a review of discounting theory and the conditions under which the utility discount rate is equal to the
consumption discount rate see Geoffrey Heal, “Discounting: A Review of Basic Economics,” 2006, this
issue.


                                                     14
policy analysis practices. Then the present value of the policy is

                                   50
                                          ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ) t .                         (1)
                                   t =0


       The second row of Table 1 pertains to policy decisions that future generations will

make at the time when the future generation begins. As with current policy guidelines,

these future generations will be making within-generation choices by discounting both

benefits and costs at a rate r. For simplicity let the future generation’s time horizon be

infinite, so that there are only two generations in the model. From their within-generation

perspective, the future generation will place a value on policies given by

                                    ∞
                                          ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ) t .                         (2)
                                   t =0


       The first row of Table 1 pertains to the discounting practices of the current

generation consistent with equation 1, while the second row shows the future

generation’s counterpart decisions following the same standard discounting principles.

Both the first and second rows of Table 1 are consistent with conventional discounting

practices. Similarly, if one were to evaluate policies affecting both current and future

generations using standard discounting practices, one would use a discount rate r for both

periods.

       The third policy row in Table 1 consists of policy decisions by the current

generation that affect future generations. Under this approach, there is discounting of all

effects on the current generation by a discount rate r, but future generation effects receive

a preferential discount rate r'< r. This approach provides for a policy preference for

consequences affecting future generations.




                                                   15
       Two variants of this future preference must be distinguished. The first variant is

case 3i in Table 1, which has a preferential discount rate for effects starting when the

future generation begins, which in my example is year 51, but this shift in discount rates

does not affect the within-generational values. The assumption that r'< r will apply in

year 51 in the future is of course quite arbitrary.

       Thus, the policy criterion is

                   50                                      1            ∞
                         ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ) t +                           ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ) t .    (3)
                  t =0                                (1 + r ')   51
                                                                       t =0



This approach creates undesirable effects at the year in which the current generation ends

and the next generation begins. The policy effects at the last year of the current

generation will have a value (b50 – c50) / (1 + r)50, whereas the first year of the next

                                                              )51. So if the value of (b50 –
generation will have effects with a value (b51 – c51) / (1 + r'

c50) equals (b51 – c51), then the policy effects in year 51 will have a greater present value

than the effects in year 50. Much the same reasoning applies to other future generation

effects. This approach disadvantages distant members of the current generation relative

to the future generation. The attractive feature of this approach is that the policy effects

that occur within the future generation effects are being valued in the same way that

future generations themselves would value these effects.

       Policy 3ii also begins at preferential discount rate r'for the future generation and

continues to use that rate thereafter. This policy criterion is

                  50                                      1            ∞
                         ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ) t +                           ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ') t .   (4)
                  t =0                                (1 + r ')51
                                                                       t =0



The formulation in policy 3ii introduces a new problem not shared by policy 3i: the




                                                         16
effects within the future generation are valued at a discount rate r'
                                                                    , which is inconsistent

with the future generation’s own rate of time preference r.

        The final row in Table 1 illustrates what advocates of the preferential discount

rate approach for future generations more typically have in mind and which is embodied

in the policy practices discussed below. If a policy has consequences for the current

generation and future generations, then all policy benefits and costs are discounted at a

preferential rate r'
                   , leading to the criterion applied at the initial period given by

                                    ∞
                                           ( b t − c t ) (1 + r ') t .                       (5)
                                    t =0


This approach does not create the across-generational inconsistencies as with the third

discounting policy. However, it does create problems within generations. Suppose the

policy has modest effects on future generations and that the preponderance of the benefits

are to the current generation. Then the preferential discount rate r'may make the present

value of the policy with future generational effects greater than that of superior current

policies valued using rate r. Similarly, suppose that all policy effects are to future

generations and are discounted at a rate r'
                                          . Then the policy ranking obtained using policy

4 with discount rate r'may be quite different than what the future generations themselves

would have chosen based on policy approach 2 using the rate r that is appropriate for

their own decisions. Thus, use of the preferential rate r'in effect overrides the

preferences that the future generation itself would have with respect to different time

streams of benefits and costs.

        Problems also arise if we generalize these concerns to the very long term. There

is also not just one future generation. If the next future generation gets a preferential

discount rate of r'< r, should not also give the subsequent future generation a preferential


                                                    17
rate of r'
         '< r? And so on. For much that same reason that r'< r will create anomalous

results for the current generation versus the next future generation, this approach of r'
                                                                                        '< r'

< r will likewise create anomalous results for the next future generation compared to the

subsequent future generation.



4. Office of Management and Budget Discount Rate Guidelines

           The guidelines for discounting issued by the OMB quite properly have

emphasized the fundamental economic determinants of discounting. Although for

decades economists have generated elegant models for proper discounting practices, such

as explorations of the social rate of discount,25 the dominant approach has been the

private opportunity cost of capital.26 Nevertheless, as I indicate below, OMB has begun

to show some ill-advised and ill-defined flexibility with respect to intergenerational

effects.

           The OMB has articulated the main principles for discounting policy effects.

OMB Circular A-94 provides general guidance for the basic mechanics of discounting.27

Although the OMB discount rate had long been set at 10 percent, this 1992 document

issued the following requirement:

                  Constant-dollar benefit-cost analyses of proposed investments and
                  regulations should report net present value and other outcomes determined
                  using a real discount rate of 7 percent. This rate approximates the
                  marginal pretax rate of return on an average investment in the private
                  sector in recent years.28



25
   Stephen A. Marglin, “The Social Rate of Discount and the Optimal Rate of Investment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. LXXVII, #1, (February 1963), pp. 95-111.
26
   See Geoffrey Heal, supra note 24, for a superb review of the discounting literature.
27
   U.S. Office of Management and Budget, Circular A-94, Guidelines and Discount Rate for Benefit-Cost
Analysis of Federal Programs, 10/29/92.
28
   Id. at 8.


                                                  18
        Although OMB did not document the justification for the 7 percent rate, it appears

to be too high a rate even in 1992. If in fact the real, inflation-adjusted rate of return was

7 percent, it was presumably because analyses justifying that rate included investments

that yielded a premium for risk. Such risk premiums should not be included, as returns

for the riskiness of an asset is not a reflection of the intertemporal rate of tradeoff per se.

        The discount rate I advocate is the riskless rate of return.29 Doing so does not

imply that uncertainty is irrelevant. Suppose that the benefits of a government policy are

highly uncertain, as for example in the case of levees to protect New Orleans from floods

due to future hurricanes. Proper analysis of program benefits based on the willingness to

pay of beneficiaries for the uncertain benefits will reflect a risk premium for these

uncertain benefits, which can then be discounted using a riskless rate. While some

observers have advocated using a discount rate that incorporates uncertainty,30 doing so

necessarily imposes the mathematical structure of the discounting process that may not

track the effect of uncertainty over time. In general, there is no reason to assume that the

risk premiums associated with regulatory benefit trajectories have the same mathematical

structure as would emerge from the exponential discounting function.

        A good measure of the riskless rate of return is the government bond rate. The

1992 three-month Treasury bill rate was 3.45 percent,31 which is just above the inflation

rate in 1992 of 3.0 percent.32 The ten-year Treasury security interest rate was 7.01




29
   The appropriateness of using the riskless rate of return is shown by Kenneth I. Arrow and Robert C.
Lind, Uncertainty and the Evaluation of Public Investment Decisions, American Economic Review 60:364-
378.
30
   See Louis Kaplow, “Discounting Dollars, Discounting Lives: Intergenerational Distributive Justice and
Efficiency,” 2006, this issue.
31
   Economic Report of the President 2005, at 296.
32
   Id. at 283.


                                                  19
percent, which is just 4 percent higher than the inflation rate.33 Moreover, returns on

longer-term bond issues for durations such as ten years will include a premium for

possible increases in inflation as well as a liquidity premium to compensate investors for

having their funds tied up for that long period. Regardless of what government bond

reference point we use, the OMB Circular A-94 7 percent rate is too high.

         In 2003 OMB revised the guidance in its OMB Circular A-4.34 The calculations

provided by OMB to justify its policy used average performance of ten-year Treasury

notes and the rate of change in the CPI. Subtracting the CPI increase from the bond rate

yielded a real rate of return of 3.1 percent.35 Why OMB did not report a similar

calculation in 1992 to justify the 7 percent rate is never explained. Despite providing the

2003 analysis in support of a 3 percent rate, OMB concluded nevertheless that agencies

should use the earlier 7 percent rate as well as the 3 percent rate of discount.36

         What useful purpose might be served by continuing to perform analyses using the

inappropriate 7 percent rate? Using that rate may enable policymakers to compare the

efficacy of proposed new policies with earlier policies that were evaluated using the 7

percent discount rate. However, presumably past policy decisions have been completed

and should be regarded as fixed costs. Should tradeoffs between current and post policies

ever arise, the analysis should be done at a more meaningful 3 percent rate applied to all

policies being considered.

         A second possible function of the 7 percent rate may be strategic. That higher

rate typically will reduce benefits compared to costs and consequently frame the policy

33
   Id. at 296.
34
   OMB Circular A-4, Sept. 17, 2003.
35
   Id. at 33-34.
36
   Id. at 34, states: “For regulatory analysis, you should provide estimates of net benefits using both 3
percent and 7 percent.”


                                                      20
debate in a manner that enables OMB to impose more discipline on spending and

regulations.

           A third possibility is that OMB is subject to a behavioral irrationality. Continued

reference to a 7 percent rate may simply reflect an anchoring bias reflecting the earlier

discount rate mind set. Historically, OMB has used excessively high discount rates, so

the movement to the pair of discount rates at 3 percent and 7 percent reflects a partial

adjustment toward a rate that bears a plausible relationship to the real rate of return on

capital.

           The official OMB guidance regarding intergenerational discounting has evolved

over time. The 1992 budget Circular A-94 does not make any explicit provision for

intergenerational concerns. The 2003 Circular A-4 notes that inconsistencies may arise

from using a preferential rate for intergenerational discounting, but nevertheless

concludes by giving agencies leeway with respect to such discounting: “If your rule will

have important intergenerational benefits or costs you might consider using a lower but

positive discount rate in addition to calculating net benefits using discount rates of 3 and

7 percent.”37 In this single sentence, OMB apparently has given carte blanche to a broad

range of economically irrational discounting practices.

           What form such a departure from standard discounting norms should take is not

specified, nor does OMB specify the extent of such a departure. Should all agencies use

the same preferential discount rate for all effects on future generations? Does the timing

of the effects influence the acceptable discount rate? None of these issues are resolved

by the OMB guidelines. What is clear is that the OMB has given agencies the leeway to



37
     OMB Circular A-4, at 36.


                                               21
adopt the discounting policy approach 4 from Table 1, with all the attendant problems

that deviation creates.



5. Discount Rate Performance by Regulatory Agencies

        While the OMB guidelines are clear, an interesting policy question is the extent to

which agencies adhere to these guidelines and apply consistent discounting practices.

Some agencies might use a very high rate to emphasize the importance of immediate

payoffs and to decrease the salience of adverse distant policy effects, whereas other

agencies might use a low rate to decrease the relative weight placed on immediate costs.

        Less than a decade ago, an inventory of discounting practices found that there

were wide disparities in the discount rates federal agencies used, notwithstanding official

OMB guidance.38 In light of the quite strong and explicit directive that the OMB now

provides, do agencies continue to display widely varying choices in the rates of discount

they select?

        The set of regulations I chose to make this comparison was the list of all

regulations from Table 1-4 of OMB’s Draft 2005 Report to Congress on the Costs and

Benefits of Federal Regulation.39 Thus, rather than selecting a few regulations at random,

this assessment considers every regulation OMB reported to the U.S. Congress in 2005.

        The results of this review appear in Table 2. The first column lists the rule, the

third column lists its status, and the second-to-last column lists the discount rate used.

Notably, the OMB guidance of 3 percent and 7 percent discount rates seems to have

taken hold. Seven of the regulations are evaluated using both rates.

38
   Edward R. Morrison, “Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-Benefit Analysis,”
University of Chicago Law Review, 65 (1998): 1333-1369.
39
   Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/OMB/inforeg/2005_cb/draft_2005_cb_report.pdf.


                                                  22
         In some instances, the regulatory agency expresses a rationale for their choice or a

preference between the two rates. For example, the interim final rule for Medicare

Prescription Drug Discount Card cites OMB Circular A-4 and indicates a preference for

the 3 percent rate: “The Office of Management and Budget has indicated that a 3 percent

discount rate better approximates the individual rate of time preference.”40

         The next set of four regulations in Table 2 all used a 7 percent discount rate. Each

of these regulations was a final rule, so that there was continuing use of the earlier 7

percent rate that presumably had been adopted in analyses at earlier stages of the policy

process. In these instances the agency presumably simply chose not to redo the earlier

analysis once the policy review by OMB was completed. It is, however, notable that the

7 percent rate does conform with OMB Budget Circular A-94.

         The next regulation did not indicate an explicit discount rate, but the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) did use a discounting approach in its analysis.

More specifically, EPA’s discussion of Effluent Limitations Guidelines and New Source

Performance Standards for the Meat and Poultry Products Point Source Category noted

there was use of a discount rate for costs and benefits, though the specific rates are not

indicated.41

         The final 19 regulations in Table 2 did not include any discussion of discounting.

That pattern could occur in four ways. First, the agency might claim that the regulation

was issued to address an emergency situation, such as mad cow disease. Indeed, that

claim was made for both USDA meat regulations: “The emergency situation surrounding

40
  68 FR69913.
41
  In particular, EPA noted: “EPA’s closure analysis is a discounted cash flow analysis that compares the
costs during a 16-year period from 2005 to 2020 to the earnings accumulated during that same period. This
analysis discounts both costs and earnings with the facility-specific discount rate reported in the detailed
questionnaire.” 69 FR 54511.


                                                    23
this rulemaking makes timely compliance with Executive Order 12866 and the

Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) impracticable.”42 Second, an analysis

using discounting may have been undertaken, but the discount rates were not reported in

the final rule, as with the EPA National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air

Pollutants for Stationary Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines43 and EPA’s

National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Surface Coating of

Automobile and Light-Duty Trucks.44 Indeed, most of the regulations in which discount

rates are not reported are final rules, so that any analysis that was done presumably was

an earlier stage. Third, in some contexts there may be no discount rate indicated because

benefits and costs are annual events, so that if the regulation is worthwhile in any given

year, it is desirable in all years.45 Fourth, the agency may not have employed discounting

because it was too difficult to accurately quantify costs or benefits.46



6. Discounting and the Value of Statistical Life

         A primary component of these regulations is the reduction to risks to life and

health. Using discounting in this context has been a prominent concern in the literature

and may at first glance appear to be indefensible.47 Aren’t we in effect saying that lives


42
   69 FR 1871 and 69 FR 1883.
43
   69 FR 33498.
44
   69 FR 22619.
45
   For example, this is true for DOL-ESA’s Defining and Delimiting the Exemptions for Executive,
Administrative, Professional, Outside Sales and Computer Employees, 69 FR 22122.
46
   For example, in the Computer Reservation System (CRS) Regulations, DOT-OST wrote: “The analysis
relied on a qualitative assessment of the costs and benefits of the proposed rules, because we did not have
information of the kind and detail necessary for a quantification of those benefits and costs.” 69 FR 1026.
47
   The role of discounting of human lives is a central theme of Revesz, supra note 3, 941, as well as a large
literature. See, among others; John K. Horowitz and Richard T. Carson, “Discounting Statistical Lives,” 3
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 403, 412 n.2 (1990); Clifford S. Russell, “Discounting Human Life” (Or,
the Anatomy of a Moral-Economic Issue), Resources, Winter 1986, at 8; Maureen L. Cropper and Frances
G. Sussman, “Valuing Future Risks to Life,” 19 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
160 (1990); John A. Cairns and Marjon M. van der Pol, “Saving Future Lives: A Comparison of Three


                                                     24
saved today are worth more than those saved in the future? And with very long-term

effects on human life, aren’t we devaluing entire future generations’ lives?

         To clarify the issues at stake and to get our thinking straight, it is useful to

examine the different contexts in which discounting enters in the valuation of morbidity

risk reductions. Discounting takes on several different roles with respect to the valuation

of regulatory efforts that reduce mortality risks. To clarify these different implications

and functions of discounting, I will distinguish three different situations: i) the role of

discounting for the value of statistical life (VSL) for people of different ages at a point in

time, ii) discounting the VSL for a person alive now and for that same person at some

future time period, and iii) discounting the VSL in the future for someone not already

alive. Many of these scenarios have arisen in previous treatments, and it is useful to

clarify how I would address each of them.48

         Consider first the appropriate VSLs for people of different ages alive today. In

particular, should we take a different approach to the VSL for someone age 30 at time 0,

which I denote by VSL (30,0), versus a 60-year-old at the current time, which I denote by

VSL (60,0)? This simple starting point enables us to separate the life expectancy

differences by age from the timing effects.

         There are two possible economics approaches to answering this question, one of

which I believe is correct. First, one could undertake a form of quantity adjustment for

Discounting Models,” 6 Health Economics 341, 343 (1997); Maureen L. Cropper and Paul R. Portney,
“Discounting and the Evaluation of Lifesaving Programs,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 3(4) (1990),
369-79; and Maureen L. Cropper, Sema Aydede, and Paul R. Portney, “Preferences for Life Saving
Programs: How the Public Discounts Time and Age,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 8 (1994), 243-265;
Maureen L. Cropper, Sema Aydede, and Paul R. Portney, “Rates of Time Preference for Saving Lives,”
American Economic Review, 82 (1002), 469-472; and Magnus Johanneson and Per-Olov Johansson,
“Saving Lives in the Present Versus Saving Lives in the Future—Is There a Framing Effect?” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 15 (1997), 167-176.
48
   The most prominent treatment in the legal literature of scenarios such as these appears in Revesz, supra
note 3, at 958.


                                                    25
the VSL. Older people have shorter remaining life expectancy, so that mortality-reducing

efforts are purchasing less of a quantity of life extension. Let the VSL be the sum of a

series of annual value of statistical life year (VSLY) components, so that each year is

equally valued apart from the influence of discounting. Although a coauthor and I

introduced the quantity-adjusted value of life concept that is mathematically equivalent to

VSLY, we never showed theoretically or empirically that each year of life has a constant

value.49 Rather, that formulation was an untested assumption of the model. After some

manipulation, it can be shown that for life expectancy L,

                                        VSLY             1         VSLY
                               VSL =            −                         .50
                                           r        (1 + r )   L
                                                                    r

To implement this formula, one can take the VSL implied by wage-fatality-risk tradeoffs

for the average worker and calculate the constant annual VSLY implied by the VSL

estimates. Assuming individuals of all age groups have the same VSLY, which may even

appear generous to older individuals given age-related declines in health status, one can

calculate for the person at age 60 the VSL associated with the discounted stream of

annual VSLY values that remain. In effect, all VSL amounts are simply the present value

of the stream of VSLY levels, so that the VSL calculated using this approach always

declines with age.

        In a series of papers my coauthors and I estimated rates of time preference with

respect to years of life as revealed by decisions in the labor market and product market.

These analyses shared a common approach. Each year of life was assumed to have the



49
   See Michael J. Moore and W. Kip Viscusi, “The Quantity-Adjusted Value of Life,” Economic Inquiry,
XXVI (3) (1988), 369-388.
50
   Joseph Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, “Age Variations in the Value of Statistical Life,” Harvard Olin Center
Working Paper 468 (2004).


                                                    26
same value, and the rate of discount was assumed to be the same for all workers. Thus,

the focus was on averages across the population rather than the possible heterogeneity of

these values for people of difference age.

        Four of these studies dealt with labor market decisions involving fatality risks.

The first of these studies found that workers discounted years of life at a rate of 10-12

percent, implying a value per year of life of $170,000 in 1986 prices.51 A second article

used a much more elaborate econometric model and found a rate of time preferences with

respect to future years of life of 11 percent.52 Subsequent labor market studies using a

variety of other econometric approaches yielded implicit rates of discount of 2 percent53

and a range from 1 percent to 14 percent.54

        My product market estimates of implicit rates of time preference were quite

similar to the labor market results. The discount rate implied by auto safety choices

involving used car preferences yielded discount rate estimates for fatality risks from 11 to

17 percent.55

        There are number of conclusions and cautionary observations that emerge from

this set of studies. First, at least at some point the quantity of life at risk does matter.

Otherwise the estimated discount rate would be infinite. Second, the estimated rates of

time preferences across these studies varies from 1 percent to 14 percent, which is at least

a plausible range given observed market rates of interest. Third, even if we accept these

51
   Michael J. Moore and W. Kip Viscusi, “The Quantity-Adjusted Value of Life,” Economic Inquiry, XXVI
(3) (1988), 369-388.
52
   W. Kip Viscusi and Michael J. Moore, “Rates of Time Preference and Valuations of the Duration of
Life,” Journal of Public Economics, 38 (1989), 297-317.
53
   Michael J. Moore and W. Kip Viscusi, “Discounting Environmental Health Risks: New Evidence and
Policy Implications,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 18 (1990), 551-562.
54
   Michael J. Moore and W. Kip Viscusi, “Models for Estimating Discount Rates for Long-Term Health
Risks Using Labor Market Data,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 3 (1990), 381-401.
55
   Mark K. Dreyfus and W. Kip Viscusi, “Rates of Time Preference and Consumer Valuations of
Automobile Safety and Fuel Efficiency,” Journal of Law and Economics, XXXVIII (1), 1995, 79-105.


                                                 27
results at face value, they imply that the value of a statistical life does not plummet with

age. Consider a discount rate of 7 percent, which is at the midpoint of the estimated

discount rate range. A person with an infinite lifespan would lose (1/.07) VSLY, or 14.3

VSLY. If there were only 10 years of remaining life expectancy, there would be a loss of

7.0 VSLY, or almost half the value with an infinite lifespan.56 Losing 1 year of life is

worth one-fourteenth of a VSL. From the standpoint of individual preferences, short

remaining lifespans are worth a great deal—much more than the proportion of life at risk.

         Several caveats are also in order. The results of these studies do not imply that

each life year has some VSLY value that is constant and that the VSL is the present value

of these individual year amounts. Each of these features is an assumption of the models,

not an empirical result. Second, the findings of these studies and similar investigations

should be treated with caution because they did not allow for variations in risk levels with

age. Moreover, the nature of the time variations that were permitted imposed

considerable structure on the possible results. The more recent studies that I discuss

below recognize time variations in risk and permit VSL to vary across the life cycle.

These new studies permit the VSL to rise and fall with age, whereas early studies

required that VSL decline with age.

         In ongoing research, I have taken advantage of the capabilities offered by more

refined fatality risk data and have written with coauthors a series of papers on age

variations in the VSL.57 Although the VSL displays an inverted-U shaped relationship



56
   For comparability with the infinite time horizon formula I valued the first year of life at the end of the
period, or 1/1.07.
57
   See Aldy and Viscusi, supra note 50; Joseph E. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, “Adjusting the Value of Life
for Age and Cohort Effects,” Resources for the Future, Working Paper (2006); and Thomas J. Kniesner, W.
Kip Viscusi, and James P. Ziliak, “Life-Cycle Consumption and the Age-Adjusted Value of Life,”
Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1), Article 4 (2006).


                                                     28
with respect to age, the curve is fairly flat. As a result, the VSL (60,0) exceeds the VSL

(20,0). Going back to first principles, the VSL is simply the individual’s wage-risk

tradeoff. A person’s reluctance to incur risks may be quite substantial even as life

expectancy shortens, in part because of increases in wealth over time. As a result, the

appropriate way to value VSL (60,0) compared to VSL (30,0) is to use the explicit VSL

amounts pertinent to these age groups rather than to construct a VSL based on a

discounted stream of VSLY values derived from VSL (30,0). Doing so takes the

influence of discounting out of this VSL calculation.

         The second discounting VSL situation involves assessing the VSL of the person

who is now 30 years old thirty years from now, which is a situation that might arise when

dealing with risks for which there is a substantial latency period or a delay before a policy

is enacted.58 The first component of this benefit value is the VSL for a similar 60-year-

old person at the current time, or VSL (60,0). The next step is to bring this amount back

to present value, leading to VSL (60,0) / (1 + r)30. Third, if income levels are expected to

grow over time, given the positive income elasticity of VSL of about 0.5 to 0.6,59 the

VSL will grow at some positive growth rate g. Thus, the appropriate VSL (60,30) value

for this situation is VSL (60,0)(1 + g)30/(1 + r)30, which is approximately VSL (60,0)/(1 +

r – g)30, which is a formulation William Evans and I derived two decades ago.60

         When I first introduced government agencies to the VSL approach in 198261, I

was asked whether it is appropriate to discount lives at all. I had two responses to this


58
   For discussion of the policy concerns with latency periods, discounting, and the value of life, see Revesz,
supra note 3, at 950-955.
59
   W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market
Estimates throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 27, No. 1 (August 2003), pp. 5-76.
60
   W. Kip Viscusi and William Evans, “Utility Functions that Depend on Health Status: Estimates and
Economic Implications,” American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 3 (June 1990), pp. 353-374.
61
   Pete Earley, “What’s a Life Worth?” Washington Post Magazine, June 9, 1985, at 11.


                                                     29
issue, which still appears to be a matter of controversy.62 First, what is being discounted

is not lives, but a monetary amount equal to the willingness to pay to reduce risks to

life.63 Second, it is possible to avoid discounting altogether by changing our frame of

reference. If we don’t discount the VSL at year 30, we could ask instead if it is

worthwhile to incur some cost c to obtain the benefit of one VSL at that time. But after

30 years, the cost c will have a terminal value c(1 + r)30, which leads to the same benefit-

cost analysis requirement, as VSL/(1 + r)30 > c.64

        Now consider the third case of someone who is not alive today but who will be

saved in 30 years at age 30. The appropriate value can be calculated using the same

general approach as with the second situation, taking the VSL (30,0) as the reference

point. Thus, in terms of our notation, we have

                          VSL (30,30) = VSL(30,0)(1 + g)30/(1 + r)30,

which is approximately

                             VSL (30,30) = VSL(30,0)/(1 + r - g)30.

If the growth rate in income is expected to be low, then the benefit assessment can be

simplified by dropping g from the calculation.



7. Policy Practices for Intergenerational Discounting

        OMB guidance has given agencies leeway in how they discount effects on future

generations. As a result, it is instructive to examine how agencies have used this

discretion. Notably, none of the regulations in Table 2 involved intergenerational effects.

62
   See Revesz, supra note 3.
63
   Much the same point is made by Cass R. Sunstein and Arden Rowell, “On Discounting Regulatory
Benefits: Risk, Money, and Intergenerational Equity,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies,
Working Paper 05-08 (2005), at 2.
64
   This example can easily be elaborated to incorporate a growth rate g in VSL.


                                                   30
There is currently a dearth of policies with truly long-term implications. The two

examples I consider in this section are stratospheric ozone regulations and radioactivity

exposure standards for nuclear waste storage at Yucca Mountain. A common feature of

these regulations is that the VSL is of central importance, as is concern for future

generations. What differs is the length of the time horizon captured by these future

concerns, as the future extends to 2075 in the regulatory analysis stratospheric ozone

regulation and a million years in the analysis of nuclear waste storage at Yucca

Mountain. Each of these examples yields a common lesson, which is that federal

agencies need to develop a sounder economic approach to their treatment of discounting

intergenerational effects.



7.1 Stratospheric Ozone Regulations

        The problem that very distant time periods create for regulatory analyses is

apparent from EPA’s 1987 analysis of its proposed rule, Protection of Stratospheric

Ozone.65 That regulation would have controlled a wide range of applications of CFC and

halons, such as refrigerants. The benefits, which were calculated to the year 2075,

included reductions in skin cancer deaths, cataracts, crop damage, damage to fish,

damage to polymers, and sea level rise damage.

        For concreteness, consider how EPA addressed the skin cancer mortality risks.

EPA undertook a sensitivity analysis with three scenarios: i) a high benefits scenario of 1

percent discount rate, $4 million value of life, and 3.4 percent annual growth in the value

of life; ii) a medium scenario with a 2 percent discount rate and a $3 million value of life


65
  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR Part 82, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone [FRL-3284-
9], December 14, 1987, proposed rule. See 53 FR 30566.


                                                 31
that increases by 1.7 percent per year; and iii) a low scenario with a 6 percent discount

rate and a $2 million value of life that increases by 0.85 percent per year. The idea of

undertaking a sensitivity analysis is a desirable feature of the analysis. The choice of the

value of statistical life was perhaps less well-defined at that time than it is now, though I

believe the $2 million figure was certainly too low even for that era.66 EPA’s discussion

of the final rule cited my work in the 1980s indicating that the appropriate VSL was

much higher than the rate they had employed in the preliminary regulatory impact

analysis.67

        Setting aside the choice of the value-of-life number, consider the implications of

their combination of discounting assumptions and growth rate assumptions. For the high

benefits scenario, the present value PV(t) of a statistical life saved t years in the future is

given by

                                                   VSL (1.034 ) t
                                      PV ( t ) =                    ,                               (6)
                                                      (1.01) t

which is approximately

                                      PV ( t ) = VSL (1.024 ) t .                                   (7)

Consequently, there is no net discounting at all, as instead the present value per life saved

increases at a compound growth rate of 2.4 percent annually. To put this growth rate in

perspective, after 75 years this approach makes the “discounted” VSL worth 5.9 times as

much as the VSL for the current period. Saving one future life in 75 years will

consequently count about as much as saving six lives today. There is no valid economic


66
   W. Kip Viscusi, “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic Literature vol. XXXI No.
4 (1993) at 1912, provides a review of evidence through the 1980s.
67
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR Part 82, Protection of Stratospheric Ozone [OAR-FRL-
3409-7] August 12, 1988, final rule. See 53 FR 30596.


                                                    32
rationale for this preferential treatment of future generations. An exhaustive exploration

of the different ways we could sacrifice now to make people better off in 2075 could

easily divert all our risk-reducing resources to making our descendents’ lives safer, given

that their lives count about six times as much as lives in the current generation.

       The middle benefits scenario developed by EPA is more modest, leading to

                                               VSL (1.017 ) t
                                  PV ( t ) =                    ,                            (8)
                                                  (1.02 ) t

or a value approximately equal to

                                  PV ( t ) = VSL /(1.003 ) t .                               (9)

The almost-identical choice of the growth rate and the discount rate fall short of being

exactly offsetting, as perhaps EPA wanted to have at least some net nonzero discounting.

Using this approach, a statistical life saved in 75 years has a present value of 0.80 of its

value today.

       The final low benefits scenario best captures the idea that there should be

discounting. The relatively high 7 percent rate that was recommended by OMB in that

era is the starting point for the analysis. The approach leads to a net discount rate of 5.15

percent. A statistical life saved after 75 years will have a present value of 0.02 times a

VSL today. Had EPA used a more realistic base discount rate of 3 percent and coupled

that assumption with its chosen low growth figure of 0.85 percent VSL growth, the net

discount rate would be 2.15 percent, and the VSL in 75 years would be 0.20 times the

value of saving a life today.



7.2 Yucca Mountain Nuclear Waste Storage




                                                33
        One of the most consequential and bizarre regulatory analysis pertaining to future

generations is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 2005 analysis of

standards for storage of nuclear waste at Yucca Mountain, Nevada.68 The standards

involved criteria for proposed storage of nuclear wastes at an underground storage facility

at Yucca Mountain, which is about 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas.69 The nuclear

waste repository would be about 300 meters underground, with an additional 300 to 500

meters between the repository and the water table. The purpose of the proposed

regulation is to establish health and safety standards for this repository of radioactive

material.70

        Before considering the details of EPA’s regulatory analysis, it is useful to ask

what an ideal regulatory analysis might look life. Because Yucca Mountain does not

create nuclear wastes but simply stores them, a pertinent question to ask is how much this

site will reduce the risks from nuclear wastes as opposed to storage at current locations.

This question never arises in the EPA analysis, as the mind set is with respect to

incremental risks from a zero baseline risk. What EPA should have done is explore the

risk-risk tradeoffs involved rather than adopt the implicit fiction that we now live in a

riskless nuclear-free world.

        Using such a framework, EPA should have analyzed the incremental cancer risk

reductions associated with different standards, the populations affected by these risks, the

value of the statistical lives saved by more stringent standards, and the discounted value

of the costs and benefits for standards of different stringency. Somewhat strikingly,


68
   Environmental Protection Agency, 40CFR Part 197 [OAR-2005-0083; FRL-], [RIN 2060-AN15], Public
Health and Environmental Protection Standards for Yucca Mountain, Nevada.
69
   See Id at 23 for a description of the site.
70
   Id, at 1.


                                               34
discounting of effects never even enters the analysis despite the use of a policy time

horizon that goes well beyond that of science fiction fantasies.

        The thought process underlying the proposed regulation bears a strong similarity

to the methodology used by EPA for deciding whether hazardous waste sites should be

cleaned up by its Superfund program.71 An individual risk approach guides the site

cleanup decisions. If a current or hypothetical future individual subjected to a reasonable

maximum exposure could be exposed to a lifetime cancer risk of 1/10,000, the site must

be cleaned up.72 If the individual risk is between 1/10,000 and 1/1,000,000, cleanup is

discretionary. Note that nobody need actually be exposed to the risk. The number of

people affected by the risk does not enter into the decision, so that risks to populations

are not the matter of concern, but only the individual risk reference point. In contrast, a

benefit-cost approach would multiply the cancer risk by the size of the exposed

population, weight the values by the pertinent VSL, and then discount the result.

        The EPA Yucca Mountain analysis is in a similar vein but at one additional level

of abstraction as it does not consider the cancer risk probability, only the level of the

radioactive dose. In particular, the proposed standard is split into two parts. For the next

10,000 years the allowable dose is 15 millirems per year, while after 10,000 years and up

to 1 million years the allowable dose is 350 millirems per year.73 In each instance, the

reference person is that for the reasonably maximally exposed individual,74 just as

Superfund focuses on the reasonable maximum exposure for an individual.75 The


71
   These criteria and alternative approaches based on a benefit-cost analysis are examined by James T.
Hamilton and W. Kip Viscusi, Calculating Risks: The Spatial and Political Dimensions of Hazardous
Waste Policy, MIT Press, 1999.
72
   Id, at 62-63.
73
   EPA, supra note 68, at 2.
74
   Id, at 25.
75
   Hamilton and Viscusi, supra note 71, at 62.


                                                    35
reasonably maximally exposed individual need not be a real person but instead is a

“theoretical representative of a future population group” based on a “concept to protect

those individuals most at risk…”76

           If we adopt the approach that only a single real or hypothetical individual matters,

how much weight should a risk to one person carry in a benefit-cost assessment? Using a

discount rate of 3 percent, one case of cancer 10,000 years from now has a discounted

value of (1/1.03)10,000, or 4.2 x 10-129. Thus, even if the entire current U.S. population

were crammed into Yucca Mountain and exposed to a lethal dose of radiation, there

would be a negligible value for the number of discounted cases of cancer that could be

prevented by eliminating this risk.

           But even these minuscule discounted cancer risks overstate the actual risks for

three principal reasons. First, the maximum possible risk to an individual greatly exceeds

the average risk to an exposed individual, as documented for Superfund.77 Second,

exposure to radioactive risks is a choice. People need not choose to build houses at the

Yucca Mountain site or rely on drinking water contaminated by radioactive waste. Third,

even taking the exposure limits at face value, my example above greatly overstates the

severity of the risk. Exposure to radioactivity is not fatal at the 15 millirem per year level

for the 10,000 year standard and at the 350 millirem standard for the period from 10,000

years to 1 million years.

           To justify the exposure limits, EPA does not calculate the exposed populations or

risk probabilities but instead gives risk reference points. Consider, for example, the

comparable background risk for residents of Colorado, which EPA views as comparable


76
     EPA, supra note 68, at 28.
77
     Hamilton and Viscusi, supra note 71, at 62-63.


                                                      36
to Nevada in terms of climatic features.78 The average background radiation level is 700

millirems per year,79 which is double the million year exposure standard and almost 50

times the 10,000 year standard. The current average background risk level in the U.S. is

300 millirems per year.80 The incremental risks from Yucca Mountain will be far from

lethal and in fact were designed to keep the total risk from background risks and Yucca

Mountain to the maximally exposed person at or below 350 millirems per year,81 which is

half the background radiation dose Colorado residents currently experience. Even based

on total risk levels, the standard is quite stringent and makes no apparent sense.

          Moreover, total risk should not be the focal point of any benefit-cost analysis,

however rudimentary it might be. What matters are the incremental risks and benefits

associated with a policy. Background risks will be present with or without the risks of the

Yucca Mountain site. To the extent that dose-response relationships are nonlinear, the

risk calculations can account for any influence of background risks, but the focus will be

on incremental risks associated with different regulatory options.

          EPA’s fanciful time horizons of 10,000 years and 1 million years are temporal

reference points that would have dropped out of any analysis had EPA engaged in any

reasonable discounting of effects. To put these time periods in perspective, recorded

human history spans about 5,000 years, and homo sapiens first walked the earth about

120,000 years ago.

          How could EPA have been led to propose a regulation for the next million years

based on our current, certainly primitive technologies for dealing with risk that surely


78
   Id, at 102.
79
   Id.
80
   Id, at 103.
81
   Id, at 116.


                                               37
will be less effective than technologies that will emerge in the future? EPA cites

approvingly the following guidelines offered by the National Academy of Public

Administration:

            To inform decision-making, NAPA defined four principles:
            •        Trustee: Every generation has obligations as trustee to protect the
                     interests of future generations;
            •        Sustainability: No generation should deprive future generations of the
                     opportunity for a quality of life comparable to its own;
            •        Chain of Obligation: Each generation’s primary obligation is to provide
                     for the needs of the living and succeeding generations. Near-term
                     concrete hazards have priority over long-term hypothetical hazards;
            •        Precautionary: Actions that pose a realistic threat of irreversible harm or
                     catastrophic consequences should not be pursued unless there is some
                     countervailing need to benefit either current or future generations.82

            It is useful to consider each of these principles in turn. The trustee obligation

appears to be reasonable insofar as it implies that future generation effects should matter

when conducting regulatory analysis.

            The second requirement of sustainability is less compelling. Is there no

sufficiently large current benefit that would make a policy desirable if it imposed a very

small risk that the quality of life for some future generation might be an infinitesimal

amount lower than our own? Rigid requirements of sustainability do not permit any such

tradeoffs and are antithetical to a balanced benefit-cost approach. “Sustainability” is also

an ill-defined environmentalist battle cry. What does it mean for the future quality of life

to be “comparable” to our own? Must they have access to the same natural resources, the

same resources per capita, or sufficient resources to have the same life expectancy? How

can we even tell if their quality of life is the same as our own? We cannot readily take

ourselves forward in time to determine the utility future generations will experience


82
     Id, at 94-95.


                                                  38
within the context of their civilizations. Going back in time, at least from my vantage

point, I believe we are better off today than we were before indoor plumbing and

electricity even though there surely has been tremendous degradation of our natural

resources. The task of ascertaining whether decisions today will lead people to have a

lower quality of life in 10,000 years or a million years cannot ignore the role of

technological progress and change in lifestyle that we are ill-equipped to predict. We

don’t know the absolute levels of their quality of life, how much our decisions today will

alter that quality, or how we might go about making a sensible intertemporal

interpersonal comparison. The sustainability objective is both inefficient and inoperable.

           The chain of obligation principle expands on the trustee notion and indicates that

current effects are the primary obligation. Proper discounting practices will ensure that

appropriate weight is given to current and future effects. The greater weight the principle

urges be given to “near-term” hazards seems to be broadly consistent with some type of

discounting.

           Where I depart from that principle is with respect to the greater weight that should

be given to concrete risks as opposed to long-term hypothetical risks. On the positive

side, this guidance avoids the excessive attention to ambiguous risks that are not well

understood.83 However, suppose that we face two types of risks—a certain risk of

1/10,000 and a subjectively assessed risk of 1/1,000 based on scientists’ best judgments.

The mean level of the risk should be our guide, not the precision of the risk estimate. This

basic principle of Bayesian statistical decision theory84 will ensure that we don’t ignore

risks when there are not large sample sizes available to undertake classical statistical tests


83
     W. Kip Viscusi, Rational Risk Policy, Oxford University Press, 1998.
84
     Howard Raiffa, Decision Analysis, Addison-Wesley, 1968.


                                                     39
for policy choices such as anti-terrorism efforts. Risks may be real, even though they are

not certain and precisely estimated.

        The final precautionary principle is either innocuous or inefficient depending on

its interpretation. No risk of any kind of harm, whether irreversible or not, should be

undertaken unless there is some offsetting benefit. But irreversibilities per se need not be

a barrier to action. In a series of papers I have examined the role of environmental

irreversibilities and found that they do not alter the decision analysis problem in a way

that is too sweeping.85 Moreover, the existence of irreversibilities sometimes leads to a

need to over-regulate risks and other times makes under-regulation optimal.86 How the

irreversibilities affect the analysis or the appropriate policy decision is often ambiguous.

What is clear is that there are threats to sound decisions that will emerge if we let our

choices be guided by arbitrary commitments to precaution or sustainability rather than

benefit-cost tests.87

        EPA’s Yucca Mountain analysis embodies the kinds of inefficient policy

prescriptions that emerge when policies are based on lofty but misguided principles of

intergenerational equity rather than a sound benefit-cost approach. Had the agency

assessed costs and benefits properly and discounted these value appropriately, the

emphasis would have shifted from arbitrary exposure thresholds for hypothetical,
85
   Viscusi and Zeckhauser, supra note 10; W. Kip Viscusi, “Frameworks for Analyzing the Effects of Risk
and Environmental Regulations on Productivity,” American Economic Review, 73(4) (1983), 793-801; W.
Kip Viscusi, “Environmental Policy Choice with an Uncertain Chance of Irreversibility,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 12(1) (1985), 28-43; and W. Kip Viscusi, “Irreversible
Benefits with Uncertain Benefit Levels,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 15
(1988), 147-157.
86
   Id, especially Viscusi, 1983.
87
   The precautionary principle has been subject to a variety of critiques. See Cass Sunstein, “Beyond the
Precautionary Principle,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 151 (2003), 1003-1057; Christian Gollier
and Nicolas Treich, “Decision-Making Under Scientific Uncertainty: The Economics of the Precautionary
Principle,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27 (2003), 77-103; and Ragnar E. Löfstedt, “The Swing of the
Regulatory Pendulum in Europe: From Precautionary Principle to (Regulatory) Impact Analysis,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 28 (2004), 237-260.


                                                   40
maximally exposed individuals to the discounted economic value of the expected number

of cancer cases that will be averted through more stringent standards.



8. The Challenge of Hyperbolic Discounting

        My discussion thus far has been normative. What discount rate should the

government use in valuing regulatory benefits and costs over time? Whether policies that

are considered for such assessment will, of course, depends on the political pressures

exerted by the citizenry. If, for example, there is no constituency for attempting to reduce

the risk of global climate change, then policies to combat global warming may not even

be considered for evaluation. Thus, it is useful to explore what the behavioral aspects of

intertemporal preferences and whether the pressures they exert on policy will lead to

rational intertemporal political decisions.

         The conventional discounting approach known as “exponential discounting”

dominates economic theory. Whether people behave in a manner consistent with this

theory is a quite different matter. Economists have long challenged the behavioral

accuracy of the conventional discounting framework. In the usual exponential

discounting case, the rate of discount for payoffs in year t is given by 1 / (1 + r)t.

Beginning with the conjecture by Robert Strotz, economists have hypothesized that

people behave in a myopic manner and put an inordinate weight on immediate rewards.88

This phenomenon, which he termed hyperbolic discounting, has led to a considerable




88
  Robert Strotz, “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,” Review of Economic
Studies, 23(3) (1955-56), 455-491.


                                                 41
experimental literature documenting this form of intertemporal irrationality.89 A useful

simple formulation of this framework is the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, in

which the discount factor is 1 in the initial period, but thereafter is given by / (1 + r)t,

where 0       < 1.90 Thus, all deferred payoffs are scaled down by some factor .

        Using a nationally representative sample, Joel Huber and I recently examined

whether people exhibited hyperbolic discounting when valuing the environment.91 The

survey considered water quality improvements that could occur now, or with a delay of

two, four, or six years. For delays of two years, people displayed an average rate of time

preference ranging from 12.7 percent to 14.3 percent.92 For delays of four years the

implicit rate of time preference range was 8.0 to 8.4 percent, while for six years it was 7.9

to 8.7 percent. Based on the responses that led to these estimates, it is possibly to

estimate the quasi-hyperbolic discounting parameter , which was 0.48-0.53 for two-year

delays and 0.58-0.61 for delays of six years. Thus, there is evidence of a substantial

under-evaluation of deferred benefits, which in effect receive a weight of about 50-60

percent of their correct discounted value that would prevail if people adhered to an

exponential discount rate. People have a strong preference for policies that generate

immediate benefits.

        This form of intertemporal irrationality is not simply an intellectual curiosity of

interest only to economists. Hyperbolic discounting has potentially far-reaching policy

consequences because it indicates that people are displaying an irrationally substantial

89
   For a review of this literature, see Shane Frederick, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donaghue (2002).
“Time Discounting and Time Preference: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature Vol. XL,
351-401.
90
   See David Laibson (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2), 443-477.
91
   W. Kip Viscusi and Joel Huber (2006). “Hyperbolic Discounting of Public Goods,” NBER Working
Paper 11935.
92
   Id. at 38, which summarizes these and subsequent statistics.


                                                   42
weight on current payoffs compared to the future. Public support for policies such as

environmental policies with very long term effects consequently are potentially strongly

affected by hyperbolic discounting.

           Given that people’s revealed intertemporal preference displays hyperbolic

discounting, should policy prescriptions for discounting practices reflect these

preferences? My view is that this form of intertemporal irrationality should not be

incorporated in official discounting practices, which instead should be based on the

opportunity cost of capital rather than the irrational myopic concerns embodied in

hyperbolic discounting.

           Nevertheless, hyperbolic discounting is of potentially substantial policy

importance. The pressure the public exerts on government officials to promote policies

they prefer will lead to policy outcomes that reflect the public’s risk beliefs and

preferences, to the extent that policy choices respond to the public’s concerns. If people

display an inordinate disregard for all future payoffs, then the political pressures on

agencies will tilt policies toward efforts with immediate payoffs rather than longer term

benefits. This disregard of future effects is not a minor anomaly but may have a

considerable effect if the public’s hyperbolic discounting parameter             is on the order of

0.5, in which case they only count future payoffs at half their discounted value.

           The question of whether we should respect the public’s preference even if they

are irrational is a recurring problem in policy contexts. For risk perceptions, the question

of whether policies should address irrational fears has long been a matter of substantial

debate.93 In the risk belief context, I have long suggested that policies should be



93
     Paul R. Portney, Trouble in Happyville, 11 J. POL’Y ANALYSIS & MGMT. 131-32 (1992).


                                                    43
grounded on the actual risk levels rather than public misperceptions of the risk.94 Just as

we wouldn’t want to ignore risks because the public is not aware of the risk, we should

not respond to hazards for which the public has exaggerated beliefs. This same principle

should guide policies with respect to intertemporal irrationalities. The practical result of

doing so will be more emphasis on policies that offer deferred benefits. How political

support can be generated for efforts that involve current sacrifices to achieve these

deferred rewards may be more problematic.



9. Conclusion

           My prescription for rational discounting is simple. The government should base

the discount rate on the opportunity cost of capital. The same discount rate should be

used for benefits and costs. Policy assessments should recognize the effects on future

generations fully, and discount those effects consistently with discounting practices for

the current generation.

           There are several reasons why this approach will not lead to neglect of future

generations. Most important is that there should be increased consideration of policies

with long-term consequences. In much the same way that choices under uncertainty may

involve neglect of possible states of the world, policy choices may neglect consequences

in future time periods. There should be a concerted effort to recognize that there are often

important consequences of regulatory policies on future generations. Somewhat

surprisingly, none of the 2005 major regulations listed in Table 2 included regulatory

analysis of future generation effects. It may be that distant effects do not play a major

role in these policies. But perhaps it is also the case that regulations that protect the
94
     W. Kip Viscusi (1998). Rational Risk Policy, Oxford University Press.


                                                     44
future do not make it onto the policy agenda. Even if there are potential benefits in the

distant future, if the regulations that would generate these benefits are never proposed and

issued, the policy process in effect neglects these concerns entirely. Those concerned

with the well-being of future generations consequently may have overlooked the more

fundamental policy problem. There will be no need to discount any future generation

effects at either a high discount rate or a low preferential rate if such policies are never

considered.

       Neglect of the well-being of future generations may be quite rational in many

instances. If policies only have near-term effects, then the future consequences do not

enter. However, if policies generate the bulk of their net benefits far into the future, then

the influence of hyperbolic discounting will tend to relegate such efforts to lower-priority

status in favor of those that generate immediate benefits due to the influence of

behavioral anomalies in subjective rates of time preference.

       Overcoming such intertemporal myopia may be extraordinarily difficult, given the

substantial uncertainties involved with very long time horizons. Waiting to take action

may provide new information that potentially may resolve the uncertainty as to whether

policy action is warranted. The existence of substantial uncertainties may provide a

plausible basis for the inaction that stems from hyperbolic discounting, making it difficult

to overcome intertemporal irrationalities. Once these policies with long term

consequences are evaluated using a consistent discounting approach, the effects will be

reduced by the inescapable mathematics of discounting. While meaningful discounting

will reduce the value of such effects, recognizing the positive income elasticity of

benefits will be at least partially offsetting. Moreover, even if policy effects a century




                                              45
from now only have a weight that is 0.05 that of current benefits, if the effects on future

generations will be truly catastrophic, their discounted value will be consequential as

well. If the effects will be minor and all but eliminated from concern by rational

discounting, then there is no compelling rationale for the current generation to make

sacrifices now.




                                             46
                                            Table 1
        Time Inconsistency Effects of Different Discount Rates for Different Generations

                                                                  Discount Rate (r)
               Discounting Policy                    Benefits to Current    Benefits to Future
                                                        Generation             Generation

Rational Discounting:

1. Current Effects, Current Decisions                         r                     --

2. Future Effects, Future Decisions                          --                     r

Preferential Discounting:

3. Current Decisions, Future Discounting                      r                   r'< r
Differential
i. No change in within-generation discounting                 r             r'< r, but r within
                                                                             future generation
ii. Within-generation discounting changes as well             r           r'< r including within
                                                                            future generations
4. Current Decisions, Continuous Differential               r'< r                  r'< r
Discounting




                                                47
                                                             Table 2
                                       Discount Rates Used for Regulations from Table 1-4
                       of the Draft 2005 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulation

                       Rule                              Cite           Status       Date     Agency    Rates Used     Pin Cite

Bar Code Label Requirement for Human Drug           69 FR 9120        Final rule   2/26/2004 HHS-FDA 3% and 7% 69 FR 9163
Products and Biological Products

Prior Notice of Imported Food Under the Public      68 FR 58974 Interim            10/10/2003 HHS-FDA 3% and 7% 68 FR 59063
Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and               final rule
Response Act of 2002

Registration of Food Facilities Under the Public    68 FR 58894 Interim            10/10/2003 HHS-FDA 3% and 7% 68 FR 58950
Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and               final rule
Response Act of 2002

Final Rule Declaring Dietary Supplements Containing 69 FR 6788        Final rule   2/11/2004 HHS-FDA 3% and 7% 69 FR 6847
Ephedrine Alkaloids Adulterated Because They
Present an Unreasonable Risk

Medicare Prescription Drug Discount Card            68 FR 69840 Interim            12/15/2003 HHS-CMS 3% and 7% 68 FR 69912
                                                                final rule

Control of Emissions of Air Pollution From Nonroad 69 FR 38958 Final rule          6/29/2004 EPA       3% and 7% 69 FR 39107
Diesel Engines and Fuel

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System-- 69 FR 41576 Final rule           7/9/2004 EPA        3% and 7% 69 FR 41662
Final Regulations to Establish Requirements for
Cooling Water Intake Structures at Phase II Existing
Facilities

Required Advance Electronic Presentation of Cargo   68 FR 68140 Final rule         12/5/2003 DHS-CBP   7%            68 FR 68166
Information
                                                                 48
                         Rule                             Cite             Status       Date     Agency   Rates Used     Pin Cite

Area Maritime Security                               68 FR 60472 Final rule 10/22/2003 DHS-USCG 7%                     68 FR 60479

Vessel Security                                      68 FR 60483 Final rule 10/22/2003 DHS-USCG 7%                     68 FR 60507

Facility Security                                    68 FR 60515 Final rule 10/22/2003 DHS-USCG 7%                     68 FR 60536

Effluent Limitations Guidelines and New Source       69 FR 54476 Final rule           9/8/2004 EPA        Rate Not
Performance Standards for the Meat and Poultry                                                            Indicated
Products Point Source Category

Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum in Domestic 68 FR 61304 Final rule 10/27/2003 DOT-FAA None
United States Airspace

Prohibition of the Use of Specified Risk Materials for 69 FR 1862        Interim      1/12/2004 USDA-FSIS None
Human Food and Requirements for the Disposition of                       final rule
Non-Ambulatory Disabled Cattle

Meat Produced by Meat/Bone Separation Machinery 69 FR 1874               Interim      1/12/2004 USDA-FSIS None
and Meat Recovery (AMR) Systems                                          final rule

General Order Implementing Syria Accountability      69 FR 26766 Final rule           5/14/2004 DOC-BIS   None
and Lebanese Sovereignty Act of 2003

United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator 69 FR 53318 Interim              8/31/2004 DHS-BTS   None
Technology Program ("US-VISIT"); Authority to                    rule
Collect Biometric Data From Additional Travelers
and Expansion to the 50 Most Highly Trafficked Land
Border Ports of Entry

Migratory Bird Hunting; Final Frameworks for Early- 69 FR 52970 Final rule            8/30/2004 DOI-FWS   None
Season Migratory Bird Hunting Regulations

                                                                    49
                        Rule                             Cite            Status       Date    Agency    Rates Used   Pin Cite


Migratory Bird Hunting; Early Seasons and Bag and 69 FR 53564 Final rule            9/1/2004 DOI-FWS    None
Possession Limits for Certain Migratory Game Birds
in the Contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii,
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands

Migratory Bird Hunting; Migratory Bird Hunting       69 FR 53990 Final rule         9/3/2004 DOI-FWS    None
Regulations on Certain Federal Indian Reservations
and Ceded Lands for the 2004-05 Early Season

Migratory Bird Hunting; Final Frameworks for Late- 69 FR 57140 Final rule           9/23/2004 DOI-FWS   None
Season Migratory Bird Hunting Regulations

Migratory Bird Hunting; Late Seasons and Bag and 69 FR 57752 Final rule             9/27/2004 DOI-FWS   None
Possession Limits for Certain Migratory Game Birds

Migratory Bird Hunting; Regulations on Certain      69 FR 58236 Final rule          9/29/2004 DOI-FWS   None
Federal Indian Reservations and Ceded Lands for the
2004-05 Late Season

Defining and Delimiting the Exemptions for           69 FR 22122 Final rule         4/23/2004 DOL-ESA None
Executive, Administrative, Professional, Outside
Sales and Computer Employees

Pipeline Safety: Pipeline Integrity Management in    68 FR 69788 Final rule 12/15/2003 DOT-RSPA None
High Consequence Areas (Gas Transmission
Pipelines)

Computer Reservations System (CRS) Regulations       69 FR 976         Final rule   1/7/2004 DOT-OST None

HIPAA Administrative Simplification: Standard        69 FR 3434        Final rule   1/23/2004 HHS-CMS None
Unique Health Identifier for Health Care Providers
                                                                  50
                        Rule                             Cite        Status      Date     Agency   Rates Used   Pin Cite


National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air       69 FR 33473 Final rule     6/15/2004 EPA       None
Pollutants for Stationary Reciprocating Internal
Combustion Engines

National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air         69 FR 45943 Final rule   7/30/2004 EPA       None
Pollutants: Plywood and Composite Wood Products;
Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the
Timber Products Point Source Category; List of
Hazardous Air Pollutants, Lesser Quantity
Designations, Source Category List

National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air       69 FR 55218 Final rule     9/13/2004 EPA       None
Pollutants for Industrial, Commercial, and
Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters

National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air       69 FR 22602 Final rule     4/26/2004 EPA       None
Pollutants: Surface Coating of Automobiles and
Light-Duty Trucks




                                                                51
