                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         BAUMOL-TOBIN AND THE WELFARE COSTS
                         OF NATIONAL SECURITY BORDER DELAYS

                                               Hui Huang
                                              John Whalley

                                          Working Paper 12296
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12296


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2006




We are grateful to SSHRC for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Hui Huang and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Baumol-Tobin and the Welfare Costs of National Security Border Delays
Hui Huang and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 12296
June 2006
JEL No. F1, F10, F13, F19

                                             ABSTRACT

The implications of national security related procedures for trade flows at border points in OECD
countries has become a major topic of commentary in popular press. We discuss whether the
economic costs of border delays are represented solely by time spent in awaiting processing. This
has been the basis of calculations in Canada-US-Ontario (2004) and Ontario Chamber of Commerce
(2004, 2005) of advalorem equivalent tariff representations of the time delays involved. While time
can be a significant part of the social cost of security related delays in customs clearance, added costs
also arise from the behavioral response to delays and looking only at the time delays at the border
can be misleading. We use a formulation where border delays occur with certainty and add to the
fixed costs of importing in any period. We develop analytics for the case where there is endogeneity
both in the frequency of transactions and in the size of individual transactions across the border in
the tradition of the well known Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1952) inventory theoretical analysis of
the demand for money.

Hui Huang
School of Economics and Finance
Victoria University of Wellington
PO Box 600
Wellington
NEW ZEALAND
hui.huang@vuw.ac.nz

John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca
        Baumol-Tobin and the Welfare Costs of National
                             Security Border Delays∗

                                          Hui Huang
                           Victoria University of Wellington†
                                               and
                                        John Whalley
                 University of Western Ontario, CESifo and NBER‡

                                       March 14, 2006




1       Introduction
    The implications of national security related procedures for trade flows at border points in
OECD countries has become a major topic of commentary in popular press and government
reports, but little or no academic research has addressed these issues. Here we explore
whether the economic costs of border delays are represented solely by time spent in awaiting
processing. This has been the basis of calculations in Canada-US-Ontario (2004) and
Ontario Chamber of Commerce (2004, 2005) of advalorem equivalent tariff representations
of the time delays involved. While time can be a significant part of the social cost of security
related delays in customs clearance, added costs also arise from the behavioral response
to delays and looking only at the time delays at the border can be misleading. Here we
focus on added inventory holding which border delays can induce and argue both that the
    ∗
     We am grateful to SSHRC for financial support
    †
     School of Economics and Finance, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington, New
Zealand, E-mail: hui.huang@vuw.ac.nz
   ‡
     Department of Economics, The University of Western Ontario, Email: jwhalley@uwo.ca

                                                 1
indirect behaviour induced costs of border delays can be substantial, and these costs do
not follow a Hotelling-Harberger t-square rule as is true of conventional tariff distortionary
costs.
       We use a formulation where border delays occur with certainty and add to the fixed
costs of importing in any period. We develop analytics for the case where there is en-
dogeneity both in the frequency of transactions and in the size of individual transactions
across the border in the tradition of the well known Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1952) in-
ventory theoretical analysis of the demand for money.1 In related work Huang and Whalley
(2006) also analyze cases where there is uncertainty over the arrival of an order and show
that increased varience in delays can add to the costs involved even if the mean delay is
unchanged.
       In the case we consider the cost minimizing problem is to meet demand for an imported
component over a number of periods, where importers have the option of importing smaller
amounts each period and carrying little or no inventory, or importing less frequently and
carrying more inventory. A fixed cost of importing each time due to border delays will
reduce the frequency of importation, and result in the carrying of inventory. We consider
two different cases, one where inventories depreciate (perish) and one where there is an
interest financing cost to inventories generated by border delays. It is also possible to
combine the two since analytically they are closely related.
       Cudmore and Whalley (2003) is a recent paper motivated by delays in processing of
imports in Russia and other CIS states analyze trade policy in a world with quantity
constraints on imports due to processing constraints with endogenous queuing. They show
that a tariff has the effect of reducing queuing and substitutes revenue racing for wasteful
time use in queuing and can be beneficial as long as processing constraints bind. They
highlight the feature that tariff liberalization without first removing administrative delays
at borders can be welfare worsening. No other papers on border delays and their trade
implications are known to us.
   1
       The earlier formulation of optimal inventory control by Wilson (1934) and Harris (1915) is usually
cited in management science literature as the origins of this form of analysis, but neither was seemingly
known to either Tobin or Baumol. Baumol and Vimod (1979) later apply a similar inventory theoretic
approach to choice of transportation mode.




                                                     2
2       The Impacts of Border Delays on Trade Flows and
        Inventory Holding
We consider the case where the consumption of a good X must meet a minimal requirement
during a year and where the price of the good is fixed. For simplicity we assume we are
dealing with the input of a good and the demand of a firm, but a similar analysis would hold
for a final consumer demand good. The only source of supply is imports, and the issue is
how much the firm buys each period. We assume that each period the firm has just enough
money to meet the minimum requirement of the current period and if it wants to buy for
more than this in the period it will need to borrow in order to pay for its purchases. If there
were no transactions costs in the form of border delays, the firm would buy enough every
period to meet the minimum requirement. If, however, there is a fixed cost of crossing the
border once the good has been bought, the firm will want to minimize the costs of meeting
demand in each period. The firm needs to pay interest on borrowed funds which finance
inventory holding and choose the optimal number and size of transactions made at the
border; effectively the frequency of purchase. This is similar in structure to the well known
Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1956) inventory theoretic analysis of the demand for money.
    More formally, the minimal requirement consumption of good X during a year is M .
We assume that the consumption occurs continuously during the year. The interest rate
is r. The price of good X is normalized to be 1. The fixed time cost of transacting at the
border each time a transaction occurs is F . Without border delays, the firm would buy X
continuously. With border delays, the firm reduces the number of transactions and carrys
inventory.
                                                                                         C
    If size each transaction by the firm is C, the average holding of inventory is       2
                                                                                           .   The
                                                     rC
annual interest cost for these inventories will be    2
                                                        .   The time cost of border delays is F M
                                                                                                C
        M
since   C
            is the number of transactions in the year. The total cost of meeting demand M is
thus
                                        rC    M
                                           +F                                                  (1)
                                         2    C
and the firm chooses a optimal C ∗ so as to minimize this cost.




                                               3
    Setting the derivative of (1) with respect to C equal to zero we obtain
                                        r   M
                                          −F 2 =0
                                        2   C
and the optimal choice of C is
                                             r
                                                 2F M
                                      C∗ =                                                  (2)
                                                   r
This is related to Baumol’s (1952) formulation of the interest elasticity of the demand for
money in a simple inventory theoretic model. In Baumol and Tobin, the demand for money
reflect the fixed cost of visits to the bank and the interest opportunity cost of holding funds.
In this formulation, the social cost of border delays are
                                                     √
                             r
                           r 2F M            M
                                       +Fq         = 2F M r                                 (3)
                           2      r          2F M
                                                 r

which exceeds the time delay F M
                               C
                                 , and by substitution in (2) can be shown to be double
the time delay, i.e.                                    r
                                   M    M                   FMr
                                 F   =Fq      =
                                   C     2F M                2
                                                 r

    An alternative and closely related formulation is where there are no interest costs of
borrowing, but there is wastage or perishability of the good. Here, meeting a given demand
involves trading off wastage costs against fixed costs in each period and as border delay
costs increase the frequency of transaction will again fall. If we interpret r as the wastage
rate rather then the interest the same analytics apply.
    Thus, in these formulations there is behavioural response to border delays in the form
of reduced frequency of transactions of the border relative to a no border delay case, and
the social costs of the border delay are given by the interest carrying costs of inventories
and/or the wastage (perishing) of inventories in addition to the time costs. The size of
these added costs will depend on parameter values including the interest rate and/or the
rate of decay of goods.


3     Concluding Remarks
If we analyze the economic costs of national security related border delays in a Baumol-
Tobin inventory theoretic framework where border delays represent a fixed cost at the

                                                 4
border, and transactions may be spaced over a number of periods, the social costs of
border delays are more than the time costs at the border. Behavioural response to the
delays (in this case in the costs of added inventory holding) also have to be factored in.
In related work (Huang and Whalley, 2006) we have also considered the case where there
is uncertainty in the arrival time of orders due to border delays and the both mean and
variance of arrival time can be affected. Here similar themes of results hold, but an increase
in the variance of border delays (even if mean delays remain unchanged) can also impose
substantial added costs.



References
 [1] Baumol, William J., (1952), The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory The-
    oretic Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 66, 545-556.

 [2] Baumol, W. J. and H. D. Vinod, (1970), An Inventory Theoretic Model of Freight
    Transport Demand. Management Science, 16(7), 413-421.

 [3] Canada-US-Ontario-Michigan        Border     Transport     Planning/Need      Feasibility
    Study (“Bi-National Study”), (2004), Regional and National Impacts of In-
    creasing Delay and Delay Related Costs at the Windsor-Detroit Crossing.
    http://partnershipborderstudy.com/pdf/Economic%20Impact%20Report FINAL 29
    Jan04WEB.pdf, last visited: February 14, 2006.

 [4] Cudmore, Edgar, and John Whalley, (2003), Border Delays and Trade Liberalization,
    NBER Working Paper No. W9485.

 [5] Harris, F.W. Operations Cost, Factory Management Series, Chicago: Shaw (1915).

 [6] Huang, Hui, and John Whalley, (2006), The Costs of Uncertainty in Arrival Time of
    Orders Due to Border Delays, miemo.

 [7] Ontario Chamber of Commerce, (2004), Cost of Border Delays to Ontario.
    http://occ.on.ca/2publications/reports/docs/CostofBorderDelaystoOntario 052004.pdf,
    last visited: February 14, 2006.


                                              5
 [8] Ontario Chamber of Commerce, (2005), Cost of Border Delays to the United States
    Economy. http://occ.on.ca/2publications/reports/docs/CostofBorderDelaystoUS
    Economy 042005.pdf, last visited: February 14, 2006.

 [9] Tobin, James, (1956), The Interest-Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash. Re-
    view of Economics and Statistics, 38, 241-247.

[10] Wilson, R.H. (1934) ”A Scientific Routine for Stock Control”, Harvard Business Re-
    view, 13, 116-128.




                                           6
